Economics;;These groups originally were opposed by the Catholic Church because of the oaths they swore, often on the pagan feast of Jul on December 26. In 858 CE Bishop Hincmar tried to organize them into the church, but they resisted. In medieval times they were often granted a letters patent from a ruler making them an oligopoly in their field. Adam Smith spoke against them, arguing that they restrained free trade by not allowing men to ply their trade without belonging. FTP name these organizations of craftsmen or tradesman that included ranks of apprentice, journeyman and master.;;guild(s)
Philosophy;;The founder of this philosophical method borrowed the term "intentionality," referring to the intentional relationship between mental acts and objects, from his teach Franz Brentano. Maurice Merleau-Ponty helped develop an "existential" form of it by disputing the notion of a transcendental ego. What is this philosophical method, FTP, that seeks to describe how the external world presents itself to us as conscious experience, a school founded by Edmund Husserl?;;phenomenology
Biology;;Caspases are essential in many pathways inducing this event. During it, the chromatin condenses along the periphery of the nucleus and the cell body shrinks, the cell membrane blebs, and finally the cell fragments into small bodies. It is induced during development to shape growing tissues, or when irreparable DNA damage has occurred. Contrasted with necrosis, FTP, name this process of programmed cell death.;;apoptosis
Religion/Mythology;;Unlike Hesiod, the author of this work posits an unnamed deity who creates the world and human beings. It begins with the Golden Age, which is followed by the Silver Age, which begins when Jupiter sends Saturn to Tartarus. A Bronze Age and Iron Age follow, the latter of which is contemporary with the book's publication, and it declares Augustus to be the earthly Jupiter. Narrating many mythical tales of love and, apropos of the title, of changes, FTP name this work of mythology written by Ovid.;;Metamorphoses
Miscellaneous;;Bob is the president of this group, where "there's no signin' up, no monthly dues". The listener is invited to "come on in' the waters fine, just idle on over an' toss us a line". Found on the 2005 album, My Kind of Livin, it describes "bass-trackers, Bayliners and a party barge, strung together like a floating trailer park". For ten points -- name this Craig Morgan song about a southerner's fancy boat group.;;Redneck Yacht Club
Art;;Jean de Dinteville and Georges de Selve are the two title figures. De Selve, though only 25, was already Bishop of Lavaur, and the broken string on the lute behind him is often interpreted as symbolic of religious discord, while the Lutheran hymn book is seen as hopeful of religious harmony. Also pictured are a globe, a case of flutes, and a sundial, representing the title figures' learning. Still, most notice the distorted skull, a memento mori, in the foreground. FTP name this 1543 painting, the most famous work of Hans Holbein the Younger.;;(The) (French) Ambassadors
Literature;;The original two volumes of this text, greatly influential on Eliot's "The Wasteland," were published in 1890, though it was expanded to thirteen volumes in 1915 before finally being condensed by the author to one volume in 1923, making it accessible to the masses.  The book sets out a number of mythical archetypes that are universal elements in religious and magical practices. Its title refers to the branch broken from a sacred tree by Aeneas before his descent into the underworld.  FTP identity this text, the best known by James Frazer.;;(The) Golden Bough
United States History;;At his death in 1728, this man's library of 4,000 books was second in size in North America only to that of William Byrd. After being refused the presidency of Harvard in 1701, he helped found Yale. Though a member of the Royal Society based on his scientific writings, his Wonders of the Invisible World described the Salem Witch Trials as part of an attempt by the devil to ruin the New World. Author of Magnalia Christi Americana, FTP name this colonial figure, son of a father named Increase.;;Cotton Mather;;Mather
Astronomy;;Some astronomers predict it could undergo a supernova explosion in the next thousand years, and after the Sun and R Doradus it has the third largest angular diameter as seen from Earth. It is the tenth brightest star in the night sky, and, with Sirius and Procyon, this red supergiant forms the Winter Triangle. Although the beta star, Rigel, is brighter, FTP, what is this alpha star of Orion?;;Betelgeuse
Religion/Mythology;;In the Hellboy comics, this mythological figure, though not of the Norse pantheon, restores the soul of Rasputin by placing it in the roots of Yggdrasil.  Her house is enclosed by a white fence made of human bones, and she flies through the air in a mortar, using a pestle as a rudder. If you are a good person with a pure heart, you might get help from her, but if your heart isn't pure she will eat your soul.  FTP name this wild forest woman of Slavic myth whose log cabin revolves on a pair of chicken legs.;;Baba Yaga
Literature;;Louisa May Alcott is said to have had an unrequited love for this writer, whom she clearly depicted as the naturalist Mr. Hyde in Little Men. His 1860 essay "A Plea for Captain John Brown" made a case for Brown as a hero supporting the Constitution. His first published work was A Week on the Concord and Merrimack Rivers. FTP name this writer who made his mark by recounting two years he spent freeloading on land owned by his friend Ralph Waldo Emerson in Walden.;;(Henry (David)) Thoreau
World History;;In Nahuatl his name means "he who makes himself ruler by his rage". His reign followed that of Auitzotl, and though he converted to Christianity, the Ramirez Codex states that he didn't receive last rites since the priests near him were occupied in trying to find more gold. He converted around 1520 to try to save his empire, but he was pelted by his subjects when he suggested they desist fighting against the Spaniards. FTP name this Aztec emperor who was humiliated by Cortes and whose namesake "revenge" is pretty gross.;;Monte(c)zuma (II|the Second)|Moctezuma (II|the Second)
Music;;The composer of this work wrote that he envisioned its second movement as a sketch toward an opera he wanted to write based on Longfellow's Hiawatha, but he never got around to it. That movement is sometimes set to the lyrics of a black spiritual called "Goin Home". Written in the U.S. during its composers stay in Iowa and New York, FTP name this immensely popular symphony of Antonin Dvorak.;;(Symphony) (From) (the) New World|New World Symphony|Symphony Number (9|Nine){1}?|ninth
Physics;;Materials exhibiting this property tend to exhibit hysteresis because of sluggish realignment.  It breaks down at the Curie point because increased motion keeps the domains from staying aligned.  The strength of a magnetic field in a solenoid can be increased by a factor of 5,000 by adding an iron core, due to this property of iron and a few other metals.  FTP, an applied magnetic field causes the alignment of magnetic dipoles in which form of magnetism, named from the Latin for "iron"?;;ferromagneti(sm|c){1}?
Literature;;Grumio, the servant of one of the protagonists, provides much comic relief in this play. Two frustrated suitors are Gremio and Hortensio, the latter of whom disguises himself as the music teacher of the girl he wishes to wed. Her father, Baptista, however, will not allow those two or Lucentio to marry Bianca until her older sister, the title character, is wed. FTP this is what comedy in which Petruchio finally marries Katherine?;;(The) Taming of the Shrew
United States History;;Protests began on May 1, and after there were skirmishes between police and students that night, town mayor Leroy Satrom declared a state of emergency. On May 4, after 2,000 students rallied on the campus commons, National Guardsmen decided to disperse the protestors. However, after the guard was pinned back on a hill, they opened fire, despite no students being closer than 70 feet. FTP four students were killed in 1970 on what Ohio college campus?;;Kent State (Massacre)
Religion/Mythology;;Her name meant "honeybee," and she lived in the hill country of Ephraim around 1100 BCE. When she heard of the cruel treatment of her people by the Canaanites she summoned Barak from Mt. Tabor to attack Sisera. FTP name this female Hebrew judge whose namesake song appears in Chapter Five of Judges.;;Deborah
Miscellaneous;;One of the title characters in this film has grown an enormous watermelon for a competition, though it is destroyed later in trying to lure the other title character. Peter Sallis reprises his usual vocal role in this film, which took five years to complete. Also featuring the voices of Ralph Fiennes as the pompous Victor Quartermaine and Helena Bonham Carter as Lady Tottington, FTP what is this latest Nick Park release about a cheese-loving clay man and his brilliant dog?;;(Wallace and Gromit) (in the) Curse of the Were-Rabbit;;Wallace and Gromit
Literature;;This man's art criticism was collected in Just Looking, while collections of his short work include Museums and Women and Pigeon Feathers. His best known character sold cars for his wife Janice's father in Mt. Judge Pennsylvania, appearing in four novels titled by his nickname. That character, Harry Angstrom, dies in the last of those novels, Rabbit at Rest. FTP name this novelist of Rabbit, Run and The Witches of Eastwick.;;(John) Updike
Literature;;Occasional hints of racism in this novel appear in the characters of Mexican priest Father Sarria, who is responsible for the rape of Angéle Varrian, and the villain S. Behrman, a vehicle for Jewish stereotypes. Among the locations in this novel are the Home Ranch, the Quien Sabe Rancho, and El Rancho de los Muertos, owned by Magnus Derrick, whose property Presley bicycles across at the beginning of the novel. Inspired by the Mussel Slough incident, it was the first book of its author's planned "Epic of the Wheat". For 10 points, name this Frank Norris novel detailing the struggle in frontier California between farmers and the railroad, which strangles them like the titular animal.;;(The) Octopus
Noncomputational Math;;It has been proved that its value for all even positive numbers is transcendental, but for odd integers, only its value for 3 has been shown to be irrational by Apéry, and that value is sometimes called Apéry's constant. Ramanujan came up with rapidly converging series for its value at odd integers, and his summation can be used to show that its value at –1 is -1/12, as well as the fact that it is zero for any negative even number, called the trivial roots, but the conjecture that all of its nontrival roots have real part 1/2 is one of the most famous unsolved problems in number theory. For 10 points, what is this function, the subject of a namesake hypothesis, closely related to the distribution of prime numbers?;;Riemann zeta (function);;Zeta (Function)
World History;;During this dynasty, the minister Qin Gui committed an infamous act of treachery against the general Yue Fei, and the author of the Comprehensive Mirror for Aid in Government, Sima Guang, opposed the New Laws of Wang Anshi. Zhao Kuangyin formed it, and gunpowder, the magnetic compass, and moveable type were invented during this era, before the death of emperor Qinzong led to the decline of its Northern period, but its southern incarnation survived until the Mongol conquest. For 10 points, name this dynasty is credited with unifying China after the Ten Kingdoms and Five Dynasties periods.;;Song (Dynasty)
Miscellaneous;;A stone in Fowey shares this name with the given name of Thomas Pynchon's niece, who directed such films as House of Ass. It is also the first name of the woman who won Olympic gold in skeleton in 2002, and it forms the name of a South Atlantic island group colonized by the British to keep an eye on St. Helena along with "da Cunha". Romanian Sami Rosenstock adopted this as a first name to write "The Inner Face" and "Seven Dada Manifestos". In addition to the poet Tzara, this is the name of the killer of Morholt and nephew of Mark of Cornwall. For 10 points, what is this name, borne by a knight in love with Iseult?;;Tristan
Miscellaneous;;Léon Duguit used this man's ideas to develop a theory of law, while Lucien Lévy-Bruhl elaborated his notion of "group ideas" to explain the difference between primitive and modern socities. He called for studying "social facts," not individuals, in The Rules of Sociological Method. In another work, he stated that a certain organizational phenomenon was the result of population growth and subsequent change in social structure, rather than a conscious attempt to produce more. For 10 points, name the author of The Elementary Forms of Religious Life and The Division of Labor in Society who founded French sociology.;;(Emile) Durkheim
Art;;His portrait of a child in a beret and gold chain exemplifies the tronie style he helped develop. His "Balaam and the Ass" was ripped from a work by his teacher, Pieter Lastman, while green light illuminates a sword, bow, and arrows hanging from the wall of a cave in his "The Raising of Lazarus". A man has his hand on the breast of his titular spouse in "The Jewish bride," but better known portraits include his self-portraits with Saskia. He is widely praised for his painting depicting the "writing on the wall," while an angelic girl stands out in the company of the titular military regiment of his best-known work. FTP name this artist of "The Night Watch".;;Rembrandt (Harmenszoon) (van Rijn)
Biology;;One class of this phylum can vomit its internal organs at potential predators, which it can then regrow. That class, Holothuroidea, has microscopic ossicles with a sponge-like structure called stereom characteristic of the phylum, and has five rows of tube feet running along its body, thus exhibiting the symmetry characteristic of this phylum. Along with the sea cucumbers, this phylum also contains the Echinoidia, or sea urchins, and the Asteroidea, or starfish. For 10 points, what is this deuterostome phylum characterized by fivefold radial symmetry, the closest relatives of the chordates?;;Echinoderm(ata|s)
Religion/Mythology;;This term can refer to the most severe form of damnation in Sufism, a contraceptive diaphragm, or the guard of a government official's office door, and it literally means "barrier". Its requirement is implied by the sura "The Light" and more directly stated in a hadith about Asmaa. At first, it was restricted to Muhammad's wives as an indication of wealth, and many poor Muslims still consider it a luxury. As early as 1866, Richard Burton condemned it as "the slavery of one portion of humanity". For 10 points, give the Arabic word for a common interpretation of the Islamic injunction for female modesty, including veiling.;;hijab
Music;;He wrote a "Greeting Prelude" after a happy birthday melody by C.F. Summy, while an "Intrada," a "song," a "Wedding Dance," and a "Cortege" are the titular components of his Four Norwegian Moods. Small vocal works include a set of songs about a tom-cat and a work in memory of Dylan Thomas, and he wrote a chamber concerto for an American estate, "Dumbarton Oaks". Also known for an oratorio the opera The Rake's Progress and a "Psalm Symphony," he is better-known for a work in which a peasant dances with a bear, Petrouchka. FTP name this Russian composer, remembered primarily for ballets such as The Firebird and The Rite of Spring.;;(Igor) Stravinsky
Philosophy;;His Ordinatio, a commentary on Book I of Lombard's Sentences, was denounced by former chancellor John Lutterll. He fled with Bonagratia and Michael of Cesena to Pisa under the protection of Louis IV, because he was persecuted for defending Franciscan poverty and right of kings to tax the church in Opus nonaginta dierum. A student of Duns Scotus, he was the leading nominalist and became known as "Doctor Invincibilis". For 10 points, who said that "plurality should not be posited without necessity," thus creating his namesake "razor"?;;(William) (of) Oc(k|c){1}?ham
Literature;;In the seventh part of this work, the title character finds "relish sweet," "honey wild," and "manna dew". The work takes place when "The squirrel's granary is full,/And the harvest's done" and when "The sedge has wither'd from the lake/And no birds sing". The speaker has a dream in which he sees "Pale Kings, and Princes too" with their "starved lips in the gloam" who tell him that the title character has him in thrall. The speaker met the title character "in the meads" and makes her "a garland for her head," noting her long hair and wild eyes. FTP name this poem that describes a knight's encounter with the titular elflike pitiless woman, a work of John Keats.;;La Belle Dame sans Merci
Physics;;For a massless bosonic gas, the density of this quantity in natural units is 2 pi squared times temperature cubed over 45 per spin state. The Sackur-Tetrode equation can be used to obtain the exact value of this quantity for a monatomic gas, while Claude Shannon is credited with the development of this quantity in information theory. Its partial derivative with respect to particle number gives the chemical potential, and with respect to internal energy the inverse temperature. Boltzmann was so proud of the expression he derived for this quantity that he placed it on his tombstone. For 10 points, what is this quantity, which, according to the Second Law of Thermodynamics, is always globally increasing?;;entropy
Literature;;Her father claims that before her wedding, this woman was "so opposite to marriage that she shunn'd / The wealthy curled darlings of our nation" and that her husband must have "abus'd her delicate youth with drugs or minerals / That weaken motion". Her mother had a maid, Barbary, who "was in love, and he she lov'd prov'd mad / And did forsake her: she had a song of ‘willow,'" which this character sings in similar circumstances, to Emilia, the wife of the man who uses her for revenge. For 10 points, name this woman in a Shakespeare play, daughter of Brabantio, victim of Iago, and wife of Othello.;;Desdemona
United States History;;Its namesake later commented that he "could have traveled the length of the country by the light of bonfires burning his effigy". It called for arbitration committees to set damages for the blockade of the West Indies, established the "rule of 1756," and prohibited the use of American ports to supply pirates. Britain also agreed to remove remaining forts in American territory and recognize free navigation on the Mississippi. For 10 points, issues remaining from the Treaty of Paris were clarified in what 1794 treaty, negotiated for the U.S. by the least prolific author of the Federalist Papers and first chief justice of the Supreme Court?;;Jay(') (s) (Treaty)|Treaty of Amity, Commerce, and Navigation (between His Britannic Majesty and The United States of America)
Art;;The arts tower of Sheffield University is a nearly identical half-scale copy of this structure, which sits across the street from the Lever house. Mark Rothko revoked his series of paintings for the restaurant in this structure after realizing how expensive it was, and a backdrop for The Three Cornered Hat by Pablo Picasso now hangs there. Sculptures by Willem de Koonig and Henry Moore were at times placed off-center in the building's plaza, while large reflecting pools grace its North and South faces. Featuring the 24-hour Brasserie restaurant along with the Four Seasons, this is, FTP, what Park Avenue skyscraper designed by Philip Johnson and Mies van der Rohe?;;(the) Seagram (Building)
Literature;;One of this author's stories describes a bachelor trapped in a tower surrounded by the titular marshes. In one of his short works Alissa, in her quest for sainthood, tries to steer Jerome toward her younger sister Juliette, but actually wants him for herself. The novelist Julius, the vivisector Anthime, and the titular bastard are at the center of a scheme to fake a papal kidnapping in Lafcadio's Adventures, while the accidental suicide of Boris mortifies the title figures' leader, the nephew of the man who cares for Bernard Profitendieu, Edouard, in The Counterfeiters. Also the author of a novel about a gay pedophile, this is, FTP what author of The Immoralist.;;(Andre) Gide
Geography;;It is home to the largest non-delta river island in the world, Sauvie Island. Believed by 17th-century cartographers to be an estuary to the mythical Straits of Anian, its mouth was first observed in 1775 by Bruno de Heceta. The site of Hanford, where plutonium enriching was performed during the Manhattan project, lies along it, and dams along its length include Wanapum, Chief Joseph, and the Dalles. Pasco marks the point of confluence with the Snake, while the Willamette flows into it at Portland. For 10 points, what is this river, the second-largest in volume in North America, which forms part of the Oregon-Washington border?;;Columbia (River)
Religion/Mythology;;One person by this name resigned after the Council of Sutri charged him with simony, and another was the Crescentii candidate deposed by Benedict VIII. One of them engineered the election of Rudolf Hapsburg as emperor, another canonized Francis Xavier and Teresa of Ávila, and another was urged by Catherine of Siena to move the Papacy back from Avignon. One dispatched Augustine of Canterbury to Kent, and another's Dictatus proclaimed that he could depose the emperor, leading to a confrontation at Canossa. For 10 points, what Papal name is shared with the engineer of a namesake calendar reform?;;Gregory
Physics;;Long thought to have no direct physical meaning, the Aharanov-Bohm effect showed that a nonzero value for this quantity could cause a phase shift even in a region where its curl was zero. Its derivative is discontinuous across surfaces carrying surface current, and its very existence implies the nonexistence of magnetic monopoles, as the divergence of its curl is by definition zero. In the Coulomb gauge its divergence is set to 0, while in the Lorenz gauge its divergence is proportional to the negative partial derivative of the electric potential. For ten points, what is this quantity, whose curl is equal to the magnetic field?;;(vector|magnetic){1}? potential
Literature;;In one of this author's novels, the chief suggests that a boy ritually murder his stepfather when he decides to retire from sailing. A restaurant owner's attraction to an elderly conservative politician clashes with the radical beliefs of her husband in his novel After the Banquet, while anxiety over a planned mutiny leads to the suicide of Reiko and Takeyama Shinji in "Patriotism". In his first novel, the student Kochan realizes he cannot marry Sonoko after a prostitute fails to arouse him, while the stuttering Mizoguchi sets fire to the title structure in The Temple of the Golden Pavilion. Best known for a series including Spring Snow, this is, FTP, what author of The Sea of Fertility?;;(Yukio) Mishima|(Kimitake) Hiraoka
Physics;;Their energy spectrum is characterized by a steepening at the "knee" at around 10 to the 16th electron-volts and another at the "ankle" at 10 to the 19th electron-volts, the latter possibly due to the GZK cutoff resulting from inelastic collisions with the cosmic microwave background. SuperKamiokande's initial observation of neutrino oscillation was made by comparing the interaction of these with Earth's atmosphere on the two sides of the earth, and Carl Anderson first discovered the positron using the interaction of these in a cloud chamber. Composed of approximately 87% protons and 12% alpha particles, for 10 points, what are these particles which bombard Earth's atmosphere from extraterrestrial sources?;;cosmic ray(s)
Geography;;Dhu Nuwas was the last king of the Himyarites, who ruled in what is now this country, and converted to Judaism, leading to a Jewish population persisting here until airlifted to Israel in Operation Magic Carpet. The Romans called the region "Arabia Felix" because of its trade in frankincense and myrrh, though now its inhabitants are partial to qat. One part of this country was dominated by Zaydi Islam and gained independence in 1918, but the rest was a British protectorate until 1967, instituting a Communist government in 1970. For 10 points, name this Arab country unified as a single republic in 1990.;;(Republic of) Yemen
Religion/Mythology;;He seduced Tyro, the wife of his brother Salmoneus, and he founded the Isthmian Games to honor his nephew Melicertes. After Autolycus stole his cattle, he seduced Anticleia, leading some some sources to say he is the true father of Odysseus. He also revealed Zeus's abduction of Aegina in exchange for a drink of water, which led to his first death, but his undignified funeral resulted in him returning to teach his wife etiquette. He had earlier chained Death to a post, so, after his death of old age, he was kept too busy to think of more tricks. For 10 points, name this king of Corinth who must forever push a boulder up a hill.;;Sisyphus
World History;;Its goal was the "AA line" and it occurred in concert with Operation Silberfuchs. After it was launched, an unsuccessful counterattack was ordered at Suwalki and Lublin, and the prolonging of the battle at Vyzama helped slow it down. This initiatve did not begin to falter until a counteroffensive in the Yelets and Tula sectors used imported Siberian troops to fight in cold weather. It led to the execution of General Pavlov after Fedor von Bock's Army Group Center captured Minsk on the sixth day. For 10 points, what invasion launched on June 22, 1941 began the Nazi war on the USSR?;;(Operation) Barbarossa
World History;;Originally trained as an electrician, criticism of party government cost this man his job at a government owned shipyard in 1976.  He was imprisoned during the military crackdown in 1981 after gaining  numerous concessions from the government, for which he was awarded the 1983 Nobel Peace Prize, while 7 years later he would defeat his former ally Tadeusz Mazowiecki for his country's presidency. FTP name this Polish hero, the leader of Solidarity.;;(Lech) Walesa
Music;;This man's orchestral works include the Othello Suite and the Battle of Stalingrad Suite. Unable to speak Russian or read music when he entered the Russian Conservatory, he went on to write the ballet Spartacus, while Lezghinka and the Dance of the Rose Maidens can be found in Gayaneh, which also includes his most famous work. FTP, who is this Armenian composer of Saber Dance?;;(Aram) Kha(t)chaturian
Literature;;In 1960, he gets his start as a salesman for the MagiPeel Peeler Company. Soon his wife Janice begins an affair with Charlie Stavros while he himself moves in with the prostitute Ruth Leonard. Known by a nickname derived from his habit of bearing his teeth while a star high-school basketball player, his life is defined by his aimless flight south whenever confronted by a major problem. Seen "rich" and "at rest" in recent novels, FTP, who is this protagonist of four novels by John Updike?;;(Harry) Rabbit (Angstrom)|Angstrom
Economics;;Adam Smith divided an elementary representation of it into effective and absolute classes, of which effective was the more important for determining the market price of a good in relation to the cost of producing it. Theories of revealed preference relate it to the individual consumer's preference, while its price elasticity measures how much more or less of a good the consumer will purchase given a decline or a rise in price. FTP name this relation used with supply to determine the equilibrium price and quantity of a good in a market.;;Demand
Physics;;One version of this phenomenon is caused by high gravitational fields, and likely causes the high values over 3 seen in quasars. Predicted by Einstein, this gravitational version is very similar to the more common version, which is usually given a value expressed as delta lambda over lambda, but for relatively low velocities of recession, the equivalent value v over c is used. FTP, what is this displacement in the lines of the spectra of certain galaxies towards longer wavelengths, most famous in its Doppler form?;;redshift
Geography;;This island's Mount Asgard is situated on the Cumberland Peninsula, and the Foxe Basin lies to the south. Home to the Sirmilik and Auyuitiq National Parks, its major cities include Pangnirtung, Pond Inlet, Arctic Bay, and Iqualuit, which now serves as the capital of Nunavat. Separated from Greenland by the Davis Strait and from mainland Canada by the Hudson Strait, FTP, what is this island named for a 17th century English explorer, the 5th largest island in the world?;;Baffin (Island)
World History;;Talat was one of the leaders of this movement which sought to reestablish their country's liberal constitution of 1876. Reformers who wished to modernize and westernize their country, they ousted Abd ul-Hamid II in 1908. Led in part by Jamal and Enver Pasha, FTP, what was this revolutionary group of the Ottoman Empire whose name indicates their upstart nature?;;Young Turk(s)
Geography;;Construction on this building was inititated in the 13th century by Ibn al-Ahmar of the Nasrid dynasty, and as completed it consists of an old fortress and a slightly more modern palace complex. The Court of the Pools makes up part of the palace, while the other major part is home to a famous alabaster basin suported by twelve white marble lions, and is appropriately named The Court of Lions. With a name probably derived from the color of its bricks, FTP, what is this Moorish palace of Grenada.;;(The) (Alhambra|Red Castle){1}?
Literature;;Mysteries in this novel include the birthday of the main character and the identity of Martha Clifford, who flirts with him by mail. In a major event, the protagonist masturbates while looking at Gerty MacDowell's. legs during a fireworks display on June 16, 1904, and the novel closes with a famous stream of consciousness soliloquy by the protagonist's wife Molly. FTP, identify this novel about Leopold Bloom written by James Joyce.;;Ulysses
Biology;;NADPH provides its reducing power, having acquired energized electrons in the previous reaction, while ATP from the previous reaction provides energy for this process, whose ultimate product is glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate. It begins with carbon fixation catalyzed by the enzyme rubisco, and in most plants it takes place during the daytime, even though sunlight is not required. Also known as the dark cycle, FTP, identify this cycle paired with the light reactions of photosynthesis and named for its discoverer.;;Calvin cycle|dark reactions
United States History;;Originally a professional soldier, this man became governor of Curacao in 1644. Taking his most famous post in 1647, he soon negotiated a mutually acceptable boundary with Connecticut by the Treaty of Hartford. Known for both the efficiency and harsh intolerance of his rule, this governor expanded his colony into the Delaware River area by conquering New Sweden, but was overwhelmed by a surprise English attack and forced to surrender in 1664. FTP, name this one-legged man, the last Dutch ruler of New Netherland.;;(Peter) Stuyvesant
Philosophy;;This thinker is famous for his writings on the concept of the "naturalistic fallacy" within the context of ethical systems. Editor of the periodical Mind, he began teaching in 1911 as a follower of Kant's transcendental epistemology, and went on to expound on the need to carefully clarify and examine the meaning of propositions while championing common sense. The author of Refutation of Idealism and major influence on the Bloomsbury Group, FTP, who was this major British philosopher, the author of Principia Ethica?;;(George) (Edward) Moore
Literature;;The husband of the title character of this literary work is a scholar writing a book about the domestic handicrafts of Brabant in the Middle Ages. A recurring theme is the desire to "die beautifully", and is first seen when the protagonist uses her power over her husband's academic rival Eilert Lovborg to convince him to commit suicide, after which Judge Brack tries to blackmail the title character into sleeping with him. FTP, this is a brief description of what play named for the female protagonist, written by Henrik Ibsen?.;;Hedda Gabler
Art;;Original members of this movement included F.G. Stephens, Thomas Woolner, and James Collinson. Advocating the expression of genuine ideas and study of Nature, their aroused controversy with paintings like The Girlhood of Mary Vrigin and Christ in the House of His Parents. Noted for their association with literature, they published the journal The Germ, and were named for their desire to recapture the artistic spirit of early Renaissance Italy. FTP, what was this 19th century British at movement whose members included William Holman Hunt and Dante Gabriel Rossetti?;;Pre- Raphaelite(s) (Brotherhood)
Astronomy;;These groups of objects are divided into various types using the Trumpler classification. Usually irregular in shape and more loosely packed than their counterparts, they can contain anywhere from a few dozen to several hundred objects. There are about 1,000 known examples, all found in the spiral arms of the galaxy, and their distances are calculated using main-sequence fitting to the Hyades, which with the Beehive is the most famous example of one. FTP, what is this type of star cluster, the counterpart of globular clusters?;;Open (cluster(s))
World History;;This Scirian was one of the chief officers of Orestes, and was murdered at a banquet by his chief rival. After his most famous achievement his troops overran Dalmatia, threatening the power of the eastern emperor Zeno. However, in 493 he was forced to surrender Ravenna when Zeno encouraged Theodoric to attack him. FTP, who was this Gothic chieftain who overthrew Romulus Augustulus to become the first Germanic ruler of Italy?;;Odo(v)acer
Religion/Mythology;;In 1882 all organizations of this religion were divided into two groups, state shrines and sectarian churches. The written record of the ancient beliefs and customs first appeared in 712's Record of Ancient Matters. This religion worships a collection of extraordinary natural objects, gods and supernatural beings known as kami, while emperors were said to be descended from its sun goddess. FTP, name this major Japanese religion.;;Shinto(ism)
Religion/Mythology;;She rides a pale-white horse which keeps a slow, steady gait, yet she cannot be caught by any rider no matter how they spur their horse. After the birth of her son, the six women appointed to watch over her son fell asleep. After his kidnapping the six women smeared this woman's face with blood and pretended she had killed her son. FTP, identify this mother of Pryderi and wife of Pwyll whose name is found in the title of a Fleetwood Mac song.;;Rhiannon
Chemistry;;These elements can be prepared through the reduction of AcF3 or AcF4 with lithium, calcium, or magnesium at temperatures of 1100 to 1400 degrees Celsius. Known for their self-heating, extreme explosiveness, and short lifetimes, all of their isotopes tend to be unstable and most undergo radioactive alpha decay, and the Aufbau principal dictates that they are constructed by adding electrons to the 5f subshell. Characterized by a 7s2 configuration FTP, what is the collective name for chemical elements 89-103?;;Actin(ide(s)|oid(s)) (series)
Literature;;This literary character's death is brought about by his loyalty to Cassy and Emmeline. An intensely Christian man, he had earlier been separated from his wife Chloe by Haley, and is horrified by the brutalities endured by his fellow passangers on a ship during his subsequent voyage to Louisiana. He soon befriends Eva St. Clair, but seees his hopes of freedom ended when he is bought by Simon Legree. FTP, who is this title character of the most famous novel by Harriet Beecher Stowe?;;Uncle Tom
Psychology;;Another name for it is instrumental learning, a term introduced by Thorndike, whose law of effect became the cornerstone of the theory of this process. Unlike the simpler classical variety, in this form of learning the response is mainly influenced by stimuli that follow rather than precede the response, and acquisition of a newly learned pattern of response is typically achieved through reinforcement. Studied by B. F. Skinner, FTP, what is this type of conditioning?;;operant (conditioning)
United States History;;His father organized the investigation into the kidnapping of the Lindbergh baby. He served two tours of duty in Vietnam and attained the rank of General in 1978. In 1983 he was a deputy commander in the invasion of Grenada, but he would gain his greatest notoriety several years later. FTP, name this man who commanded the U.S. forces in the Gulf War and authored the book It Doesnít Take a Hero.;;(Herbert) (Norman) Schwarzkopf (Jr)|Stormin Normin
Physics;;From 1662 to the end of his life he held the post of "curator of experiments" to the Royal Society. He worked on a wave theory of light, a theory of gravitation, and speculated on the atomic composition of matter. After the Great Fire of 1666, he was named Surveyor of London. He discovered that spiral springs have a period of oscillation independent of amplitude, and helped Robert Boyle invent a gas pump. FTP, identify this scientist who, while looking at cork through a microscope, coined the term cell.;;(Robert) Hooke
United States History;;Its founder, a veteran named William Mooney, developed a long series of fake Indian rituals as a way to mock its higher-class rival, the Society of Cincinnati.  Named for a Delaware Indian chief and incorporated as an immigrant aid association in 1805, it gradually became active in politics, eventually helping elect Fernando Wood as mayor of New York. Associated with "Boss" Tweed, FTP, what was this New York City political machine?;;(The) (Society of St.) Tammany (Hall)
Biology;;They often stand out in electron micrographs because of a crystalloid core made up of urate oxidase.  In germinating seeds, they are called glyoxysomes, since they convert fats to sugars as part of the glyoxylate cycle.  Remarkably adaptable, they are small in yeast cells grown on sugar, but grow large if the yeast is transferred to methanol.  For 10 points-name these organelles that break down many molecules by producing hydrogen peroxide.;;peroxisome(s)
Literature;;Its coins include the sprug, drurr, and glumgluff.  Its emperor supports the Slamecksan faction, while the prince is thought to favor the rival Tramecksans, who wear high-heeled shoes.  Civil unrest followed the prophet Lustrog's declaration concerning the proper side to break eggs, just one example of the pettiness seen on this island, the first visited by the man who describes it, and who, after initially helping them in their war with Blefuscu, becomes disillusioned when they propose tying him down to prevent him from fending for himself. FTP, what is this island of diminuitive people visited by Lemuel Gulliver?;;Lilliput
Religion/Mythology;;Notable adherents of this doctrine included Edward Herbert of Cherbury and Henry St. John. Arguing against the need for religion to be imposed by religious institutions or supported by divine revelations, it reached its height during the 18th century Enlightenment, and held that belief in God can commend itself to the human mind by its own reasonableness. Adhered to by Voltaire, FTP, what is this religious doctrine usually taken to involve God's leaving the Universe to its own lawful devices?;;deism|natural religion
World History;;The causes of this war included the construction of Mennonite settlements in a disputed region, rumors of new petroleum deposits there, and the recent Tacna-Arica Settlement. When the League of Nations failed as a mediator, the German-trained Bolivian army was expected to win easily, but the inability of the Bolivian Indian conscripts to adapt to the region's weather combined with the tactical skill of Jose Felix Estigarribia led to a Paraguayan victory. FTP, name this 1932-35 war between Bolivia and Paraguay fought over a piece of lowland  territory.;;(Gran) Chaco (War)
Noncomputational Math;;This two dimensional manifold is orientable and has Euler characteristic 0.  It can be expressed as the product of two circles, but like the Klein bottle is more often viewed as a square with opposite sides identified.  FTP, name this surface, which is more familiar to most people as the surface of a donut.;;Torus
Literature;;The female protagonist of this poem is first seen singing the 100th Psalm. The title character says he is not afraid of bullets or cannons, but admits "That of a thundering 'No!' point-blank from the mouth of a woman, / That I confess I'm afraid of".  Due to this, the title character sends his young friend to plead his case for the love of Priscilla, but Priscilla urges John to speak for himself, leading John to declare his own love for Priscilla. FTP, what is this Longfellow poem about a 17th century American historical figure?;;(The) (Courtship of) Miles Standish
Art;;Creator of the painted wooden crucifix in Sta Maria Novella, this man received the world's first technical patent for an invention that he claimed would help him haul marble down the Arno River. Originally a goldsmith and sculptor, he designed the Pazzi chapel and the Church of the Santo Spiritu after he lost a bid to design the gates of the Florence Baptistery to Lorenzo Ghiberti. FTP, name this first great Renaissance architect best-known for his design of the dome of the Florence cathedral.;;(Filippo) Brunelleschi
Physics;;Flaws in Schrodinger's equation or Bohr's formula can be corrected by introducing this value measured in multiples of a unit called the Dirac h, or h-bar. It was first proposed by Samuel Goudsmit and George Uhlenbeck to explain the spectra of light emitted by atoms of alkali metals. Calculated for complex nuclei by taking the vector sum of the intrinsic values for the constituent particles and their orbital angular momentum, it is zero for nuclei with even numbers of neutrons and protons in their ground states and for pions, while for electrons, neutrons, and protons the multiple involved is 1/2. FTP, what is this measure of the amount of angular momentum associated with a subatomic particle or nucleus?;;spin
Music;;Failed romances helped inspire this composer's song cycle Lieder eines fahrenden Gesellen and the cantata Das Klagende Lied.  Director of the Imperial Opera of Vienna from 1897-1907, his death fixation helped shape his Kindertotenlieder,or "Songs on the Death of Children", and a year after his cancer diagnosis he wrote Song of the Earth.  FTP, name this Austrian-Jewish composer best-known for the Titan Symphony, the Resurrection Symphony, and the Symphony of a Thousand.;;(Gustav) Mahler
Literature;;It is said that this play's title character "always wears her hair in the same style".  Its author, while attempting to learn English, was amazed by the emptiness of the bits of daily conversation he found in his English phrasebook, and sought to produce a play from such clichéd , meaningless chatter.  The result was a work starring Mr. and Mrs. Smith, Mr. and Mrs. Warren, and the Fire Chief. For ten points, what is this 1950 play by Eugene Ionesco?;;(The) Bald Soprano|(La) Cantatrice chauve
United State History;;Known for the 1972 "Declaration of Conscience", Earl Warren claimed that if he'd been nominated for president in 1952, he would have made this Senator his running mate.  The first Republican to denounce Joseph McCarthy on the Senate floor, this one-time reporter finished second to Barry Goldwater for the 1964 Republican presidential nomination, fourteen years after going to the House of Representatives to succeed her late husband. FTP, name this long-time senator from Maine.;;(Margaret) (Madelin) (Chase) Smith
Geography;;Its northernmost island is Nanumea, and its southernmost is Niulakita.  Made up of nine isolated atolls located north of the Wallis and Futuna Islands and southwest of Kiribati, it won its independence in 1978, only three years after separating from the Gilbert Islands.  Originally known as the Ellice Islands, FTP, name this archipelago whose main island Vaitupu is home to the capital Funafuti.;;Tuvalu
Philosophy;;One of his techniques was writing sous rature, or "under erasure": writing a word, then crossing it out, then leaving the crossed-out word in the text.  His first book was a translation of Husserl's Origin of Geometry, which he followed with the collection Writing and Difference, in which he attacked structuralism and used his famous method to discuss Descartes and Foucault.  FTP, name this author of Of Grammatology and theorist of deconstruction.;;(Jacques) Derrida
World History;;The first, signed in 1668, left France its conquests in Flanders but ended the French invasion of the Spanish Netherlands.  The second gave Silesia to Prussia, recognized the Hanoverian succession in England, and confirmed the Pragmatic Sanction of 1713, ensuring Maria Theresa's right to rule Austria.  FTP, what is the shared name of these treaties, the second of which ended the War of the Austrian Succession in 1748?;;(Treaty of) Aix-la-Chapelle
Miscellaneous;;One of this man's students was Jomo Kenyatta, and he wrote the introduction to Kenyatta's Facing Mount Kenya. Author of 1948's "Magic, Science, and Religion", he attacked Sigmund Freud's concept of the Oedipus complex using evidence collected on the Trobriand Islands. The founder of "functionalism", FTP, who was this Polish-born social anthropologist, the author of Argonauts of the Western Pacific?;;(Bronislaw) Malinowski
Literature;;In this novel, Rosamond Vincy is more interested in money than moral standards, causing trouble for her husband, Dr. Lydgate, as he struggles to decide whether to build a wealthy medical practice or pursue idealistic medical reforms.  These reforms are supported by the main character, who is trying to escape her love for Will Ladislaw, who she must not marry to keep the inheritance of her late husband Edward Casaubon. Centering on the chacacter Dorthea Brooke, FTP, what is this novel, arguably the best-known work of George Eliot?;;Middlemarch
Chemistry;;It can be transformed into lyxose using the Ruff degradation. Like the other aldohexoses, its chemical formula is C6H12O6, but unlike talose or glucose, it gives an optically-inactive meso compound upon reaction with nitric acid. A major component of many gums, mucilages, and pectins in plants, it is also a constituent in animal glycolipids and glycoproteins. For ten points, name this simple sugar which bonds to glucose to form lactose.;;galactose
World History;;In part because of a curse on his family, this Alcmaeonid was opposed by his fellow aristocrats, and turned to the common people to achieve power.  He then instituted ostracism, expanded the Athenian council to 500 members, and reformed the Athenian tribes, abolishing the four old ancestor tribes in favor of ten new ones composed of three trittyes each. FTP, name this Athenian who sought to build on Solon's democratic reforms, generally acknowledged as the founder of Athenian democracy.;;Cleisthenes (of Athens)
Religion/Mythology;;One of his lovers was Uathach, a daughter of his tutor, the warrior-woman Scathach, and forgetting his own strength, he broke Uathach's fingers while taking a dish from her hand. His son Conlaoch later challenged him to single combat, and not recognizing his son, he impaled him on the end of his spear. Possessing seven fingers, seven toes, and seven pupils in each eye, FTP, who is this Celtic hero best-known for fighting off the forces of Queen Maeve?;;Cu Chulainn|Setanta
Noncomputational Math;;Its inventor, Guido van Rossum, claims that he was influenced primarily by ABC and Modula-3. It supports objected-oriented and generic programming styles, and is perhaps best known for its emphasis on readability, with indented blocks and a notable lack of semicolons compared to many other languages. FTP, identify this programming language with a name inspired by a 70s British comedy series rather than a type of snake.;;Python
Literature;;An unusual blend of textbook and novel, it was written by a former high school teacher who wanted to write an introduction to philosophy within the framework of a mystery story.  The title character receives strange mail addressed to someone called "Hilde," and her attempts to discover their source lead her to a course in western philosophy. A Norwegian bestseller, FTP, what is this novel by Jostein Gaarder?;;Sophie's World|Sofies verden
Chemistry;;This man showed that carbon is tetravalent. A native of Darmstadt, he first studied architecture, but became interested in chemistry when he heard Liebig give evidence in a murder trial.  His interest in structure is shown in his study of reaction products, but he never finished his major work, the Lehrbuch der Organischen Chemie. For ten points, name this German chemist famous for his dream concerning the structure of benzene.;;(Friedrich) (August) Kekule
United States History;;After studying art with Benjamin West, this man dedicated himself to engineering, patenting machines for sawing marble, for spinning flax, and for twisting hemp into rope. He then entered the canal digging business, publishing "A Treatise on the Improvement of Canal Navigation". While in Paris from 1797-1806 he invented a submarine but failed to interest the French government in the designs, after which he was commissioned by Robert Livingston to build his most famous creation, which was once described as "a backwoods saw-mill mounted on a scow and set on fire".  FTP, who was this inventor whose ship Clermont was the first economically effective steamboat?;;(Robert) Fulton
Art;;This artist painted a series of 4 frescos based on the Decameron for the decoration of the Pucci villa. Also known for "The Madonna of the Pomegranate" and the "Mystic Nativity", his nickname was due to the corpulence of his eldest brother Giovanni, and means "little barrel" in Italian. The artist of "Primavera", FTP, who is this 15th Century Italian painter of The Birth of Venus?;;(Alessandro) Botticelli
World History;;When the invading fleet appeared in the Bay of Phalerum before this battle, they were sent a false message by a spy which led them to blockade the Bay of Eleusis with a thin line of 1,000 ships.  The Greek fleet of 370 vessels attacked and broke the line, resulting in the loss of 500 Persians ships, while the Greeks under Themistocles only lost 40 ships.  FTP, name this major 480 BC naval battle in a strait southwest of Athen.;;(Battle of) (Strait(s) of) Salamis (Bay)
Literature;;In this play, the female protagonist's young son dies only a year after her husband's death, prompting a five year trip to Paris. The plot is set in motion by the need to pay for this trip and for Anya's return home. In response to this need for money, Gaev does nothing but play billiards and Varya merely prays. Lopakhin suggests a way to save the estate, but Madame Ranevsky rejects the plan, and her estate is lost.  FTP, name this play by Anton Chekhov, in which the title object is eventually chopped down.;;(The) Cherry Orchard|Vishnovy sad
Geography;;This Asian body of water receives the Red River, and its main ports include Ben Thuy, Haiphong, and Pei-hai. Measuring 300 miles long by 150 miles wide, it is the northwest arm of the South China Sea bounded by China to the north, Hainan Island to the east, and Vietnam to the west. FTP, what is this gulf notorious for a torpedo attack against two U.S. destroyers in 1964?;;(Gulf of) Tonkin
Physics;;This equation behind this physical law was amended by Newton to take the form 4 pi squared a cubed over T squared equals G times the quantity m plus m sub p. First published in the work "Harmonices mundi" in 1619, like its two partners it was derived from data found in its namesake's "Rudolphine Tables". Stating that the square of a planet's period is proportional to the cube of its mean distance from the sun, FTP, what is this famous law of planetary motion?;;Kepler(')s (Third|3rd){1}? Law (of) (Planetary) (Motion)
Music;;This composer of the "Alto Rhapsody" and "Love-Song Waltzes" expressed his artistic credo in the words, "If we can not compose as beautifully as Mozart and Haydn, let us at least try to compose as purely".  A meticulous worker, he did not complete the first of his four symphonies until age 43. Composer of "Variations on a Theme of Haydn" and the "Four Serious Songs", he is better-known for the "Tragic" and "Academic Festival" Overtures. FTP, name this composer of "A German Requiem" and a famous "lullaby".;;(Johannes) Brahms
Literature;;The death of this poet's second wife Frances Appleton prevented him from working for several years, but he eventually completed the religious poem "Christus". Renowned for his skill with languages, the early romanticism of such early works as "Outre-Mer", "Voices of the Night", and "Hyperion" soon gave way to a fascination with narrative forms and European meters, as seen in works like "Tales of a Wayside Inn". FTP, who was this 19th century poet, the author of "Evangeline" and "Hiawatha"?;;(Henry) (Wadsworth) Longfellow
World History;;The region that now makes up this country was conquered by Rome in 58 BC, and afterwards was controlled by Swabia and Burgandy until the Holy Roman Empire gained the region in 1033. The march towards independence started with a 1291 defensive league formed by the states of Uri, Schwyz, and Unterwalden, which resulted in virtual independence from the Hapsburgs in 1499, with official independence recognized in the Peace of Westphalia. An alpine nation of 7 million divided into cantons, FTP, what is this country known for its neutrality?;;Switzerland
Pop Culture;;Famous scenes in the film include the "walls of Jericho" and the hitchhiking lesson, and sales of men's undershirts supposedly plummeted because of its bare-chested star.  In this screwball romantic comedy, a rich heiress runs away from her wedding and winds up on a cross-country bus with a wisecracking reporter.  Directed by Frank Capra, it starred Claudette Colbert and Clark Gable.  FTP, name this 1934 film, the first film to sweep the Academy Awards for Best Actor, Actress, and Picture?;;It Happened One Night
Biology;;Extant classes of this phylum of animals include Crinoidea and Stelleroidea. They have a simple nervous system consisting of nerve rings, a rudimentary circulatory system, and no brain, and movement is achieved using a rounded muscular sac called an ampulla. Unique in their posession of a water vascular system and tube feet, their spiny skin gives them their name, and many of them have pentaradial symmetry. FTP, name this phylum which includes sea cucumbers, sea urchins, and starfish.;;Echinoderm(s)|Echinodermata
Religion/Mythology;;He wore a chain of seashells around his neck and a chain of rattles around his ankles, and he often wore a conical cap made from the skin of a jaguar.  He was once aided by vultures, an eagle, a coyote, a wolf, and hundreds of moles in digging up his slain father, the Sun.  He taught the Toltecs of Tula how to raise corn, but he was forced to flee by Tezcatlipoca.  FTP, name this Toltec and Aztec deity known as the plumed serpent god who was once confused with Hernando Cortez.;;Quetz(a)lcoatl
Literature;;Toward the end of this novel, the title character takes in Sally Godfrey's daughter to raise alongside her own son, Billy, and her husband decides to be faithful to her.  About 900 pages earlier, she is employed as a servant to Lady B, but after Lady B's death she is kidnapped by Lady B's son. However, the protagonist wins Mr. B's respect with her tenacious resistance, and they are soon married. Subtitled "Virtue Rewarded", FTP, what is this first major epistolary novel, which along with "Clarissa" is probably the best-known work by Samuel Richardson?;;Pamela(,) (or Virtue Rewarded)
World History;;In 1930 this man led a 200-mile march to the sea to collect salt in defiance of a government monopoly, marking a renewal of his protest efforts. Trained as a lawyer in London, he spent 21 years in South Africa opposing discrimination on the part of the South African government. Assassinated by Nathuram Godse in 1948, he had earlier become famous for his non-cooperation and civil disobedience in India. FTP, name this Indian nationalist leader known as "Mohatma"?;;(Mohandas) (Karamchand) (Mahatma) Gandhi
Physics;;Developed by Godfrey Hounsfield, the first working version of the device to produce them was built in 1972. In the device to make them, a lead collimator focuses a fan-shaped x-ray beam which is then rotated, with the transmitted fan beam picked up by an arc of detectors. The measurements are then reconstructed into a tomograph providing a 2-dimensional X-ray picture revealing a slice of the body inside the device. FTP, what is this type of medical scan?;;C(A)T (scan)|computerized axial tomography
Miscellaneous;;This woman's writings include the children's story The Eagle and the Wren and the books In the Shadow of Man and Visions of Caliban.  The holder of a PhD in Ethology, she is an explorer-in-residence for the National Geographic Society, as well as the only non-Tanzanian to win the Medal of Tanzania.  She first traveled to Lake Tanganyika at age 26 in 1960, where she established the Gombe Stream Research Centre.  FTP, name this anthropologist, famous for her years of observations of chimpanzees.;;(Jane) Goodall
World History;;It reached the height of its power when it defeated Waldemar IV of Denmark and signed the favorable Treaty of Straslund.  It still met as late as 1669, but it had not been a major power for over a century.  It began in part to facilitate trade of salt and herring for Kiel and Lubeck, but a 1241 mutual defense pact between Lubeck and Hamburg is considered its true beginning.  Consisting of up to 160 members, FTP, name this powerful league which controlled trade in the Baltic and North Sea regions for centuries.;;(the) Hanseatic League|Hansa
Chemistry;;Not easily oxidized, these compounds can be synthesized by using an organolithium reagent on a nitrile, followed by hydrolysis of the product.  Useful as solvents and flavorings, they can also be made by oxidizing a secondary alcohol.  They do not affect Fehling's solution and do not react with the Tollens reagent, which differentiates them from aldehydes.  FTP, name this class of compounds with a carbonyl group between two aryl groups, the simplest of which is acetone.;;ketone(s)
Literature;;The title character of this work takes command of the treasury, declares the assumption of civil authority, and fights off an advance by the Scythians.  Lampito, a Spartan, was the first to support the title character's plan, but some supporters eventually used fear of the snakes and owls of the Acropolis as an excuse to abandon their cause, while others resorted to fake pregnancies. Eventually, the Spartans and Athenians did meet, but failed to sign an agreement ending their war.  FTP, name this play by Aristophanes, in which women withhold sex as leverage to end war.;;Lysistrata
Philosophy;;Sections of this philosophical work include "Of Heresy," "Of the Priesthood of Christ," "The Immutability of God," and "Of the Substance of the Angels Absolutely Considered". Concluding with a section detailing the role of Jesus and the Sacraments in the soul's salvation, it opens with a discussion of God's existence, including the author's famous "Five Proofs". Left incomplete when its author experienced a great change while saying mass in December 1273, it still provides a thorough survey of Scholastic thought and serves as the basis for the teachings of the Roman Catholic Church.  FTP, name this massive work by Thomas Aquinas.;;Summa Theologica|Summa totius theologiae
Miscellaneous;;The possibilty of this phenomenon was discussed in a famous report by Turco, Toon, Ackerman, Pollack, and Sagan.  It may result from great fires, wind, and large quantities of smoke and dust.  Theoretically, these effects could reduce incoming solar radiation, resulting in the extreme cooling of the earth's surface, possibly to -15 to -25 Celsius.  FTP, name this two-word "seasonal" term, described as a severe deterioration of climate that might take place as a result of multiple H-bomb explosions on the earth's surface.;;Nuclear Winter
Literature;;As a book editor in the 1960s, this graduate of Howard University worked on the writings of Toni Cade Bambara, Gayl Jones, and several other black female writers.  During this period, she wrote her first novel, about the experiences of young black girls struggling to define themselves, The Bluest Eye, and she later won a Pulitzer Prize for her novel about a woman who tried to kill her children rather than allow them to be sent back into slavery.  FTP, name this author of Jazz, Sula, and Beloved.;;(Toni) Morrison|(Chloe) (Anthony) Wofford
Geography;;A mostly lowland nation except in the dry northern sections, it has the largest artificial lake in the world, Lake Volta.  Gold is a leading export, of which the Ashanti Goldfields Corporation is the chief producer.  The Oti river forms part of its border with Togo, while the Black Volta separates it from Burkina Faso and Ivory Coast.  The home nation of the winner of the 2001 Nobel Peace Prize, FTP, name this African nation once known as Gold Coast, with capital at Accra.;;Ghana
Chemistry;;These compounds can be made by fusing a sulphonic acid salt with sodium hydroxide and adding sulphuric acid to liberate them. Unlike normal alcohols, these compounds are acidic because of the presence of an aromatic ring. Named for a compound with formula C6 H5 OH, FTP, what are these compounds containing a hydroxyl group bound directly to a carbon atom in a benzene ring?;;phenol(s)
Literature;;After the failure of her father's utopian community Fruitlands this author began supporting her family by writing Gothic works like "Pauline's Passion and Punishment" and "Perilous Play" under the pseudonym A.N. Barnard.. Author of "Flower Fables", her first success as a serious author came with "Hospital Sketches", describing her time as a nurse in the Civil War. FTP, who is this author of "Little Women"?;;(Louise) (May) Alcott
Geography;;The Kern River Canyon is on the west of this mountain, while its precipitous streams enter Owens Valley on the east. Its summit is a gently sloping tablelike surface notable for its lack of erosion, and was first reached in 1873 by A.H. Johnson, C.D. Begole and J. Lucas. Located on the Inyo-Tulare county line at the east border of Sequoia National Park, it rises to a height of 14,494 feet, making it the culminating summit of the Sierra Nevadas. FTP, what is this mountain, the highest in the contiguous United States?;;(Mount) Whitney
United States History;;During this war a militant Indian faction called the Red Sticks killed 533 frontiersmen in the Fort Mims Massacre. Later that fall, the villages of Talladega and Tallashatchee were destroyed, and by the next spring, 1000 warriors congregated at a village on a peninsula in the Tallapoosa River, where they were destroyed in the Battle of Horseshoe Bend. FTP, what was this war named for the Native American tribe defeated by Andrew Jackson during the War of 1812?;;Creek (War)
Religion/Mythology;;The Lesser ones were held in the early Spring at Agrae and involved seed trays called kernos, while the Greater ones were held in the early fall at sowing time, and usually lasted 9 days. Starting with Assembly day, the second day was the Halade, when initiates raced to the sea with a piglet under their arm and bathed themselves for purification, while on the Pompe day the initiates walked 14 miles on the Sacred Way from Athens. FTP this is a description of what mystery religion of Ancient Greece which was performed in honor of Demeter and her daughter?;;Eleusinian Mysteries
Philosophy;;This philosopher died while working on his Compendium of Theology, and a legend holds that he possessed a brazen head which would indicate when his projects would succeed by talking to him. He gained the reputation as an erratic genius for his scientific speculations, and he was declared a heretic by the Franciscans in 1278 due to his advocacy that the Roman Catholic church should embrace all the sciences. Famous for his Opus majus, Opus minus, and Opus tertium, FTP, who was this English philosopher known as "Doctor Mirabilis"?;;R(oger) Bacon;;Bacon
Art;;This man founded the first laboratory of aerodynamics at Auteuil in 1912. His first notable achievement was his 1858 iron bridge over the Garonne, and he went on to specialize in metal construction, building the Garabit viaduct, the moveable dome of the Nice Observatory, and the framework for Bartholdi's Statue of Liberty. FTP, who was this "magician of iron", best known for the Paris tower which bears his name?;;(Alexandre) (Gustave) Eiffel
Literature;;Serialized in the magazine All the Year Round, the scheme at the center of this novel's plot is hatched by Count Fosco and Sir Percival Glyde, and is eventually solved by Walter Hartright and his lover Marian. In an attempt to gain the money of his wife Laura Fairlie, Glyde plans to replace her with the lookalike Anne Catherick, who is dying in a mental asylum. FTP, this describes what Victorian detective novel by Wilkie Collins?;;(The) Woman in White
Miscellaneous;;In addition to his more famous endeavours, this man was a skilled calligrapher who in 1540 published a concise manual on Italic lettering. He gained a mastery of mathematics and astronomy under the guidance of Gemma Frisius and learned of engraving from Gaspar a Myrica, who would become his partners in his life's work, which included a series of publications intended to describe the creation and history of the world, coining the term atlas to describe it. Using the graceful Italic lettering which became his trademark, he gained fame for constructing maps of Palestine, his native Flanders, and the world, the latter of which he presented in a double-heart shape. FTP, who was this cartographer who devised the cylindrical projection named for him?;;(Gerardus) Mercator|(Gerardus de) Cremer
United States History;;In this event's aftermath, Albert Parsons, George Engel, and Adolph Fischer were hanged, while Louis Lingg was found dead in his jail cell. Judge Joseph Gary had sentenced these people, as well as August Spies, as accessories before and after the fact in the deaths of seven people as a rally in support of a 8-hour work day. FTP, name this violent confrontation between police and labor supporters in Chicago in 1886.;;Haymarket (Square) (Riot)
Literature;;The title of this book comes from its introductory piece, which describes the author's farmhouse Arrowhead. The character Bannadonna figures promenantly in the second story, "The Bell Tower", which is followed by The Lightning-Rod Man and The Encantadas. Most famous for its last two stories, Benito Cereno and Bartleby the Scrivener, FTP, what is this collection of "tales" by Herman Melville?;;(The) Piazza (Tales)
World History;;In the aftermath of this battle the losing forces were forced to retreat over a single bridge which was prematurely destroyed, trapping 30,000 troops. Initially, the attacks by Blucher from the north and Schwarzenberg from the south were unsuccessful, but the arrival of Russian and Swedish troops combined by the defection of Saxon forces led to Napoleon's defeat. Breaking French power in Poland and Germany, FTP< what was this October 1813 battle, known as "the battle of the nations"?;;(Battle of) (Leipzig|the Nations){1}?
Psychology;;This man's autobiography was 1963's Memories, Dreams, and Reflections. Originally an assistant at the Burgholzli Clinic under Eugen Bleuler, he went on to develop the concept of shadow, the repressed and guilt laden part of the personality, as well as animus and anima, the male and female parts of the personality. He coined the terms extrovert and introvert in 1923's Psychological Types, while his broader application of the libido signaled his break with Freud. FTP, who was this Swiss analytical psychologist who developed the theory of the collective unconscious and wrote 1912's Psychology of the Unconscious?;;(Carl) (Gustav) Jung
Physics;;This device was first developed to measure the wavelength of light, and is used today to measure the diameter of nearby stars, test flat surfaces, determine the indices of refraction of materials, and measure small distances. The echelon version consists of a stack of glass plates, while the Fabry-Perot type uses a pair of half-silvered mirrors to produce circular fringes. FTP, name this device most famously used by Michelson and Morley to disprove the existence of ether?;;Interferometer
Literature;;A major moment in this novel occurs when the protagonist, lost in the snow, has a vision of a classical temple in which two hags are eating a child. Having come to the Haus Berghof to visit his cousin Joachim Ziemessen, the discovery of a pulmonary defect by Dr, Behrens prompts him to stay for seven years, during which time he falls in love with Claudia Chauchat and argues with Settembrini and Pepperkorn. Set at a tuberculosis clinic, FTP, what is this novel about Hans Castorp, the best-known work by Thoman Mann?;;(The) Magic Mountain|(Die) Zauberberg
Music;;The principal theme of this musical work is used in second movement of Verdi's Manzoni Requiem, in Berlioz's Symphanie Fantasique, and in the third movement of Mozart's Requiem. Probably composed by Thomas of Celano, it is based on the Vulgate version of Joel 2:31, and is used in the mass for the dead and on All Souls' Day. A medieval hymn on the Last Judgement. FTP, name this famous hymn whose name is Latin for a certain 24 hour timespan of vengeance.;;Dies Irae|Day of Wrath
United States History;;This man died of tuberculosis in 1887 in Glenwood Springs, California. Raised in Georgia, he graduated in 1872 from the Pennsylvania College of Dental Surgery. Discovering that he was better at faro than tooth extraction, he lived in places as varied as Pueblo, Dallas, and Las Vegas, at some point marriying Kate Elder. Befriending Wyatt Earp in Dodge City, he fought against the Clanton gang at the OK Corrall. FTP, name this part-time dentist of the American West.;;(John) (Henry) (Doc) Holliday
Biology;;Salts of this acid produced during metabolism can accumulate for form kidney stones, and its accumulation in the synovial fluilds of joints causes gout. The major form in which metabolic nitrogen is execreted from the body, it has formula C3 H4 N4 O3. FTP, what is this acid, the end product of purine breakdown in most mammals?;;Uric acid
Religion/Mythology;;This figure is depicted as having four arms, in which he carries a club, shell, discus, and lotus. Also known as Hari and Narayana, at various times he takes the forms Kurma, Varaha, Narasimha, Matsya, Vamena, Rama, Krishna, and the Buddha. FTP, who is this kindly preserver god of Hinduism?;;Vishnu|Hari|Narayana
Literature;;Characters in this play include Doctor Pinch, the ludicrously fat maid Luce, and the just Duke Solinus. When it opens, the Syracuse merchant Egeon has been sentenced to death; meanwhile his son is involved in a shipwreck which also involves his lost brother. Confusion ensues due to the fact that each brother shares the name Antipholus and employs a servent named Dromio. FTP, what is this Shakespearean play whose title indicates the confusion involved?;;(The) Comedy of Errors
Religion/Mythology;;One myth holds that this mythological figure was worshipped as the god Virbius in Italy after being brought back to life by Asclepius. Hating luxury, he worshipped only Artemis, causing him to incur the wrath of Aphrodite. After his mother Antiope died, his father Theseus married Phaedra, who fell in love with him. He rejected her advances, but before she killed herself Phaedra accused him of violating her, leading Theseus to banish him and pray to Poseidon for his death. FTP, who was this man dragged to death by his own horses?;;Hippolytus
Literature;;Poems by this author include Tentative Description of a Dinner Given to Promote the Impeachment of President Eisenhower, and One Thousand Fearful Words for Fidel Castro. Author of "Pictures of the Gone World", he was the founder of the City Lights  Bookstore in San Francisco in 1953, and published many of the works of the Beat poets. FTP, name this author of A Coney Island of the Mind.;;(Lawrence) Ferlinghetti
World History;;Its publication was advised by Sergey Witte, and it guaranteed freedom of speech, press and assembly; a broad franchise; and a legislature that had to approve legislation before it could become law. Prompted by a disastrous war with Japan and the Bloody Sunday uprising, FTP, what was this 1905 letter in which Nicholas II ended autocracy in Russia, named for the month in which it was issued?;;October Manifesto
Physics;;The maximum energy involved in this effect is given by the equation h times f minus phi, and it will only occur if h is greater than the work function divided by the threshold frequency. Although it usually occurs with ultraviolet light, it can sometimes occur with sunlight. Discovered in 1887 by Hertz, FTP, what is this effect in which a surface exposed to electromagnetic radiation emits a stream of photons, most associated with the work of Albert Einstein?;;photoelectric (effect)
Economics;;In the extended title of his most famous work this economist claims to respond to the speculations of William Godwin and the Marquis de Condorcet. From 1805-34 professor at the East India Company's college at Haileybury, he wrote 1820's Principles of Political Economy and An Inquiry into the Nature and Progress of Rent, but is best-known for a 1798 work in which he uses the argument that one element of society increases at an arithmetic rate, while another increases at a geometric rate, implying the need for moral restriant, crime, disease, war, and vice. FTP, who was this author of An Essay on the Principle of Population?;;(Thomas) Malthus
Literature;;In this work the author tells of his unhappiness at Manchester Grammar School and his subsequent escape. After befriending a 16 year-old prostitute named Ann he went to Oxford, where his two great joys are to hera the soprano Grassini and to take medicine to treat his acute stomach pains. Moving to a cottage in northern England, he initially experiences complete happiness and writes a book on economics, but he soon descends into an extended period of inactivity marked by fantastic visions induced by his laudanum addiction. FTP, what is this most-famous work by Thomas de Quincey?;;Confessions of an English Opium-Eater
World History;;Born with a damaged left arm which he hid with a cloak, this leader was sympathetic to the working class, as seen in his support of the Comprehensive Factory Act of 1908 and the Imperial Insurance Code of 1911. A grandson of Queen Victoria, he became unpopular with Great Britian due to his telegram of congratulations to Kruger for surviving the Jameson raid, while his alliance with Franz Joseph II of Austria eventually cost him the throne, after which he lived as a country gentleman in the Netherlands until his 1941 death. FTP, who was this man who served from 1888-1918 as Kaiser of Germany?;;(Kaiser) (Wilhelm|William){1}? (II|the second){1}?;;(Kaiser) (Wilhelm|William){1}?
Art;;This artist often appended to his paintings quotes from his putative epic poem "The Fallacies of Hope", which he never published and may never have written. Prone to outrageous claims, such as when he vowed he had been lashed to the stern of the ship Ariel in a blizzard in order to create "Steamboat off a Harbour's Mouth", he often gave his paintings grandiose titles, such as "Slaves Throwing Overboard the Dead and the Dying-Typhoon Coming On". Although is work was criticised by Constable as "airy visions, painted with tinted steam", Ruskin championed such works as "Petworth", Fighting Temeriere", and "Burning of the Houses of Parliament. FTP, who was this English painter perhaps best known for "Rain, Steam and Speed", "The Slave Ship", and "Snowstorm:Hannibal Crossing the Alps"?;;(Joseph) (Mallord) (William) Turner
Biology;;This type of algae can occur in running water and in vegetative form, but most are of the conjugative variety and are found in mats over still waters. All of them possess a slippery unbranched filament composed of cylindrical cells containing torodial green chloroplasts and take an uncomplicated structure ideal for microscopic study in secondary schools. With a name meaning "coiled-ring", FTP, what is this type of algae also known as mermaid's tresses, water silk, and pond scum?;;spirogyra
Geography;;This river's tributaries include the Skawa, Sola, San, and Narew rivers, and it forms in the Beskid range from the confluence of the Czarna and Biala Wiselka streams. Connected to the Bug canal via the Dneipr-Bug canal and the Oder by the Bydgoszcz ("bid-gosh") canal, during its 651 miles it passes such cities as Torun, Danzig, and Krakow. FTP, what is this river which flows through Warsaw, the longest in Poland?;;Vistula|Wisla
Geography;;One city of this name was described by Homer as "the Hundred Gated", and stood on the site of modern Al-Uqsur. In Strabo's time it was reduced to a small village, but earlier had served as the Egyptian capital during the 11th dynasty. The one in Boeotia was famous for the seven gates supposedly built using the music of Amphion, and in 336 it was sacked by Alexander the Great, who famously ordered that only the House of Pindar be left standing. FTP, what is the name of these cities, the latter of which was the subject of a mythical attack by seven Greek leaders?;;Thebes
Literature;;The protagonist of this novel was raised by her uncle, from whom she inherited a fortune, but she was actually the daughter of the once-powerful businessman Moodie. A beautiful magazine writer and feminist, the reader is told by Miles Coverdale of her disasterous marriage to the mesmerist Westervelt, and after her-half sister Priscilla wins the heart of the reformer Hollingsworth she kills herself. Centering on Zenobia, FTP, what is this novel set in a utopian community, written by Nathaniel Hawthorne?;;(The) Blithedale Romance
Chemistry;;This chemist's explanation of electrolysis laid the foundation of the modern electrochhemical series, and while working as a laboratory assistant discovered the respiratory effects of laughing gas. Among his practical inventions was a safety lamp usable in the presence of methane, and he is also famous for employing Michael Faraday as his assistant. FTP, who was this English chemist who used electrolysis to discover sodium, potassium, calcium, boron, magnesium, strontium, and barium?;;(Humphry) Davy
World History;;The end of this historical event was put in motion with the publication of Ludvik Vaculik's editorial "Two Thousand Words", and saw  coltrol of the government pass to Gustav Husak. In an attempt to avoid purges to remove hardline apparatchiks from the government, several measures had been passed on April 5 to ease restrictions on civil liberties and to bring about "socialism with a human face", but by August 27th a Soviet garrison was mandated, leading to the removal of Alexander Dubcek as First Secretary. FTP, what was this brief 1968 period of increaed freedom named for the capital of Czechoslovakia and the season during which it occurred?;;Prague Spring
Philosophy;;Lesser known works of this thinker include "Repition", "Dread", and "Crisis and the Crisis in the Life of an Actress", written under such pseudonyms as Inter et Inter and Virgilius Haufnienses. His opposition to Hegel can be seen in the works written as Johannes Climaticus, including "On All Things to be Doubted", "Philosophical Fragments", and "Concluding Unscientific Postscript", while is analysis of the "teleological suspension of the ethical" is found in Fear and Trembling. FTP, name this Danish forerunner of existentialism, the author of "Either/Or".;;(Soren) Kierkegaard
Physics;;A key part of this apparatus is an insulating stopper through which is passed a chain or conducting rod, which is then attached to the inner wall of the container. Usually charged using an electrostatic generator, it is coated on the inside and outside with metal foil, allowing it to store the electric charge. Now used almost exclusively in classrooms and named for the university at which it was invented, FTP, what is this jar, the earliest known capacitor?;;Leyden jar
Religion/Mythology;;Anecdotes about the deeds of this religious leader are found in the Janam-sakhis, and relate his travels to such places as Rome and China. Born into the mercantile Khatri caste in the village of Rai Bhoi di Talvandi, he worked in a granary until his religion inspired a lengthy period of travels. Until his death, when he was replaced by his hand-picked successor Angad, he preached salvation by meditation on the name of God from his home in the village of Kartarpur, and his hymns dedicated to this purpose are collected in the Adi-Granth. FTP, who was this first guru of Sikhism?;;(Guru) Nanak
Music;;Set during the reign of the Tsar Berendey, the opera features the wealthy youth Misgir, whose love of the title character cannot console her after she is repeatedly rejected by the shepherd Lehl,. who in turn loves Misgir's betrothed Kupava. Longing both to love and be loved, the title character prays to her mother, the Fairy Spring,. to be able to return the affection of Misgir, a request that is granted, but when she is about to marry him her heart is melted by a ray from the sun god Yarilo and dies,. leading to Misgir's suicide. Such are the events in, FTP, what opera about the daughter of Spring and Winter whose words and music were composed by Nicolai Rimsky-Korsakov?;;(The) Snow- Maiden|Snegurochka
Literature;;At one point this author of "Arc de Triomphe" supported himself as a race-car driver and sportswriter. Although he received acclaim for his late novel "A Time to Love and a Time to Die", he is best-known for a novel continued in "The Road Back" and which tells of Paul Baumer's experiences in WWI. FTP, who was this German author of "All Quiet on the Western Front"?;;(Erich) (Maria) Remarque
United State History;;One of this organization's founders was a fugitive from justice who evaded arrest due to the aid of Jerry Brown and Mario Cuomo from 1975-84. Founded by Minneapolis in 1968 by George Mitchell, Clyde Bellecourt, and Dennis Banks, they gained attention for their 1969-71 occupation of Alcatraz prison, marking them as the most militant group of their kind. Organizers of the Trail of Broken Treaties Caravan and Wounded Knee Reservation Seizure, FTP, what is this militant Indian organization.;;AIM|American Indian Movement
Noncomputational Math;;The basics behind this computer language were developed by its inventor at a 1956 Dartmouth Summer Research Project, and its primary dialect, version 1.5, came out in 1965. Its significant features include the use of "atoms", reliance on recursion, garbage collection, and computation performed by applying functions to arguments rather than variables. Invented by John McCarthy, FTP, what is this language famous for its use in artificial intelligence whose name is short for "List Processing"?;;LISP
Religion/Mythology;;This god held court at Svarga, his heaven in the clouds, and his attendant were called the Maruts. His most notable exploit was returning water to the earth by defeating the evil dragon Vritra, which he achieved by drinking large amounts of soma to take on giant form. The son of Dyaus Pita and Prthivi, from whom he was born fully grown and armed, he rode the great white elephant Airavata, and his most famous son was Arjuna. FTP, who was this supreme ruler of the gods in Vedic times, the husband of Indrani?;;Indra
Literature;;One major character in this novel is a Mississipian practicing law in New York while writing tracts against "modern times". In opposition to this character is his cousin, an feminist activist. They both vye for the attentions of a pretty, intectually vacant girl who finally decides to leave the women's movement and settle down with Basil Ransom, thus disappointing her protector, Olive Chancellor. Centering on the character Verena Tenent, FTP, what is this Henry James novel whose title refers to the Massachusetts home town of Verena and Olive?;;(The) Bostonians
United States History;;In the majority opinion for this case the Supreme Court first ruled that the plaintiff, referred to several times as an "eelemosynary" institution, was a private corporation which could not be subjected to meddling by the legislature. This was a de facto victory for the plaintiff which was then bolstered by acknowledging that the Royal Charter in essence consisted of a contract between the government and the plaintiff which, according to Article I secion 10, could not be impaired by the actions of a state, in this case New Hampshire.  This is a summary of Chief Justice John Marshall's ruling in, FTP, what 1819 case argued by Daniel Webster on behalf of a college which claimed the right to appoint its own governing body independent of the action of the state to modify it?;;(The) (Trustees of) Dartmouth (College) v(s)(.) Woodward
Literature;;The action of the play takes place in the basement of what appears to be a restauraunt in Birmingham, where the two main characters have been sent by the mysterious and uncommunicative Wilson. Confused by several cryptic messages sent to them, they are aware that they have been sent to kill someone though they don't know who, and this ambiguity remains  unresolved in the end even when it appears that one of the men is going to kill the other one. Such is a brief sketch of the adventures of Gus and Ben in, FTP, what absurdist play by Harold Pinter whose title refers to the device by which they are sent unfillable requests?;;(The) Dumb Waiter
Earth Science;;In Europe fossil strata from this epoch are divided into the Ypresian, Lutetian, Bartonian, and Priabonian stages, while in North America they are referred to as the Wasatchian, Bridgerian, Uintan, and Duchesnean stages. In it, marine mammals such as the the cetaceans and the sirenians first appeared, as did the artiodactyls, which were precursors to the deer, cattle, and sheep, and perissodactlys, ancestors of rhinoceroses, tapirs, and horses. FTP name this second division of the Tertiary Period that began about 57.8 million years ago and ended about 36.6 million years ago, which followed the Paleocene Epoch and precedes the Oligocene Epoch, and which, as its name suggests, was the "dawn" of recent life.;;Eocene (epoch)
Art;;Just to the left of center on the bottom of this painting is a spotted dog standing at the edge of the water, while on the far right is a man in the overgrowth on the opposite shore. A man is seen reaching into the water at the house which dominates the far left, while in the center two men are trying to navigate the shallow water with a cart drawn by several black animals with red bridles. FTP, what is this famous painting by John Constable?;;(The) Hay Wain
United States History;;This military leader resigned his commission when he was blamed by a court of inquiry for not following up on the explosion of a mine before the Battle of Petersburg. In February 1862 he captured Roanoke Island, but soon after taking command of the Army of the Potomic led the unsuccessful Fredericksburg campaign and was relieved of command. Also known for his 1866-69 stint as governor of Rhode Island, FTP, who was this Union army officer who lent his name to a style of facial hair?;;(Ambrose) Burnside
Literature;;Throughout this novel the author comments on the changing nature of Russian farm life through observations concerning the estate Maryino, while comic relief is provided by the vainglorious intellectuals Madame Kukshin and Sitnikov, who stand in contrast to Madame Odintsov. Its main plot concerns a young man who has a flirtation with Fenitchka and who believes that progress can only be achieved by rejecting the principles of the past, which the reader observes through his conversations with his protege Arkady and his arguments with Paval Kirsanov. FTP, what is this novel about the nihilist Bazarov, the best-known work of Ivan Turgenev?;;Fathers and Sons
Chemistry;;This element's only oxidation state is -1, and it is impossible to free from its compounds by chemical means. It is prepared commercially be the same method which Henri Moisson used to isolate it in 1886, and is also found in the mineral cryolite. Its only isotope is the stabe 19 version, and in its gaseous form takes on a pale yellow color. The most electronegative and reactive of the elements, FTP, what is this lightest of the halogens with atomic number 9 and symbol F?;;Fluorine
Religion/Mythology;;Although the actual author of this book is unknown, its first verse attributes it to "qohelet", or "preacher", who is identifiied as "the son of David, king in Jerusalem". Questioning the doctrine of retributive justice, chapter 9, verse 1 holds that man's fate does not depend on righteous or wicked conduct, but is rather an inscrutable mystery that remains hidden in God, and goes on to observe that "the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong,...but time and chance happen to them all". FTP, what is this book of the Old Testament containing the famous observation that "All is vanity"?;;Ecclesiastes
World History;;The stage was set for this war by Britain's alliance with Prussia in the Treaty of Westminster and Austria's alliance with France in the so-called "diplomatic revolution". Early success went to Prussia with their victories at Rossbach, Leuthen, and Zorndorf, which were soon followed by British victories at Minden and Quiberon Bay. However, Spain's entry into the war coupled with the death of Russia's Elizabeth Petrovna and the resignation of Pitt the Elder led all parties to conclude hostilities with the Treaty of Paris. FTP, what was this European war lasting from 1756-63?;;Seven Years(') (War)
Religion/Mythology;;This mythological figure avenged his brother's death by killing Lynceus after having abducted and married Lynceus's cousin Hilaeira. While one of the Argonauts he killed the belligerent king Amycus with his boxing skills, but he is best-known for exploits performed with his brother, including the abduction of Theseus's mother Aethra and the rescue from Aphidnae of their sister Helen. Granted immortality by Zeus, FTP, who is this man who then shared that immortality with his slain brother Castor?;;Pollux|Polydeuces
Literature;;This author's first novel, Jocelyn, was published under the pseudonym John Sinjohn, while the first book to appear under his own name was The Island Pharisees. A successful dramatist who examined controversial social issues in plays like Loyalties, Justice, Strife, and The Silver Box, he secured lasting success by examining the members of one family in works like The End of the Novel and A Modern Comedy and in the novels The Man of Property, In Chancery, and To Let, which comprise his most famous trilogy. FTP, who was this author of The Forsyte Saga?;;(John) Galsworthy
Biology;;This body part is divided into three parallel canals by the basilar membrane and Reissner's membrane. Those three canals, the scala vestibule, scala media, and scala tympani, contain endolymph and perilymph fluid which transmits vibrations from the oval window to the organ of Corti, whose sensory hairs produce impulses in the brain. FTP, what is this coiled, shell-like part of the inner ear responsible for transforming sound waves into nerve impulses?;;cochlea
Miscellaneous;;The one called Crow Dog denied US courts jurisdiction over crimes committed by and against members of reservations. Vallandigham concerned military tribunals, while Quirin held that the sixth amendment did not apply to military tribunals. Garland was one of the test-oath cases, and Yarbrough upheld passage of the Force Act of 1870. FTP, these are all examples of what type of court case, the most famous of which are probably Milligan and Merryman, whose two word name means "from one party only"?;;ex parte
Literature;;This author left unfinished the poetic drama Politian, and shortly before his death finished the essay Eureka. Rising to fame with early works like Al Aaraaf, Berenice, and Hans Pfaal, many of his greatest short stories were published in his first collection, Tales of the Grotesque and Arabesque, but he considered himself mainly a poet, turning out such works as Ulalume, Sonnet-To Science, and The Conquerer Worm. FTP, who was this master of the short story responsible for tales like A Descent Into the Maelstrom, The Masque of the Red Death, and The Gold Bug?;;(Edgar) (Allan) Poe
World History;;The measures taken by this leader to restore popular confidence in the government is recorded in the so-called "Restoration Stela" from Karnak. Also known as Nebkheperure, he came to the throne circa 1352 BCE, succeeding his brother Smenkhkare, and he soon married the priestess Ankhesenamun and restored the worship of Amun after the Amarna interlude before dying without an heir circa 1343 BCE, making him the last of the 18th Dynasty. FTP, who was this child pharoah famous for the virtually intact tomb discovered in 1922 by Lord Carnarvon and Howard Carter?;;(King|Pharaoh) Tut(ankha(m(u|e){1}?n|ten){1}?)
Geography;;The Great Karroo can be found in the south of this country which contains four regions, Venda, Ciskei, Bophuthatswana, and Transkei, which were declared independent from 1976-94. On its west coast are False Bay and St. Helena Bay, while on its east coast are the ports of Durban and Port Elizabeth. In the southeast is the Drakensberg Mountain Range, while rivers which have their source here include the Vaal and Limpopo. FTP, what is this country whose three capitals are Bloemfontein, Cape Town, and Pretoria?;;(Republic of) South Africa
Astronomy;;This moon is covered with large impact craters, with the largest, Stickney, measuring 11.5 kilometers in diameter, and it also features several families of parallel grooves or chains of craters. It is irregularly shaped, measuring 27 by 22 by 19 kilometers in size, and maintains a distance of only 6,000 kilometers from the surface, making it the innermost of its planet's moons. Like its famous partner, it always keeps one face turned towards the planet's surface, and was discovered by Asaph Hall in 1877. FTP, what is this larger moon of Mars, the partner of Deimos?;;Phobos
Philosophy;;Among this philosopher's important early work are the essays "The Uses and Disadvantages of History For Life" and "Schopenhauer as Educator", which he grouped with two other essays under the collective title "Untimely Meditations". He gained notoriety for the section entitled "The Madman" in "The Gay Science", but in 1889 the sight of a horse being flogged led to his mental collapse, ending the writing of his so-called "Nachlass" materials, including "The Case of Wagner", "Twilight of the Idols", and "Ecce Homo". FTP, who was this German philosopher probably best-known for "Thus Spake Zarathustra"?;;(Friedrich) Nietzsche
Literature;;The title figure of this poem is initially described as "Marble-heavy, a bag full of God", but is soon referred to as a "Ghastly statue". Opening with the speaker's statement that "you do not do anymore", she compares the title figure as a Nazi, describing him as "a man in black with a Meinkampf look", and after claiming that he bit her "pretty red heart in two", she finally frees herself from his memory, concluding the poem by telling him "you bastard, I'm through". FTP, what is this confessional poem by Syliva Plath?;;Daddy
World History;;This man was trained as an advocate, but resigned his post as a judge in 1782 and for a time lived the life of a dandy in Arras. Known as the "Incorruptible", in 1791 he became public accuser, and the next year he emerged as the leader of the Mountain faction of the National Convention, but in 1794 was ousted and killed in the Thermidorian Reaction. FTP, who was this member of the Committee of Public Safety who dominated France during the Reign of Terror?;;(Maximilien) (Francois) (Marie) (Isidore) (de) Robespierre
Music;;Throughout this musical work, the same theme is taken up by different combinations of instruments, constantly increasing the sonority of the piece until the full force of the orchestra makes a final, thunderous statement of the theme just before its conclusion. Its single theme is in two sections, the first heard in the flute and clarinet, the second in the bassoon and clarinet. During a slow, 17-minute long crescendo, a side drum punctuates the Spanish dance rhythm for which it is named. FTP, what is this most-famous piece by Maurice Ravel?;;Bolero
Chemistry;;The properties that make this polymer useful probably derive from its helical structure with the fluorine atoms on the surface of an inner ring of carbon atoms. Possessing a high softening point of 327 degrees Celsius, its preparation requires ammonium peroxosulphate as an initiator, and it is formed by the polymerization of tetrafluoroethene. FTP, what is this plastic used in electrical insulation, gaskets, and non-stick cookware?;;Teflon|P(oly)T(etra)F(louro)E(thylene)
Literature;;After the protagonist of this play suffers a series of misadventures, including a dunking in the Thames, he winds up dressed in a costume adorned with stag's horns being teased and frightened by fairies and witches, who turn out to be his friends in disguise. A subplot of this play concerns Anne Page, who is simultaneously courted by Fenton, Dr. Caius, and Slender, but the main plot concerns the realization by Mrs. Ford and Mrs. Page that they are both being wooed by John Falstaff. Said to have been requested by Queen Elizabeth, FTP, what is this comedy by Shakespeare?;;(The) Merry Wives of Windsor
Miscellaneous;;Chloracne is the major biological result from this chemical mixture consisting of equal parts of 2,4-D and 2,4,5-T, the latter of which contains varying amounts of the by-product tetrachlrodibenzodioxin, which is often refered to as TCDD or simply as dioxin. Named for the stripe marking drums containing it, it was used in Operation Ranch Hand, which sought to destroy crops and defoliate forest areas that might serve as cover for enemy troops. FTP, what is this mixture of herbicides which from 1962-71 was sprayed in Vietnam?;;Agent Orange
Religion/Mythology;;Among the exploits of the mythological figure were the capture of the Marathonian bull and the slaying of the Crommyonian sow. In his old age his unpopulatity forced him to take refuge in Scyros, where he was murdered by Lycomedes. Earlier, he had left home after becoming strong enough to lift the stone under which his father Aegeus' sword was hidden, and went on to marry Phaedra, who bore him the son Hippolytus. FTP, who was this chief hero of Attica who, with the aid of Ariadne, slew the Minotaur?;;Theseus
World History;;This ruler died during his siege of Szigeth in his war with Austria. Establisher of the Corsair States in north Africa, he developed a series of new regulations concerning land tenure which earned him the nickname Qanuni, or Lawgiver, among his people. In three camapigns against Safavid Persia he confirmed Ottoman control of eastern Asia Minor, maintained a naval supremacy in the eastern Mediterranean marred only by his costly failure to take Malta, and advanced all the way to the middle Danube with his victory at Mohacs in 1526. FTP, who was this Ottoman sultan, known as the "Magnificent"?;;Sule(i|y){1}?man (I|1st|the First|the Magnificent)
Literature;;One of the key ideas of this novel is the comparison made by Mozart between life and a radio playing Handel's Concerto Grosso in F Major, while another major moment is the protagonist's dream of a conversation with Goethe while sleeping at the The Black Eagle. The title figure is forced to reevaluate his life after meeting the bandleader Pablo and Hermine, and after visiting the Magic Theater he begins to realize the errors of his earlier way of life, in which the conflict between his intellectual ideals and his animal impulses led to his estarangment from society. FTP, such describes what novel about Harry Haller by Hermann Hesse?;;(Der) Steppenwolf
Geography;;This lake contains only limited numbers of fish, all of which were artificially introduced. Attaining a depth of 1,932 feet, it is famous for its intense blue color. Home to Wizard Island, it is located in the Cascade Range of southwestern Oregon, and was made a national park in 1902. Found in the remnant of Mount Mazama, FTP, what is this lake located in a huge volcanic caldera?;;Crater Lake
Physics;;The energy loss which results from this effect is governed by the formula h times the quantity v sub 1 minus v sub 2. When low-energy photons and high-energy electrons are involved the inverse effect occurs. This effect results in an increase of the wavelength of the radiation involved, and it was first discovered in 1923, resulting in a share of the 1927 Physics Nobel Prize for its discoveror. FTP, what is this effect in which the energy of high-energy photons is reduced when they are scattered bu free electrons?;;Compton (effect)
Art;;Among this artist's important works painted in the United States are a painting for the San Francisco Stock Exchange, as well as "Detroit Industry". He gained an intenational reputation with The Nightmare of War and the Dream of Peace and Man at the Crossroads, and created a scandal by including the phrase "God Does Not Exist" in Dream of a Sunday Afternoon in the Central Alameda. Known for his monstrously ugly appearance, FTP, who was this most popular of the Mexican muralists?;;(Diego) Rivera
World History;;This man served as minister of foreign affairs in the French government in 1849, and his book on the French Revolution entitled The Old Regime and the Revolution was unfinished at his death in 1859. He is famous today for work resulting from 9 months he spent travelling with Gustave de Beaumont, resulting in two major works, one of which was The Penal System in the United States and its Application in France. FTP, who was this French writer and politician best-known for his magnum opus Democracy in America?;;(Alexis) (de) Tocqueville
Literature;;Forced to live on a limited income after his family lost its fortune in mysterious circumstances, this literary character shares a remote Gothic mansion in the Faubourg-St.-Germain with his unnamed companion, a fellow bookworm who he met at an obscure library in Montmartre. He shows that a former suitor murdered Marie Roget, but is better known for solving two other crimes, one involving Minister D--'s blackmailing of a woman of royalty, the other concerning the murder of Madame L'Espanaye and her daughter in a locked room. FTP, who is this Edgar Allan Poe creation described in The Purloined Letter and The Murders in the Rue Morgue?;;(C(.)) (Auguste) Dupin
United States History;;This man's grandfather Christopher was a Revolutionary War leader and head of the South Carolina radicals. After serving in the U.S. army he was made U.S. commissioner to remove the Seminole Indians to reservations in 1823. From 1840-50 he was president of the South Carolina Railroad Company, during which time he projected a southern route for a transcontinental railroad, which is closely related to his most famous achievement, which occurred while he was U.S. minister to Mexico. FTP, who was this man who negotiated the purchase of nearly 30,000 square miles of land in Arizona and New Mexico?;;(James) Gadsden
Biology;;This body part regulates fluid intake and feelings of thirst, contains a center that determines wakefulness and sleep, regulates body heat in response to variations in external temperature, and influences caloric intake and weight regulation by establishing a stable "set point" for individual weight gain. It is connected by both nervous and chemical pathways to the pituitary, and triggers the pituitary's release of growth hormone, oxytocin, and vasopressin. FTP, what is this region of the brain making up the floor of the third cerebral ventricle, named for its location below the thalamus?;;hypothalamus
Philosophy;;This thinker studied first under Roscellinus and then under William of Champeaux. Author of Historia calamitatum, he was an extremely popular lecturer at Notre Dame who developed conceptualism, which served as a compromise to the schools of realism and nominalism, but his rationalism angered the clergy, and he died on his way to Rome to appeal a condemnation caused by the prosecution of Bernard of Clairvaux. FTP, who was this 12th century scholastic philosopher best-known for his love affair with Heloise?;;(Pierre) Abelard
Literature;;Some of this poet's notable works include Robert of Lincoln, The Fountain, and The Flood of Years. A direct descendant of John and Priscilla Alden, he influenced politics as editor of the New York Evening Post, but is most important today for works written in his youth, including a satirical poem attacking Jefferson entitled The Embargo and the short poem To a Waterfowl. FTP, who was this first great American poet most famous for Thanatopsis?;;(William) (Cullen) Bryant
Biology;;This scientist discovered parthenogenesis in aphids, as well as protozoa, which he called animalicules. Apprenticed to a cloth maker in his native Delft, where he was friends with Jan Vermeer, in 1660 he obtained the sinecure of chamberlain to the sheriffs of Delft, after which he undertook work which led him to see bacteria, sperm, and red blood cells, achievements not repeated for more than a century. FTP, who was this Dutch pioneer in microscopic research?;;(Anton) (van) Leeuwenhoek
United States History;;On the opening day of this battle Stonewall Jackson's forces kept Union troops from taking Centreville, and on the final day of fighting Jackson defeated retreating Union forces at Chantilly. The main fighting occurred on August 29-30, 1862, when Lee's forces defeated those of John Pope. FTP, what is this Civil War battle, the second of two with the same name?;;(2nd|Second) (Battle of) Bull Run|(2nd|Second) (Battle of) Manassas
Miscellaneous;;This hominid was at one point erroneously placed in the Sinanthropus group. Characterized by a flat skull with a small forehead, cranial capacity averaging 1,075 cubic centimeters, and a large, powerful, chinless jaw, these hominids had a well-developed communal culture, practiced hunting, and used fire domestically. First identified as a new fossil human by Davidson Black in 1927 on the basis of a single tooth, later excavations yielded fossils from about 40 individuals, but these finds mysteriously disappeared during an attempt to smuggle them into the United States in 1941. FTP, what is this member of homo erectus discovered in Chou-k'ou-tien cave and named for the Chinese city nearby?;;Peking man
Chemistry;;These compounds dehydrate to give alkenes or ethers, and react with acids to give esters. The primary type have two hydrogen atoms on the carbon joined to the central group, secondary ones have one hydrogen atom on the carbon, and tertiary ones have no hydrogen on the carbon. Methanol and ethanol are examples of, FTP, what organic compounds containing the OH group?;;alcohol(s)
Religion/Mythology;;The earliest reference to this festival is from the pilgrim Etheria, who attended it in Jerusalem in the late 4th century. Called Hypapante in the Greek church, it was instituted in the Western chirch by Pope Sergius I, and commemorates the occasion when the Virgin Mary, in accordance with Jewish law, went to the Temple in Jerusalem to be purified 40 days after the birth of her son and to present Jesus to God as her firstborn. Celebrated on February 2, FTP, what is this festival whose current name derives from the custom of observing it with lighted candles?;;Candlemas(s)|Presentation of the Lord|Presentation of Christ in the Temple
Literature;;The protagonist of this novel and Herbert Pocket are discovered by the police trying to help their friend escape London due to a tip provided by the criminal Compeyson, while at the same time the woman the protagonist loves marries Bentley Drummle. A key moment occurs when the lawyer Jaggers informs the protagonist that he has been given a large fortune, leading him to mistreat his brother-in-law Joe Gargary, but he soon learns that his benefactor is not Miss Havisham but rather Abel Magwitch. FTP, such is a partial description of what novel about Philip Pirrip, written by Charles Dickens?;;Great Expectations
Music;;While most of these musical pieces follow the same pattern, the first features a minuet as a fourth movement, while the third features only two movements separated by two slow chords, and is written for strings alone, while the fifth features the harpsichord. The most famous of these pieces is the second, which is written in the Italian concerto grosso style and features trumpet, flute, oboe, and violin. Named for a margrave, FTP, what are these six concertos by J.S. Bach?;;Brandenburg (Concert(o(s)|i){1}?)
World History;;It ended the oppressive dragonnades, but the end of its political benefits was achieved by the Peace of Alais and the capture of the stronghold at La Rochelle, while a series of declarations beginning in 1665 interpreted it so narrowly that it became virtually useless. Officially revoked in 1685, it had originally created what was essentially an independent state within France with its provisions for French subsidies for troops and fortifications for its constituents. FTP, what was this 1598 edict of Henry IV which ended the Wars of Religion by granting religious toleration to the Huguenots?;;(Edict of) Nantes
Music;;After working as the band director at his home county's mental asylum, this composer gained notice with early works like Sevilliana, the Imperial March,. Scenes from the Saga of King Olaf, and Scenes from the Bavarian Highlands, while works created during WWI include The Sanguine Fan and Carillon. Many critics consider his finest work to be the cantata The Dream of Gerontius, which followed shortly after his first major success,. the Enigma Variations. FTP, who was this British composer best known for five marches entitled Pomp and Circumstance?;;(Edward) Elgar
Literature;;The theme for this play is set in the first act, when the protagonist insults Oronte by attacking the quality of one of his sonnets, while in the final act a damaging letter causes Oronte, Acaste, and Clitandre to reject the coquettish Celimene. The protagonist's reasonable friend Philinte wins Eliante, while the protagonist, angered by the unjust loss of a court case and the dishonesty found in society, decides to flee to the country after seeing the results of his plan to always speak with complete honesty. FTP, what is this play about Alceste by Moliere?;;(The) Misanthrope
United States History;;At the age of 10 this person was captured by Gros Ventres, and was later sold as a wife to Toussaint Charbonneau. Known as "Bird Woman", she, her husband, and her infant son were soon employed as interpreters, but her most valuable service to her employers was to secure horses needed to cross the Rockies from her native Shoshoni tribe. FTP, who was this Native American who took part in the Lewis and Clark Expedition?;;Sacagawea
Art;;Canvases by this artist include The Companions of Fear, The Castle of the Pyrenees, and The Tomb of the Wrestlers, and he also made analogues of famous paintings like David's Madame Recamier and Manet's The Balcony in which he replaced the figures with coffins. Influenced by de Chirico, he gained renown for the painting The Menaced Assassin, while works like Golconda and The Red Model demonstrate his use of visual paradoxes and everyday objects taken out of context, such as enormous rocks floating in air and fishes with legs. FTP, name this Belgian surrealist best-known for his recurring motifs of bowler hats and apples.;;(Rene) Magritte
Chemistry;;This chemist coined the terms protein, allotropy, isomerism, and halogen, was the first to isolate zirconium, and proposed the system of chemical symbols and formulae now in use. By his observations of platinum's behaviour during some reactions he postulated catalysis, and he was able to estallish the validity of Proust's law of definite proportions and Dalton's atomic theory with the 2,000 relative atomic and molecular masses he determined. FTP, who was this Swedish chemist, the discoveror of the elements thorium, selenium, and cerium?;;(Jons) (Jakob) Berzelius
Geography;;The largest river emptying into this lake is the Ramis, while the Desaquadero drains it at its southern end. The large island Isla del Sol lies just off the tip of the Copacabana Peninsula, and it is divided into two parts by the narrow Tiquina strait. Covering some 3,200 square miles, it extends in a northwest-to-southeast direction for a distance of 120 miles, and lies at 12,500 feet above sea level, making it the highest major lake in the world and second largest in South America behind Lake Maracaibo. FTP, what is this Andes lake on the Peru-Bolivia border?;;(Lake) Titicaca
Literature;;One of the best of this man's early poems was "Neutral Tones", and he described his first meetings with his wife in a group of poems known as Veteris Vestigiae Flammae, or Vestiges of an Old Flame. Due to prompting by George Meredith he wrote a novel, Desperate Remedies, and began a series of novels set in an imaginary county of England in Under the Greenwood Tree., while his more famous works include The Trumpet-Major, and The Dynasts. FTP, who was this English writer, author of Far From the Madding Crowd and Jude the Obscure?;;(Thomas) Hardy
Miscellaneous;;Number 11 is the Wild Duck, number 27 is the Dumbbell, entry 44 is the Beehive, 51 is the Whirlpool, and 64 is the Black Eye, and despite their name many of these objects were originally discovered by Pierre Mechain. In its first incarnation it consisted of 45 objects, but was later extended to 68 and finally to 103, and was intended as a list of objects that might be mistaken for comets, including its first entry, the Crab Nebula, which is designated M1. FTP, what is this famous star catalogue named for the Frenchman who compiled it?;;Messier (Catalog(ue)|objects)
Philosophy;;The content of this philosophical work is a story Apollodorus learned from Aristodemus, which begins with a suggestion by Eryximachus that a certain topic should be discussed and ends with a speech by a very drunk Alcibiades. The climax occurs when Socrates tells of what he has learned from the wise woman Diotima, which follows speechs on the nature of love by Phaedrus, Pausanias, Aristophanes, and the party's guest of honor, Agathon. FTP, what is this Platonic dialogue which takes its name from the dinner party where it is set?;;(The) Symposium
World History;;This man's son David II succeeded him as king. As Earl of Carrick he swore fealty to England. He consolidated his power by stabbing his political rival John Comyn to death, and after being forced to flee to Ireland returned the next year to defeat the British at Loudoun Hill, but it would be another 21 years until he would be recognized as king in the Treaty of Northampton. FTP, who was this man who, with his 1314 victory at Bannockburn, established himself as King of the Scots?;;Robert the Bruce
Literature;;On a magazine assignment the narrator of this novel goes to the island of San Lorenzo, where the black adventurer Earl McCabe has been ousted by Papa Monzano with the aid of Franklin Hoenikker. Meanwhile, Lionel Boyd Johnson has become a spiritual leader by creating a religion called Bokononism. The climax occurs with Papa Monzano kills himself with an invention of Franklin's father Felix called ice-nine, which freezes any water in which it comes in contact. FTP, such is a description of what 1963 novel by Kurt Vonnegut?;;Cat(')s Cradle
Religion/Mythology;;An everlasting supply of boar's flesh is produced here by Saehrimnir, while mead is provided by the magical goat Heidrun. Possessing 540 gates through which 800 can pass at a time, it is here that the Einherjar are waited upon by the Valkyries, while the wolves Geri and Freki are fed at the feet of Odin. FTP, what is this great hall where slain soldiers await Ragnarok?;;Valhalla
Biology;;These bodies exist in a precisely folded three-dimensional L-shaped structure, and about 25 percent of its bases are unusual in being modifications of the four standard bases, such as methylations. Typically 70-90 nucleotides long, they are able to recognize the proper amino acid activating enzyme so that the proper amino acid will be sent to its free 2 prime or 3 prime OH group. Acting as adapters that translate nucleotide sequences of mRNA into protein sequences, FTP, what are these structures that carry amino acids to ribosomes during protein synthesis?;;t(ransfer) RNA|transfer Ribonucleic acid
World History;;This man's reign saw the subjugation of Bijapur and Golconda, attacks on the Uzbegs and Persians, and two wars in the Deccan. Coming to power in 1628, a severe illness in 1657 led to a succession war which saw his imprisonment by his son Aurangzeb, and on his death he was buried with his favorite wife, Mumtaz. FTP, who was this Mughal ruler who immortalized his wife with the construction in Agra of the Taj Mahal?;;(Shah) Jahan
Literature;;In Act 5 Scene 4 of this play, the god Jupiter promises the ancestors of the male protagonist that he will care for him. In it, the evil Queen tries to secure her arrogant son Cloten's marriage to the female protagonist, who avoids death when the servant Pisanio refuses an order to murder her. This occurred after her husband Posthumus is tricked into believing Imogen has been unfaithful with Iachimo. FTP, what is this play whose title refers to a British king, written by William Shakespeare?;;Cymbeline
Religion/Mythology;;The final passage in this book, consisting of Chapter 16, Verses 9-20 and accounting for the Resurrection, is omitted in some manuscripts and replaced by a shorter passage in others. Among its notable aspects is the author's emphasis on Jesus' reluctance to reveal himself as the Messiah, as well as the author's attention to the Passion, predicting it as early as chapter 8 and devoting the final third of the book to the last week in Jesus' life. The shortest and earliest of the four gospels, FTP, what is this second book of the four New Testament Gospels?;;(The) (Holy Gospel) (of) (Jesus Christ) (According to) (St.|Saint) Mark
Chemistry;;In the presence of hydrogen and nickel at 180 degrees Celsius this compound will reduce to cyclohexane. Remarkably resistant to oxidation, the fact that it does not show the properties normally associated with double bonds and the fact that the number of isomeric disubstituted ones is smaller than predicted led Linus Pauling to describe its structure as a hybrid state, which explains the odd distance of 1.39 angstroms between the bonded carbon atoms. This was an improvement on an 1865 proposal that its formula was a hexagon with alternating single and double bonds. FTP, what is this simplest aromatic hydrocarbon with formula C6 H6, whose original structure was proposed by August Kekule after experiencing a dream in which a snake bit its own tail?;;benzene
United States History;;By a 5-4 Supreme Court vote this endeavour was ruled constitutional in the Ashwander case. An independent public corporation governed by a board of three and originally chaired by Arthur Morgan, one of its purposes was to sell inexpensive fertilizers and electricity, and just nine years after its May 18, 1933 establishment it generated more electricity than any US utility due to its renovation of five dams and construction of 20 new ones, transforming a violent, uncontrolled river into an efficient inland-transportation system. FTP, what was this New Deal Authority established in a southern state?;;Tennessee Valley Authority|TVA
Miscellaneous;;This work consists of an introduction and five chapters whose titles include "Religious Affiliation and Social Stratification", "Luther's Conception of the Calling and the Task of the Investigation", and "The Religious Foundations of Worldly Asceticism". The author attempts to explain one reason for the modern view that turning a profit is virtuous, claiming that the psychological need for clues concerning whether one was saved ot damned led many Calvinists to seek worldly success, sparking the modern "spirit of capitalism". FTP, what is this major work by Max Weber?;;(The) Protestant Ethic (and) (the) (Spirit of Capitalism)
Literature;;The protagonist of this novel is educated on matters of wealth and social position by Mrs. Hale and Mrs. Vance, while an encounter with Bob Ames inspires her to resume her career as an actress, prompting her to work on the New York stage under the name Madenda. Having left her hometown of Columbia City, Wisconsin for the Chicago apartment of her sister Minnie, she soon begins an affair with Charles Drouet, but her desire for material wealth and social connections leads her to leave Drouet for George Hurstwood, who commits suicide when she leaves him. FTP, what is this novel about Caroline Meeber, written by Theodore Dreiser?;;Sister Carrie
Literature;;Shortly before his death this author began a new trilogy with the novel The Dunne Family, while his last collection of stories is Olive and Mary Anne. Arousing controversy with his frankly naturalistic style, he wrote a series of novels about the character Danny O'Neill, who first appeared in his most famous trilogy. FTP, who is this author of the Studs Lonigan trilogy?;;(James) (T.) Ferrell
United States History;;A major development of this historical event was the publication of letters written to Henry McComb. It began when Thomas Durant and other stockholders organized a company under an existing charter which soon assigned contracts to seven trustees. The reputations of congressmen James Brooks and James Patterson and Vice President Schulyer Colfax were ruined when it was revealed that they had been given stock in a company run by Oakes Ames. FTP, what was this scandal involving a scheme surrounding the construction of the Union Pacific Railroad?;;Credit Mobilier (scandal)
Physics;;Several methods to detect this particle rely on its interactions with isotopes, including its conversion of gallium-71 to germanium-71 and chlorine-37 to radioactive argon, the latter of which is used at the Homestake gold mine observatory in South Dakota. Postulated in 1931 to account for the missing energy in beta decay, it was tenitively identified in 1953 and more definitely in 1956, has no charge, and is thought to travel at the speed of light and have zero rest mass, although in some grand unified theories it is predicted to have nonzero mass. FTP, what are these leptons associated with the tau particle, muons, and electrons?;;neutrino(s)
Art;;The godson of Anthony Koberger, this artist wrote the theoretical studies Treatise on Measurement and Four Books on Human Proportions. Called "the Apelles of black lines" by Erasmus, his early works include illustrations for Brant's Ship of Fools and the Paumgarter Alter, while mature work's like Feast of the Rose-garlands were intended to compete with the best Italian paintings. His best-known works came from his middle period, including St. Jerome in his Study and The Knight, Death and the Devil. FTP, name this great German Renaissance artist and engraver, creator of the Apocalypse series.;;(Albrecht) Du(e)rer
Literature;;This literary character was originally named Maury by his mother, who frequently calls him God's judgment on her. Often supervised by Versh, T.P., and Luster Gibson, he is often seen standing at the gate of his family's house, but when it was once left unlocked he grabbed a passing girl, leading his older brother Jason to have him castrated. Throughout his life, the only person who can stop his bellowing is his sister Caddie. FTP, who is this mentally impaired youngest son of the Compson family in The Sound and the Fury?;;(Ben(jy)|Bejamin){1}? (Compson)
Religion/Mythology;;The most important rituals of this religion are the bembes, in which spirits enter the bodies of the participants. Its adherants prefer to call it Lucumi, and its principal saints include Elegua and Shango. Collectively, its saints, called orishas, were identified with major Roman Catholic saints in order to protect its early practitioners, Yoruba slaves who were forced to work in Cuba, and who later migrated to the United States. Spanish for "the way of the saints", FTP, what is this religion which gained attention in the early 1990s when its animal sacrifices were declared to be protected by the first amendment?;;Santeria
Miscellaneous;;In 1994 this man was made head of the Truth and Reconciliation Committee. After studying at King's College, London, he was ordained a deacon of the Anglican Church in 1960 and held a number of church positions in England. He returned to Sputh Africa in 1975 to become Dean of Johannesburg, and went on to become Bishop of Lesotho, Bishop of Johanesburg, and Archbishop of Cape Town. FTP, who was this leader awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1984 for his nonviolent protest against apartheid?;;(Bishop) (Desmond) Tutu
Philosophy;;At the end of this philosophical work, the author discusses the awe induced by "the starry heavens above and the moral law within". In it, the author maintains that to act morally is to act for the sake of duty, and deduces that it is never right to tell a lie, sighting as an example the desire to lie to a murderer who is searching for your friend. Offering a philosophy of ethics based on the free will of man, this work's main feature is a new formula which can be used to judge whether an action is moral. FTP, what is this 1788 work containing the "categorical imperative", the second of three "critiques" by Immanuel Kant?;;Critique of Practical Reason|Kritik der praktischen Vermunft
Biology;;This compound acts as a neurotransmitter by inhibiting the transmission of nerve impulses in the substantia nigra, basal ganglia, and corpus striatum. A catecholamine, it is formed as an intermediate compound from dihydroxyphenylalanine during the metabolism of tyrosine, and is the precursor of epinephrine and norepinephrine. FTP, what is this nitrogen-containing organic compound whose deficiency leads to Parkinson's disease?;;dopamine|hydroxytyramine
Geography;;During its early course this river picks up melted snow and glacial meltwaters from the Zaskar, Shyok, and Gilgit streams, and flows as a rapid stream between the Swat and Hazara regions and across the Salt Range. It then receives its most notable tributaries, the Jhelum, Chenab, Ravi, Beas, and Sutlej, also known as the "Five Rivers", and after reaching Thatta it begins its delta stage and empties into the Arabian Sea. FTP, what is this 1,800 mile long river, the chief river of Pakistan?;;Indus
Literature;;The protagonist of this novella is inspired to travel by the sight of a man standing before a mortuary chapel, while symbolically important is his encounter with an old man who has joined a group of young clerks by donning a wig and false teeth. The protagonist, the acclaimed author of Maia and The Abject, sees his prized discipline and reasonableness desert him after encountering a vacationing Polish family, whose youngest member, the charming youth Tadzio, captivates the protagonist and leads him to his downfall. FTP, what is this work about Gustav von Aschenbach, arguably the best-known novella by Thomas Mann?;;Death in Venice
World History;;This man's Memoirs of His Life and Writings, commonly called the Autobiography, first appeared in a highly bowdlerized version published by Lord Sheffield, and is one of the more acclaimed English-language works of its kind. In his youth he was engaged to Suzanne Curchod, future mother of Madame de Stael, but his father prevented the marriage. Although he was harshly criticised for the historical criticism of Christianity found in several chapters of his most famous work, he gained general acclaim for his masterpiece, whose scheme was developed  in Italy while he was "musing amidst the ruins of the Capitol". FTP, who was this author of The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire"?;;(Edward) Gibbon
Chemistry;;In his final paper this chemist described palladium hydride, the first known instance of a solid compound formed from a metal and a gas. From his work on the three forms of phosphoric acid he developed the concept of polybasic acids, devised the method of dialysis, and proved that partial decomposition of certain chemical compounds results from liquid diffusion, but is best known for a law used to separate isotopes stating that the rates at which gases diffuse is inversely proportional to the square roots of their densities. FTP, who was this Scottish chemist, considered the father of colloid chemistry?;;(Thomas) Graham
United States History;;The main leaders of this political group were Carl Schurz, George Curtis, and Henry Cabot Lodge. Single-issue reformers who took orthodox Republican positions on most issues, they defected from their party on the issue of civil service reform, and their name was first used by Charles Dana in the New York Sun, deriving it from an Algonkian word meaning "great chief". FTP, who were these politicians who deserted James Blaine in favor of Grover Cleveland in the 1884 presidential election?;;mugwump(s)
Literature;;Included in this novel are descriptions of Interzone, where Liquiefactionists, Divisionists, Senders, and Factualists contend for control. It opens with the protagonist disposing of his herion paraphernalia in Washington Square, after which he travels with his friend Gains buying drugs, escapes the narcotics agents Hauser and O'Brien, and travels to South America in search of sex and a halucinogenic vine called Yage. Throughout the novel, the protagonist, Bill Lee, experiences paranoid fantasies in which he believes he works for Islam Incorporated in Freeland, where he engages the services of Dr. Benway. FTP, what is this surrealistic classic of Beat Literature written by William S. Burroughs?;;Naked Lunch
World History;;Author of the book "Theism and Humanism", this man became Secretary for Scotland in 1886, and from 1887-91 served as Chief Secretary for Ireland, where his policy of suppression earned him the nickname "bloody". He engineered the 1904 entente with France and succeeded Churchill as First Lord of the Admiralty in 1915, ten years after his four year stint as Prime Minister ended, but he is best-known for his time as Foreign Secretary from 1916-19, specifically a short November 2, 1917 communication to Lord Rothschild. FTP, name this man whose declaration expressed Great Britain's support for a Jewish homeland.;;(Arthur) (James) Balfour
Economics;;In 1980 Robert Axelrod held an experiment in which a number of computer programs opposed each other in this game, and determined that the best long-term strategy is to adopt a forgiving approach. Applicable to real-life problems such as the nuclear arms race and price wars, it was first formulated by Albert Tucker, and concerns two criminals who must each decide whether to confess to a robbery. FTP, what is this famous dilemma?;;Prisoner(')s dilemma
Religion/Mythology;;This goddess formed an astral triad with the sun god Shamash and the moon god Sin, and her symbol was a star with 6, 8, or 16 rays within a circle. A major myth tells how she was rescued by the creature Asushu-Namir from her sister, the underworld goddess Ereshkigal. She had descended to the underworld by passing through seven gates, losing an article of clothing at each, in an attempt to retrieve her beloved Tammuz. FTP, who was this Babylonian goddess who, in her anger, sent the bull of heaven against Gilgamesh after he rejected her, not to be confused with a bad movie starring Dustin Hoffman and Warren Beatty?;;Ishtar
Biology;;Among the most famous types of this animal are sooty, laysan, and black-browed, and because of their tameness on land they are also known by common names like mollymawk and gooney. Making up the family Diomedeidae, they are among the most spectacular gliders of all birds, using their long, narrow wings to stay aloft in windy weather for hours, although in calm air they have trouble keeping their stout bodies airborne and prefer to rest on the ocean surface. Known for their size, the wandering version has a typical wingspread of more than 11 feet, the largest among living birds. FTP, what is this type of bird which sailors held were bad luck to kill?;;albatross
Music;;Questa o quella is a notworthy aria in this opera, one of the few post-1830's operas to feature the baritone as the chief protagonist. The action is driven by a curse placed by Monterone on the protagonist, who is soon approached by the assassin Sparafucile, who is soon paid to kill the libertine Duke of Mantua. However, Maddalena falls for the duke and has Sparafucile spare him, after which he mistakenly kills Gilda, the protagonist's daughter. Featuring the aria La donne e mobile, FTP, what is this opera about a court jester by Verdi?;;Rigoletto
Literature;;Near the end of this poem, the poet imagines an old farmer, described as a "hoary-headed swain", who replies to the questions the poet has posed. Earlier, the author claimed that many of the poor could have flourished outside their rural environment, stating "Full many a flower is born to blush unseen/ And waste its sweetness on the desert air". Lamenting the unfulfilled potential of a "mute inglorious Milton", he then wonders how many potential evil doers were rendered guiltless by living "far from the madding crowd's ignoble strife". FTP, such is a partial description of what famous poem by Thomas Gray?;;Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard
World History;;At the age of 7 this man was given the title Duke of Reichstadt, but possessed no official political power. From the age of 3 until his death in 1832 he lived at Vienna under the control of Metternich. Known as l'Aiglon, or The Eaglet, he was named King of Rome on his birth, but never ruled. FTP, who was this son of Marie Louise who was named successor to Napoleon Bonaparte on his abdication?;;Napoleon (II|2|(the) 2nd|(the) second){1}?
United States History;;Entering the navy in 1809, this leader first gained favorable attention for his plans for officer education, improved gunnery training, and a naval engineer corps. In 1837 he took command of the Fulton, one of the first naval steamships, and during the early 1840s he aided the British in suppression of the slave trade, but is best known for negotiating the Treaty of Kanagawa. FTP, who was this brother of another naval leader who anchored off Yedo Bay in Japan in 1853 in order to force open Japanese ports to U.S. trade?;;(Matthew) Perry
Geography;;Connected to the Neales River, this lake's northern and southern parts are connected by the narrow Goyder Channel. Its lowest part lies 50 feet below sea level, which causes it to fill completely only twice a century, and although it is occasionally partially filled by flood waters delivered by rivers like the Diamantina it is normally dry, during which times its extremely flat surface has made it a site of attempts to establish land speed records. FTP, what is this great salt lake located in the southwest corner of the Great Artesian Basin in central South Australia?;;(Lake) Eyre
Literature;;This author's novel Mr. Stone and the Knight's Companion marked a change in style from his first three novels, The Mystic Masseur, The Suffrage of Elvira, and Miguel Street. His recent work includes the novel A Way of the World, and he won a Booker Prize for In a Free State, but he is better known for works like A Bend in the River. FTP, who is this Trinidadian novelist, author of A House For Mr. Biswas and winner of the 2001 Nobel Prize in literature?;;(Vidiadhar) (Surajprassad) (V. S.) Naipaul
Music;;Shortly before his death this composer wrote a third opera, entitled The Bigamist, while his songs include The Toasting Cup, The Gulf of Finland, "Where is our rose"?, and "I recall a wonderful moment". Several trips to Spain influenced his First and Second Spanish Overtures, but he is better known for works related to his native land, including his opera Ruslan and Ludmilla and a work originally titled Ivan Susanin. FTP, who is this father of Russian classical music best-known for his first opera, A Life For the Tsar?;;(Mikhail) Glinka
Biology;;Among the parts of the body named for this scientist are corpuscles of the spleen, tufts in the kidney, and the deep layer of the epidermis. Personal pyhsician to Pope Innocent XII, he studied the metamorphosis of the silkworm, described the structure of the brain, spinal cord, and taste buds, and used his studies of frogs to describe the capillary circulation of the lungs. FTP, who was this 17th century Italian whose use of the microscope has led him to be called the father of microscopic anatomy?;;(Marcello) Malpighi
World History;;This battle led directly to the Treaty of Pressburg. Fought in Moravia, Alexander I convinced Francis I to attack before reinforcements arrived, and their complicated plan to encircle the French allowed Napoleon to split the Austrian and Russian forces and defeat each half. Fought on December 2, 1805, FTP, what was this battle known by another name since all participating titular rulers were present on the field commanding their troops?;;Austerlitz|Battle of the Three Emperors
Religion/Mythology;;During the Trojan War, the bones of this king were brought to Troy because of a prophecy that this was the only way the Greeks could conquer the city. He had become king of Pisa by convincing Myrtilus to remove the linchpins from the chariot of King Oenomaus, so that when he carried off Oenomaus' daughter Hippodameia her father was thrown from the vehicle and dragged to death. However, this man then betrayed Myrtilus, leading Myrtilus to curse his sons. FTP, who was this man who possessed an ivory shoulder after being cut to pieces by his father Tantalus and served as a meal to the gods?;;Pelops
Literature;;Important developments in this novel are often related by the sewing-machine salesman V.K. Ratliff, and include a crooked horse-trading deal struck by Pat Stamper and the schoolteacher Labove's failed seduction of one of the female protagonists. The central character becomes wealthy by conning Henry Armstid into believing there is buried treasure at the Old Frenchman place. Initially given a job as a store clerk to placate his father Ab, he later marries into a rich family when Hoake McCarron abandons Eula Varner. FTP, what is this novel detailing the rise of Flem Snopes, the first in a trilogy by William Faulkner?;;(The) Hamlet
Biology;;Some of these units possess an attenuator site which can control processes according to the amount of end-product found in the cell. If a represser molecule binds to one of its adjacent loci transcription is prevented, but if an inducer binds to the represser its promoter site can bind the RNA polymerase, initiating transcription of its structural genes. Proposed in the Jacob-Monod hypothesis and modeled after the lac version, FTP, what are these genetic units which control gene expression in bacteria.;;operon(s)
Astronomy;;John Goodricke discovered delta prototype of this type of star in 1784. The exceptional RR Lyrae type hinders its main use, which derives from the fact that its size fluctuates anywhere from 7 to 15 percent, allowing them to be used to determine stellar distances using their period-luminosity law, discovered by Henrietta Leavitt. FTP, what are these pulsating variable stars?;;Cepheid (Variable(s)) (Star(s))
Philosophy;;One of this thinker's main ideas called for the distribution of goods amongst free individuals who cooperated spontaneously outside a framework of state authority, a philosophy he called "mutualism". Considered Marx's main rival in the international socialist movement, he gained notoriety for his violent attacks on French church and state in 1858's La Justice dans la Revolution et dans l'Eglise, while many critics consider his best work to be Systeme des contradictiones economiques. FTP, who was this thinker best-known for denouncing private ownership in his seminal work What is Property?;;(Pierre) (Joseph) Proudhon
World History;;Having fought in the Chaco War, this man served as commander-in-chief of his nation's armed forces from 1951-54, and in 1954 he ousted President Frederico Chavez. Nicknamed Colonel Trunk, he essentially ruled as a totalitarian, and membership in his Colorado Party was a requirement for most jobs. His country became notorious for its illegal trade, drug trafficing, and harboring of NAZI war criminals, and in 1989 he was ousted by so-called "traditionalists" led by Andres Rodriguez. FTP, who was this son of a German immigrant, the long-time president of Paraguay?;;(Alfredo) Stroessner
Art;;The English manifesto for this art movement was entitled Circle. Rejecting the idea that art must serve a social purpose, the brothers Antoine Pevsner and Naum Gabo issued their Realist Manifesto, in which they conceived of a purely abstract art that reflected modern machinery and technology and which used inductrial materials, and their ideas were applied to architecture and design by Alexander Rodchenko, among others. FTP, what was this Russian art movement founded in 1913 by Vladimir Tatlin?;;Constructivis(m|t Movement){1}?
Chemistry;;Among the disadvantages to using this type of device is its bulky size and the need for a constant supply of gas. Its most basic version contains a compartment filled with a hot alkaline electrolyte, which separates porous sintered nickel electrodes. A supply of gaseous hydrogen is fed to a compartment containing the porous cathode, while oxygen is fed to a compartment containing the porous anode, and after the hydrogen reacts with the hydroxide ions in the electrolyte two electrons are released, which then flow to the anode through an external circuit. FTP, such is a description of what cell which is more efficient in converting electric energy than a heat engine?;;fuel cell(s)
Literature;;Among the characters in this novel are the slave girl Sada, who risks her life to pray before a statue of the Virgin Mary, and Jacinto, who risks his life protecting the secrets of the Navajo faith. The protagonist, an aristocrat from Auvergne, France, initially comes into conflict with the morally suspect Padre Martinez, but with the aid of his friend Joseph Vaillant he is soon successful enough in his endeavours to build the cathedral in Sante Fe which eventually becomes his resting place. FTP, what is this novel about Archbishop Jean Latour's attempts to bring Catholicism to the American West, written by Willa Cather?;;Death Comes for the Archbishop
Miscellaneous;;Originally named Alekseyev, this man joined Vladimir Nemirovitch-Danchenko in founding the Moscow Art Theater, producing plays like The Seagull and The Lower Depths. Author of the autobiography My Life in Art, he headed the Bolshoi Opera Studio, which was later named for him, and founded the Opera Drama Studio. FTP, who is this actor, director, and producer best-known for his innovative "method" style of acting?;;(Konstantin) Stanislavsky
United States History;;This scandal was brought to light due to the secret investigation of Benjamin Bristow. Led by John McDonald, it was centered in Milwaukee, Chicago, and St. Louis, and defrauded the US treasury of $2 million in excise taxes. In its aftermath, the government indicted 238 people, including the president's private secretary Oliver Babcock, but President Grant himself was cleared of any wrongdoing. FTP, what was this conspiracy involving distillers of a certain alcoholic beverage?;;Whiskey Ring
Literature;;This author of the essay collection Sociology and Anthropology was renowned for his encyclopedic recall of ethnographic knowledge, and although he never did field work, he focused the attention of French thinkers on ethnology. Among his early works was 1899's Sacrifice: Its Nature and Function, but he is more important for his novel ideas concerning the forms of exchange in Melanesia, Polynesia, and northwestern North America. FTP, who was this nephew of Emile Durkheim, author of Essai sur le don, or The Gift?;;(Marcel) Mauss
Chemistry;;An important feature of this model is that qualitative predictions about deviations from ideal shapes can be made on the basis of differences in the sizes of the domains involved. Developed by Gillespie and Nyholm based on proposals by Sidgwick and Powell, its basic postulate is that the region of space occupied by a pair of electrons can be approximately represented by a sphere, with the preferred arrangements of pairs those in which the spheres are closely packed around the core of the atom. A simple method for predicting the arrangements of bonds around an atom in a covament molecule, FTP, what is this model with a five-letter acronym?;;VSEPR (theory)|Valence Shell Electron Pair Repulsion (theory)
Literature;;The historical event at the center of the novel is the murder of the "Red Fox" of Glenure. The miserly villain Ebenezer has his nephew, the protagonist, carried off on a ship bound for the Carolinas, where he meets the Jacobite Alan Breck. Escaping with Alan when the ship sinks on the coast of Mull, they witness the murder of Colin Campbell, and after suspicion falls on them they make a perilous escape across the Highlands, while in the sequel Catriona David Balfour tries to gain the acquittal of James Stewart of the Glens. FTP, what is this novel by Robert Louis Stevenson whose title indicates what happened to Balfour?;;Kidnapped
World History;;This group's name comes from the Peshto for "seekers". Formed by theological students in the south of their country with the intention of unifying the country, the experienced early setbacks before defeating rival Mujaheddin forces and capturing Herat in September 1995 and the capital a year later, executing former president Najibullah. Currently opposed by UIFSA forces int he northeast, they have instituted a strict Islamic code of law, restricting the role of women and banning television. FTP, what is this group which currently rules Afghanistan?;;Taliban
Literature;;This poem ends each of its 4 stanzas with the same invocation, though the last line becomes a positive statement with the insertion of the word "enjoy". The speaker compares himself to a "committed linnet", or finch, and celebrates the title character, imagining himself "tangled in her hair" and "fettered to her eye", much preferring the restraining effects of love to the literal restraints he must deal with. FTP identify this 1649 work by Richard Lovelace that includes the lines "Stone walls do not a prison make/ Nor iron bars a cage".;;To Althea(,) from Prison
World History;;Though he was to be burned at the stake, Vincente de Valverde converted him on his death-bed and he was strangled instead. He was enjoying a recent military victory at the hot springs in Cajamarca when a force of 180 men arrived to take him hostage. The son of an Ecuadorian princess, he ruled the Northern part of his empire until his victory over Huascar in 1532 consolidated the empire, but his supreme rule was cut short by the former governor of Panama, Francisco Pizarro. FTP identify this 13th and last emperor of the Incan empire.;;Atahualpa
Biology;;Swelling and the appearance of calcium deposits in this organelle signify that the cell is undergoing necrosis. Bounded by a smooth outer membrane, its inner membrane consists of several shelf-like folds called cristae. Possessing its own type of DNA, it contains the machinery for synthesizing proteins. FTP, what is this organelle which provides energy for animal cells.;;mitochondrion|mitochondria
Geography;;Sharing its name with a lake in southeast Wisconsin, the Venoge and Dranse are two of the three major rivers that drain it, and the Strait of Promenthoux divides it into two sections.  Its northern shore gives way to the wine-producing Jura region, and resorts on this lake include Évian-les-Baines, Montreux, and Lausanne.  FTP, identify this crescent-shaped lake formed by the Rhône River and named for a city in Switzerland.;;(Lake) Geneva
Music;;One of this composer's highly influential works was his String Octet in E-flat Major. Also an important conductor whose performance of the St. Matthew Passion rejuvenated the reputation of Bach, this composer of the "Elijah" oratorio was inspired by the waves on the Scottish coast, leading to the "Hebrides" overture. FTP, who was this composer of "A Midsummer Night's Dream" Overture and the "Italian" Symphony?;;(Felix) Mendelssohn
Literature;;The locale of this story and its "flush times" become news in Red Dog after the pony expressman leaves. Many of the tough residents attribute the changes that occur at the site to the arrival of the title character, whose ‘rasslin' tendencies impress Kentuck, and make Man O'War Jack start singing lullabies. Stumpy eventually names him and raises the boy on Ass's milk, but it is John Oakhurst who first gives the boy his nickname for surviving the birth that kills his mom, Cherokee Sal. FTP, identify this short story featured in the Overland Monthly in 1868, one of Bret Harte's most famous works.;;(The) Luck of Roaring Camp
Psychology;;His papers were published posthumously as The Farther Reaches of Human Nature.  Instead of studying troubled clinical cases, he studied normal individuals, including Thomas Jefferson, Abraham Lincoln, and Eleanor Roosevelt, and based his theories on common traits he encountered in their histories.  In Toward a Psychology of Being and Motivation and Personality, he put forth the idea that each person has a hierarchy of needs which must be satisfied.  FTP, identify this proponent of the theory of self-acutalization.;;(Abraham) (Harold) Maslow
United States History;;He migrated to the colonies after his father-in-law disinherited his wife and he was caught trying to defraud his neighbor of his inheritance.  He acquired two estates, and less than a year after he arrived, he was appointed to the council of the governor, his cousin by marriage. Although his camapign disintegrated after his death from dysentary, he had achieved military success after responding to an attack by Susquehannock Indians, leading him to be declared a traitor by Governor Berkeley. FTP, who was this western Virginia leader of a rebellion which eventually burned Jamestown?;;(Nathaniel) Bacon
Biology;;Studies of metabolic similarities and ribosomal RNA sequences suggest that these organisms form a good, monophyletic taxon. Motile species of them utilize the same gliding locomotion as other gram-negative gliding bacteria, and while they are unicellular, they sometimes form colonies of filaments, sheets, or hollow balls joined by a sheath of mucilage. Some possess the red pigment phycoerythrin, while all of them possess phycocyanin, which led them to be misclassified. FTP, what are these prokaryotes found in all aquatic habitats originally misidentified as blue-green algae?;;cyanobacteria
Philosophy;;In his earliest works he argued for as disassociation between psychology and philosophy in order to fully understand man. More specific doctrinal criticisms grew out of his studies with Heinrich Rickert and are expressed in such works as _Kant and the Problem of Metaphysics _ and _What is Called Thinking? _.  His most controversial comments were made with his Freiburg acceptance speech, entitled "The German University's Self-Affirmation" which many saw as an affirmation of Nazism. The developer of "dasein", FTP identify this philosopher who argued that man was thrown into existence and is always struggling for an authentic existence in his 1927 masterpiece _Being and Time _.;;(Martin) Heidegger
World History;;Preceded by the taking of Norham by the invaders, this battle may have been decided by a commander's dalliance with Lady Ford, who was likely a spy. One side crossed Twisel Bridge and took a stretch of earth called Brankstone. Although the Scots had one more division than the British, the British took control of this battle after Lord Dacre held off the forces of Lord Home, leading to the loss of 10,000 Scots. FTP, what was this major 1513 battle that saw the death of King James IV?;;Flodden Field
Literature;;One of his teachers in college once told him of the importance of kissing in American culture, prompting him to practice on an oak tree. He had reluctantly enrolled in college because his goal of becoming a forest ranger required that he learn Latin, but after switching to French literature he wrote a national award-winning story about a boy's friendship with an African-American POW entitled "The Catch". Later works like "A Personal Matter" often deal with the birth of his brain-damaged son.  FTP, name this 1994 Japanese Nobel Laureate, author of "The Silent Cry".;;(Kenzaburo) Oe|Oe (Kenzaburo)
Astronomy;;They were not believed to exist until Shiv Kumar claimed to see one in 1963. Extremely faint compared to other cosmic objects, the first indisputable evidence of their existence was not found until 1995, at which point several were found thanks to the evolution of the lithium test.  G1 229B was, for 10 points, the first clear indication of the existence of what stellar object, essentially considered to be a failed star?;;brown dwarf(s)
Religion/Mythology;;This mythical name identifies a man from Hellas who was blinded and cursed by his father Amyntor after they quarreled. Eventually healed by Chiron, he became friends with Peleus and was soon responsible for raising Achilles. This name also identifies a creature that, according to Ovid, lives on frankincense and odoriferous gums and makes its way to Heliopolis with the charred remains of its parent to deposit in the temple of the sun. FTP identify this name most commonly associated with a magical bird that lives 500 years before it is destroyed and reborn in flame.;;Phoenix
Art;;The wall in the background holds a bell, an hourglass and scales, directly under which sits a dejected looking cherub on top of a wheel. The foreground features a sleeping dog to the left, while tools of intellectual pursuits, including a sphere and a polyhedron,  lie scattered around the folds of the title figure's dress. She is sitting and fingers a divider in her right hand, while her left holds up her chin. FTP identify this 1514 work whose title is carried by a strange creature in the upper left hand corner, an engraving by Albrecht Durer.;;Melencolia (I)
Literature;;This play features a fire at the beginning of the third act which cruelly reminds the nurse Anfisa and the old boarder Ferapont of class distinctions. Act 4 features Solyoni and Tuzenbach killing one another in a duel for the hand of Irina, while Natasha is seduced by Protopopov. These events are foreshadowed by Olga's initial distrust and Chebutykin's melancholy attitude, and conclude with Masha reechoing her unrequited love for Vershinin. FTP identify this 1901 work focusing on the titular siblings of Andrei Prozorov, a work by Anton Chekov.;;(The) Three Sisters
United States History;;In 1920, the Supreme Court applied the "rule of reason" interpretation of this act. It was first interpreted in 1895 in U.S. v. E.C. Knight Company, in which the Court declared that manufacturing was a local industry and did not fall into the realm of interstate commerce. It had little impact during its first eleven years, but was made into an effective weapon against monopolies by Theodore Roosevelt. FTP, name this first major antitrust legislation.;;Sherman (Anti-Trust) (Act)
Geography;;The last two of its 20,000 defenders under General Kuribayashi Tadamichi finally surrendered in 1949. Unclaimed by any nation until 1891, it was administered as part of Tokyo due to its strategic importance during World War II, and then by the United States until 1968.  Located between Saipan and Japan, it was valuable as a base for fighter escorts and a haven for crippled bombers. With a name meaning "sulfur island",  FTP, identify this largest of the Volcano Islands, home to Mt. Suribachi and the scene of bloody fighting in February and March 1945.;;Iwo Jima
Chemistry;;A derivative of phthalic anhydride, this compound was freqently used in laxatives until it was discovered that it might be carcinogenic.  It is insoluble in water but soluble in most basic solutions or acetone, and for its primary use is most frequently found in a 1% alcohol solution.  For 10 points, identify this crystalline organic compound with formula C20 H14 O4, an indicator which turns red above a pH of 9.6.;;phenolphthalein
Literature;;He founded the literary review "Barandal" at the age of 17, and his early poems were later collected in "Configurations". Other collections include "Airborn" and "Blanco", while specific poems like "Freedom Under Parole" and "Eagle or Sun" express the type of sympathy for the Indians in his homeland instilled by his father, who served as a secretary to Zapata. He is most famous for non-fiction such as "The Pears of the Elm" and an essay written in 1950 that analyzes what it means to be Mexican. FTP identify this poet and diplomat who wrote "Luna Silvestre" and "The Labyrinth of Solitude".;;(Octavio) Paz
Religion/Mytholog;;Some translations of this book take it as a conversation between a "bride" and a "bridegroom", even though there is no evidence of marriage and no sign of who is speaking. Most scholars hold that it is an allegory concerning the spiritual love of God for Israel rather than a depiction of sensual love. FTP, name this book of the ketuvim sometimes attributed to a wise king of Israel.;;Song of Solomon|Song of Songs|Canticle of Canticles
Biology;;This drug has antiinflammatory properties useful in treating leprosy and rheumatoid arthritis, and is useful in treating AIDS due to its ability to inhibit the function of the Tumor Necrosis Factor protein, and may even inhibit replication of HIV.  Developed in the 1950s in West Germany, it was not approved for use in the US until 1998.  It is now known to exist as two enantiomers, one of which is believed responsible for its sedative effects, the other for its notorious side effects.  FTP identify this drug, taken off the market in 1962 because it caused thousands of birth defects.;;thalidomide
Literature;;It ends with a separate section portraying seven black men and five white men working in a chain gang by the Forks Falls highway.  Denizens of the nameless Georgia town include the Rainey twins, malaria victim Merlie Ryan, and the Macy brothers, which consist of the amiable Henry and the violent Marvin.  The latter defeats the protagonist Miss Amelia in a wrestling match at the title locale after the malevolent hunchback Lymon intervenes.  FTP, name this dark tale about the parasitic nature of love, a 1951 novella by Carson McCullers.;;(The) Ballad of the Sad Cafe
Economics;;His theoretical work on inequality provided an explanation for why there are fewer women than men in some economically disadvantaged countries. This study is included in the work _Collective Choice and Social Welfare _ in which he argues that social reform must precede economic growth. His other important work was inspired by his own experience in Bengal during the 1940s and is called _Poverty and Famines: An Essay on Entitlement and Deprivation _. FTP identify this noted economist whose work to help the poor earned him the Nobel Prize in 1998.;;(Amartya) Sen
Literature;;He collaborated with Roy DeCarava on a pictorial essay which was published posthumously as The Sweet Flypaper of Life. He wrote a semi-autobiographical novel about the picaresque adventures of Sandy Rodgers entitled Not Without Laughter, while his dramas include Simply Heavenly and Tambourines to Glory. He also wrote a series of newspaper sketches about the urban folk hero Jesse B. Simple, but he is better known for his poetry, collected in works like The Pather and the Lash and Fine Clothes for the Jew. FTP, identify this Harlem Renaissance author of The Weary Blues and Montage of a Dream Deferred.;;(Langston) Hughes
United States History;;To many critics his most important writing was the essay The Dividing Line Between Federal and Local Authority.  His rejection of the demands of William Yancey led to a split in his party.   The author of the sections of the Compromise of 1850 relating to the governments of the Kansas and New Mexico territories, he created the famous "Freeport Doctrine" annunciating his theory of popular sovereignty during his run for senator in 1858.  For 10 points, name this "Little Giant," who authored the Kansas-Nebraska Act and defeated Abraham Lincoln after a series of famous debates.;;(Stephen) Douglas
Religion/Mythology;;One myth tells of this god's pursuit of the numph Lotis, who was changed into a lotus tree to escape him. The brother of Hymen, he could supposedly be kept away by the braying of a donkey. Imported from Lampascus, where Pausanias reported he was supreme among all gods, he became popular in the Roman Empire, where he served as a god of sailors, fishermen, and gardens, and red satyr-like statues of him where placed in the fields to ensure fruitfulness. FTP, who was this fertility god known for his enormous phallus?;;Priapus
Earth Science;;During this geologic period the first flying reptiles, the pterosaurs, appears, as did Archaeopteryx, the first primitive bird. Ammonites are used as index fossils for this period in which reptiles dominated the vertebrates, and which featured ferns, ginkgos, conifers, brachiopods, bivalves, and echinoids. Named in 1829 by A. Brongniart for a mountain range on the French-Swiss border, it extended from 190 to 139 million years ago. FTP, what is this period of the Mesozoic era between the Triassic and Cretaceous Periods?;;Jurassic (Period)
Literature;;This play begins with a nurse recounting and lamenting the events that have led to the events described. The title character gains sanctuary in Athens in exchange for a fertility drug for the king Aegeus, then escapes in a chariot sent by her grandfather, the Sun-God, following the death of Creon,  who is poisoned via the clothes of his daughter Glauce. FTP, identify this play about the vengeful machinations of the former wife of Jason, a tragedy of Euripides.;;Medea
Music;;His songs include words by Housman, Hopkins, Yeats, and Stephens, and he set to music James Joyce's Chamber Music.  His operas include A Hand of Bridge and Antony and Cleopatra and he composed the Capricorn Concerto for flute, oboe, trumpet, and strings.  Known for the vocal piece Dover Beach, his best known opera is Vanessa.  For 10 points, name this American composer best-known for Adagio for Strings.;;(Samuel) Barber
World History;;Geoffrey of Villehardouin wrote the principle account of this event and Fulk of Neuilly helped drum up support for it.  Despite papal objections, it attacked and captured the Christian city of Zara and spent the winter there.  After the death of Thibaut of Champagne, the leadership of the Crusade passed to Boniface of Montferrat.  The future Alexius IV appealed to European kings on behalf of his father Isaac Angelus, leading Doge Dandolo to divert the crusade to Constantinople.  For 10 points, name this 1202-04 crusade in which Venice sacked Constantinople.;;(The) (4th|fourth){1}? Crusade
Philosophy;;Chapter three, entitled, "Of the Consequence or Train of the Imaginations" asserts that the continuance of motion is responsible for human thinking. The third part claims that the universe is a plenum containing no angels or apparitions, thus undermining orthodox Christianity, and is entitled "Of A Christian Commonwealth". Finally, the fourth part, "Of the Kingdom of Darkness", builds up the authors materialist program. Famous for its description of man in a state of nature, FTP, identify this work describing the "Matter, Form and Power of a Commonwealth", written by Thomas Hobbes.;;Leviathan
Biology;;In samples, the presence of gram negative cocci pairs displaying a typical kidney bean shape is usually a diagnostic of this disease.  Occasionally, it can lead to pelvic inflammatory disease or even death if the infection spreads to the lungs, heart, or brain.  A member of the genus Neisseria, it is usually treated with Cetriaxone, Cefixime, Ciprofloaxin, or Ofloxacin, but not Penicillin, as it has developed resistance to that drug.  Characterized by appearance of pus and a burning feeling during urination, this is, FTP, what venereal disease also known as "the clap"?;;Gonorrhea
Literature;;The seventh stanza alludes to the story of Ruth, saying that "when sick for home, she stood in tears amid the alien corn". In the sixth stanza the poet says that he has often been "half in love" with the idea of Death, and called Death soft names in many rhymes. In the second stanza the poet finds himself wishing for the oblivion of "a draught of vintage" though later on he repudiates his earlier Bacchanalian tendencies in favor of the pursuit of poetry. In the end, the word "forlorn" tolls like a bell to restore him from his speculations concerning the titular animal. FTP, identify this poem about a bird, written by John Keats.;;Ode to a Nightingale
World History;;His reign was troubled by a tribal insurrection under the Chaldean Merodach-Baladan which led him to appoint Bel-ibni as sub-king to deal with the problems.  He was constantly threated by the Elamites, who he defeated at Halule.  He attacked Jerusalem, but did not sack the city and Isaiah described him as God's instrument, but didn't not condemn his actions.  His wife Naqai fathered his heir Esarhaddon, and he was known for his splendid palace: Shanina-la-ishu or "Nonesuch".  FTP, name this son of Sargon II who made Nineveh his capital and the destruction of whose armies is the subject of a Byron poem?;;Sennacherib
Chemistry;;It is a polyamide in which all the amide groups attach to the phenyl rings opposite to each other at carbons 1 and 4, forcing it to maintain a "trans" formation, producing long, stackable fibers.  Its high tensile strength, flame resistance, high chemical resistance, and high cut resistance made its inventors, Herbert Blades and Stephanie Kwolek of DuPont, unsure of what it could be used for, as it could not easily be melted down or put in solution. FTP, name this strong synthetic fiber used in sails, kayaks, firefighter gloves, run-flat tires, and bullet-proof vests.;;Kevlar
Art;;Shortly before his death this artist began The Cross of the World, a series of paintings on a religious theme.  One of his most famous works was based on the Count de Volney's Ruines and was painted while he was living with Henry Greenough in Florence. In The Voyage of Life he depicts the progression of a young man from birth to old age, while the stages of a society is seen in "The Course of Empire".  For 10 points, name this painter of the Hudson River School best remembered for The Ox-Bow.;;(Thomas) Cole
United States History;;He became active in Republican politics under Harold Stassen, serving as floor manager at the 1948 and 1952 Republican conventions.  Chairman of the commission planning the bicentennial celebration of the U.S. constitution, he was appointed assistant Attorney General in 1953, and two years later Eisenhower appointed him to the US Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia.  Contrary to expectations, this conservative upheld the Miranda decision, and it was his court that presided over Roe v. Wade.  For 10 points, name this Chief Justice of the Supreme Court who in 1969 succeeded Earl Warren.;;(Warren) Burger
Economics;;The theory behind this basic concept has been augmented in the 20th century by the pioneering work in indifference analysis of Edgeworth, and its first formulation can be attributed to William Stanley Jevons. It grew out of speculations about the origins of price and the paradox of value, seen in the lesser of cost of bread than diamonds, which implied the need to consider scarcity in determinations of price. FTP, identify this basic economics concept which is defined as the additional benefit that the consumer acquires from the purchase of an additional unit of a commodity.;;marginal (utility|benefit){1}?
Literature;;The title character is wooed via trips to the theater to see plays in which a girl is skirted away from a palatial home and a cruel guardian by a hero with "beautiful sentiments". The phrase "gone to the devil" is repeated several times as the heroine is disowned by her drunkard mother, and despite the promise of a happy, petit-bourgeois life, everything is ruined by the schemes of Nellie, an audacious woman who steals Pete the bartender away from the title character. FTP, identify this sad tale of a doomed girl-come-prostitute in the Bowery district, written by Stephen Crane.;;Maggie(:|,) (A Girl of the Streets)
Miscellaneous;;He regularly gave lectures on popular astronomy to working class audiences, leading to the publication of his A Philosophical Treatise of Popular Astronomy, and at his death he left a book on the philosophy of mathematics entitled The Subjective Synthesis. He argued that human kind progressed through a theological stage, a metaphysical stage, and finally a scientific stage, in his appropriately-named "law of three stages," while his romance with the tubercular Clotilde de Vaux influenced his view of the woman's place in an ideal science-based society. FTP, identify this French founder of positivism, considered to be the first sociologist.;;(Auguste) Comte
Physics;;Nearly all of the energy leakage in a nuclear fusion reactor is due to this phenomenon, and it is also observed when beta decay products propagate through uranium in a fission reactor. When coherently applied to crystals with incident energetic electron beams, photon beams in the range of 200 giga-electron volts have been observed.  FTP, name this phenomenon in which x-rays are produced when charged particles are accelerated by the strong electric fields of atomic nuclei, whose name comes from the German for "braking radiation".;;bremsstrahlung
Geography;;It was founded as a result of mining activities overseen by Gonzalo Pizarro, who was interested in exploring the highland east region of the Andean Cordillera.  Located on the Rio Cachimayo, this city's main attractions are el Museo de la Recoleta, el Palacio de la Glorieta, la Casa de la Libertad, and la Universidad Mayor de San Francisco Xavier.  Founded by Pedro de Anzúres, it was originally named La Plata, and has also been called Charcas and Ciudad Blanca until its name was permanently changed on August 11, 1825 to honor a Venezuelan freedom fighter.  For 10 points, name this legal capital of Bolivia.;;Sucre
Literature;;He wrote a series of parodies of his favorite authors published in Le Figaro entitled "The Lemon Affair," while his theories on the universal function of literature can be seen in "Contre Saint-Beuve". Author of the collection of sketches Pleasures and Days, his work on the novel Jean Santeuil contained the seeds of his most famous work, whose sections include "The Sweet Cheat Gone" and "Swann's Way". FTP, identify this French author of The Remembrance of Things Past.;;(Marcel) Proust
Noncomputational Math;;He told his most famous student not to study too much math, lest it interfere with her child birthing abilities.  In 1838, he presented one of the first clear explanations of mathematical induction, a term which he coined, but his real contributions lie in the field of symbolic logic, where he invented notations that help prove prepositional equivalences.  FTP, name this teacher of Ada Lovelace, one of whose two namesake laws states that the negation of the conjunction of two propositions is logically equivalent to the disjunction of their negations.;;(August) De Morgan
Literature;;The climax of this novel occurs on the narrator's thirtieth birthday, when he declares "I'm five years too old to lie to myself and call it honor".  Descended from the Dukes of Buccleuch, the narrator had come east to learn the bond business. He is constantly offered "gonnegtions" by the wily Jew purported to have fixed the 1919 World Series, Meyer Wolfsheim, becomes involved with Jordan Baker, and becomes privy to the secrets of the title character, who loves Daisy Buchanan.  Narrated by Nick Carraway, FTP, what is this most-famous novel by F. Scott Fitzgerald?;;(The) Great Gatsby
Physics;;This physical law was first derived from experiments resulting in the structures of sodium chloride and zinc sulfide.  This law was derived from Ewald's theory of atomic distance and greatly simplifies the von Laue description of wave interference.  It is governed by a simple equation that relates the diffraction of X-rays in crystals at certain angles of incidence, stating that n lambda equals two d times the sine of theta.  FTP, identify this law named after a father and son pair who won a Nobel Prize for their work in 1915.;;Bragg('s) (law)
World History;;Ecclesiastically, it ended all religious persecution in Germany and confirmed the Treaty of Passau and the Peace of Augsburg.  Politically, it ceded the archbishoprics of Bremen and Verden to Sweden, while the Lower Palatinate was restored to Charles Louis, eldest son of Frederick V, and the de facto independence of the United Provinces of the Netherlands was recognized.  Including the Treaties of Munster and Osnabruck, FTP, what was this agreement that was signed on October 24, 1648 and ended the Thirty Years' War?;;(Peace of) Westphalia
Music;;The composer of this piece had projected an additional slow movement, a larghetto in D major, of which only sixteen measures survive.  The second movement features a dialogue between the first violins and the low strings to the accompaniment of sixteenth notes in the middle instruments. In the first movement, the string quartet plays an arpeggiation of the tonic triad which is answered by the arpeggiation of the dominant seventh chord.  The composer halted his work on Don Giovanni to write this piece, K. 525.  FTP, identify this serenade by Mozart that shares its name with a Stephen Sondheim musical.;;Eine Kleine Nachtmusik|(A) Little Night Music
Philosophy;;This thinker's first work was published while a professor at the University of Halle, and was entitled Philosophie der Arithmetik.  His most important contribution to philosophy was considered solipsistic by others, so he attempted to show how individual consciousness can be applied to other minds and history in Cartesian Meditations.  His most important idea involved "bracketing existence" in contemplating an object, providing a means of describing "things themselves".  FTP, identify this German philosopher and author of Ideas: A General Introduction to Pure Phenomenology.;;(Edmund) Husserl
Literature;;Among its powers are invisibility, flight, the creation of magical music, misdirection, the creation of storms and fire, and transformation, the last of which is used to change into a nymph in Act I, Scene ii, and to a harpy in Act III, Scene iii.  This creature of ambiguous gender was imprisoned in a pine tree's trunk by the evil witch Sycorax, but then freed by the newly arrived island inhabitants, both of whom it serves in return, creating a storm to exact revenge upon Antonio and his kinsmen at the behest of Miranda and Prospero.  FTP, identify this airy spirit that appears in Shakespeare's The Tempest.;;Ariel
Biology;;The relative rate of this compound's carboxylation is varied by the YPC model parameter.  In a pathway that regenerates NAD+ from NADH, this triose ketoacid is converted via acetaldehyde into carbon dioxide and ethanol in an anaerobic environment.  It is also anaerobically converted into lactate during muscle contraction, and serves as an important biochemical intermediate by bonding with acetyl coenzyme A to enter the Krebs cycle.  FTP, identify this molecule produced by glycolysis.;;pyruv(ate|ic){1}? (acid)
World History;;It was described in some detail by the Muslim geographer al-Bakri, while the first known references to it occur in Arabic writings that date from the 5th century.  Its major trade centers included Awdaghost and Walata, and its ruling dynasty belonged to the Soninke people.  It was revived for a brief time after being overrun by the Almoravids in 1076, though it finally succumbed to the Susu tribe in 1203 when they captured its capital, Kumbi Saleh.  FTP, identify this ancient kingdom that gives its name to a modern African country formerly known as the Gold Coast and whose capital is Accra.;;(Kingdom of) Ghana
Literature;;Perhaps in anticipation of his death, this author posed in photographs as a shipwrecked sailor and St. Sebastian shot dead with arrows.  Author of the dramas The Moon Like a Drawn Bow and My Friend Hitler, he is more famous for his novels, such as 1950's Thirst for Love.  Among his best works were the novels Spring Snow, Runaway Horses, The Temple of Dawn, and Five Signs of a God's Decay, which made up the tetralogy The Sea of Fertility. Famous for committing seppuku in 1970,  FTP, identify this Japanese writer most famous for The Temple of the Golden Pavilion.;;(Yukio) Mishima
Biology;;During this phase, Brachet's cleft becomes visible between the epiblast and the hypoblast.  Epiboly arrests briefly and then continues after formation of the embryonic shield.  Its primary characteristic is the archenteron, which eventually forms the cavity of the gut and is connected to the outside by the blastopore, which becomes either an animal's mouth or anus.  The primary germ layers are also formed during this stage of development.  FTP, identify this stage of embryonic development that follows the blastula.;;gastrula(tion)
United States History;;The intent of the Federal advance in this battle was to seize the Memphis & Charleston Railroad.  The Union counterattack was led by Major General Lewis Wallace on April 7, against which Beauregard managed a tenacious defense.  Beginning when Confederate forces launched an offense attempting to push the Union, led by Grant, into the swamps at Owl Creek, the Confederate flank attack was stalled at Sarah Bell's peach orchard and the "hornet's nest," during which General A. S. Johnston was killed.  FTP, identify this early battle of the Civil War that took place at Pittsburg Landing.;;(Battle of) Shiloh
Economics;;The eleventh chapter of this work declares gambling a "subsidiary trait of the barbarian temperament," and is entitled "The Belief in Luck". It expounds on society's "need" for fashionable clothing in the chapter entitled "Dress as an Expression of the Pecuniary Culture", while the introductory chapter describes the namesake social stratum and attempts to account for their seemingly wasteful expenditures, as detailed in the chapter entitled "Conspicuous Consumption".  FTP, identify this seminal 1899 work of economics by Thorstein Veblen.;;(The) Theory of the Leisure Class
Religion/Mythology;;One of his aspects is the cosmic dancer Nataraja, and his phallus is represented by the stone lingam.  At one point he swallowed the world's sins and has held them in his throat ever since, contributing to his blue color.  Named for the Sanskrit for "Auspicious One", this father of Ganesha had a bull called Nandi, and his consort is represented in many forms, including Uma, Shakti, Durga, Kali, and Parvati.  FTP, identify this god of the Hindu trinity that is usually given the epithet "The Destroyer".;;Shiva
Literature;;This poem is composed of four quattrains in which the speaker beseeches the reader, "may there be no sadness of farewell, / When I embark…"  The dark comes after "twilight and evening bell," and the speaker expresses his wish to see his "Pilot face to face" after the title journey is complete. Beginning with the speaker's assessment that there is one clear call for him, FTP, identify this poem that employs the metaphor of a sandbar as a line between life and death, intended to appear as the final poem in all collections of the poems of Alfred, Lord Tennyson.;;Crossing the Bar
Geography;;Among the attractions in this city are the Underground Palace, the Tekfur Sarayi, and the Topkapi Palace. The modern center is in the northern part, Beyoglu, which is separated by the Golden Horn from the old walled city, which is home to seven steep hills which maintain a medieval appearance. Home to the Blue Mosque and the Hagia Sophia, FTP, what is this largest city in Turkey formerly known as Constantinople?;;Istanbul
Chemistry;;Recent studies have shown that infectivity of the cytomegalovirus may require this functional group in its free form.  It can be qualitatively detected using lead(II) acetate, which produces a yellow solid if this functional group is present.  They are oxidized by mild oxidizing agents such as molecular iodine to produce disulfides, and cysteine is unique in that it is the only amino acid to bear this functional group.  FTP, identify this functional group from organic chemistry formerly known as mercaptan and consisting of a sulfur atom bonded to a hydrogen atom.;;thiol|sulfahydrl
World History;;This man gained the throne in accordance with the Treaty of Wallingford.  His northern campaigns regained Cumbria and Northumbria from Malcom IV of Scotland, but his sons conspired with Philip II Augustus to remove him from power.  He more than doubled his continental holdings when he married the ex-wife of Louis VII, Eleanor of Aquitaine, and he earned the scorn of his nation after he was implicated in the assassination of the Archbishop of Canterbury, Thomas a Becket.  FTP, identify this British monarch that ruled from 1154-1189, the first of the Plantagenets.;;Henry (II|2|(the) (second|2nd){1}?){1}?
Art;;A contributor to the magazine G, this man served as director of the Werkbund-sponsored Weissenhof project in the 1920s and 30s, producing the Weissenhof Apartment Complex in Stuttgart in 1927. Architect of the New National Gallery in Berlin and the Tugendhat House in Brno, he was famous for his dictum "Less is more". One-time director of the Bauhaus, he also produced the Farnsworth House in Plano, Illinois and the Lake Shore Drive Apartments in Chicago.  FTP, identify this architect perhaps most famous for collaborating with Philip Johnson on New York's Seagram Building.;;(Ludwig) Mies (van der Rohe)
Psychology;;Wolfgang Kohler's The Mentality of Apes presents a refutation of the ideas of this psychologist.  He served as an instructor in genetic psychology at Columbia and in 1904 was made director of the Institute of Educational Research.  His works Educational Psychology and Mental and Social Measurements reflected his interest in the intelligence of children, but he is better known for his namesake puzzle box that he used for testing animal psychology.  FTP, identify this psychologist and author of Animal Intelligence, the developer of the laws of exercise and effect.;;(Edward) Thorndike
Literature;;This poem's eleventh section contains the famous episode of the "twenty-ninth bather," who watches twenty-eight men bathing in the ocean and wishes she could join them unobserved.  The poet takes on the speaker's voice in the twenty-fifth section, proclaiming "Speech is the twin of my vision, it is unequal to measure itself," while the sixth section contains another famous scene in which a child asks the narrator, "What is the grass"?  The first work in the collection Leaves of Grass, FTP, identify this autobiographical poem by Walt Whitman.;;Song of Myself
Economics;;The curve representing this quantity is always downward sloping due to Pigou's wealth effect, Keynes' interest-rate effect, and the Mundell-Fleming exchange-rate effect.  In the Mundell-Fleming model, it can be stated by an equation that relates consumption as a function of disposable income and investment as a function of interest rates, net exports, and the GDP, all of which, when added together, equal the total income or output. FTP, what is this economics concept that represents the total demand for goods and services in an economy?;;aggregate demand
United States History;;His name means "Panther Crossing," and he fought alongside Little Turtle at the Battle of Fallen Timbers, gaining notoriety for not signing the 1795 Treaty of Greenville.  His people were forced out of Ohio and moved in 1808 to Indiana, where he tried to form an alliance with other Native American tribes.  However, his plans were thwarted when his brother was defeated at the Battle of Tippecanoe, and Richard M. Johnson claimed to have killed him at the Battle of the Thames.  FTP, identify this Shawnee leader, brother of The Prophet.;;Tecumseh
Literature;;This author's early travails contributed to his pseudonym, which means "the bitter one".  Some of his works helped to found the socialist realism movement, including Queer People, Enemies, and The Last One.  His first play, The Smug Citizen, garnered much attention for depicting the worker as superior to the intellectual, but he is most famous for his second play.  FTP, identify this Russian playwright of The Lower Depths.;;(Maxim) Gorky
Chemistry;;This rule holds valid if the following approximations are made: all overlap integrals are set equal to zero, all resonance integrals between non-neighboring atoms are set equal to zero, and all remaining resonance integrals are set equal to each other.  Essentially, all the Coulomb integrals for the atomic orbitals that contribute to the pi orbitals are set equal.  This rule states that pi electrons undergo delocalization if there are 4n+2 pi electrons in a given molecule.  FTP, identify this rule that determines a molecule's planarity and aromaticity.;;Huckel('s) (rule)
United States History;;Early in his career this politician served as private secretary to associate justice Louis Brandeis, and in 1933 was undersecretary of the treasury.  Among his writings are Power and Diplomacy and Present at the Creation: My Years in the State Department, which received a Pulitzer in 1970.  He was accused by McCarthy for protecting Communists due to his defense of Alger Hiss, but is more famous for implementing the Marshall Plan.  FTP, identify this secretary of state under Harry Truman.;;(Dean) Acheson
Literature;;2,400 square miles in area, this region takes its name from the Chickasaw for "water flowing slow through the flatland, " and is bounded on the north by the Tallahatchie River and on the south by its namesake. Jefferson is the seat of this county based on Lafayette, its creator's home, and it is the site of numerous plantations, including those of the Greniers, McCaslins, and Sutpens. FTP name this county in northern Mississippi that is the setting for many of the works of William Faulkner.;;Yoknapatawpha (County)
Biology;;The Ames cancer test uses a strain of this bacteria whose typhi and paratyphi types cause typhoid and paratyphoid fever. Rod-shaped Gram-negative bacteria, they can exist for long periods outside their hosts, often in sewage and surface water, and are best known for causing disease when occupying the intestines. FTP, what is this bacteria which can cause gastroenteritis and septicaemia and are often transmitted by unhygienic food preparation?;;Salmonella
Religion/Mythology;;In Rome these Greek figures were named Nona, Decuma, and Morta, and were collectively called the Parcae. In Greece, their collective name derived from the word meaning "a lot", and like the Hesperides they were considered to be the daughters of Nyx. FTP, who were these sisters named Clotho, Lachesis, and Atropos who by spinning, measuring out, and cutting the thread of life controlled the destines of man?;;(the) Fates|Moirai
Philosophy;;This philosopher's early death left his works in an incomplete state, with much of his work compiled by his students, including the "Opus Parisiense" and the "Opus Oxoniense". Famous for his defense of Immaculate Conception and his analogy comparing man's free will to a horse capable of throwing off grace, its rider, he gained notoriety for challenging the ideas of Thomas Aquinas. FTP, who was this Scottish Fransciscan thinker known as "Doctor Subtilis", whose followers were often called "dunces"?;;(John) Duns Scotus
United States History;;This man rose to the rank of mate while involved in the slave trade, but settled in America after killing a mutinous sailor. Late in his life he served as an admiral in the Russian navy against the Turks, but is better-known for his exploits against the British, including spiking the guns of his old home port Whitehaven and capturing the HMS Drake. FTP, who is this admiral who defeated the HMS Serapis with his ship the Bonhomme Richard, best-known for the quote "I have not yet begun to fight"?;;(John Paul) Jones|John Paul (jones)
Literature;;On the night of the title character's birth, his father murdered his employer Mr. Haredale, a fact mysteriously connected with his mental retardation.  He wears all green and always carries a raven named Grip in a basket on his back, and is condemned to death for his role in a riot, even though he participated in it only for the pleasure of carrying a flag and wearing a blue bow. Famous for its depictions of the Gordon Riots, FTP, identify this novel by Charles Dickens.;;Barnaby Rudge
Economics;;Formally, this economics term is defined as the difference between the total return from a factor of production and its supply price; that is, the minimum amount necessary to attain a factor of production.  Alfred Marshall analysed the "quasi" version, while the traditional use of this term refers to the special case of a specific factor of production which is always present in a fixed quantity and therefore has zero supply cost.  FTP, identify this term, most commonly used to refer to the price paid for use of land.;;(economic) rent
World History;;This region is divided by the Eider River. After Christian IX violated the protocols of the 1852 London Convention, the Treaty of Vienna ceded it to Austria and Prussia. However, Austria lost its part after the Seven Weeks War, and following World War I, the northern part of its northern duchy voted to be reunited with its northern neighbor.  FTP, identify this region now shared by Germany and Denmark.;;Schleswig-Holstein
Physics;;This law is governed by the same equations which govern Fick's Law of diffusion and Fourier's Law of heat transfer. Not holding for semiconductors, it is true for magnets under adiabatic conditions, and has as constant the ratio of the magnet's force to its flux. It was first shown experimentally in 1827, but since it was not expected in the German scientific community, its namesake was forced to resign from his high-school teaching position and lived in poverty for 25 years. FTP name this law which states that the voltage of a circuit is equal to the product of its current and impedance.;;Ohm('s) (Law)
Literature;;Famed for his skill in duels, this author was wounded during the siege of Arras in 1640, and gave up his military career to study under the philosopher Pierre Gassendi. He aroused controversy with his blasphemous play The Death of Agrippina, but Moliere admired his skill as a satirist so much he model several scenes in The Rogeries of Scapin on this man's play The Pedant Imitated. His best-known works are the Voyages to the Moon and Sun, but he is famous today mainly because of a play by Edmond Rostand. FTP, who was this author famous for his large nose?;;(Savinien) Cyrano (de Bergerac)
World History;;This man's doctrine declared the right of the Soviet Union to intervene in the affairs of other Communist countries when their governments were threatened. In 1950 he spent time in Moldavia sovietizing Romanians, and after losing and then regaining his seat on the Politburo he became President of the Praesidium if the Supreme Soviet in 1960. Although he briefly shared power with Alexei Kosygin after he engineered the ouster of Khrushchev, he soon took over full control of the government. FTP, who was this man who served as general secretary of the Soviet Union until 1982?;;(Leonid) Brezhnev
Art;;A former schoolmate and friend of Emile Zola, this painter of The Murder was greatly influenced by the work of Manet, as seen in A Modern Olympia or The Pasha. He soon focused on brush strokes and the balance of 2-dimensional and 3-dimensional images, developing his technique of breaking down an natural object into its composite shapes, including the cylinder, sphere, and cone, a technique clearly seen in his most famous series of works. FTP name this French forerunner of cubism and painter of Mount Saint Victoire.;;(Paul) Cezanne
Astronomy;;This celestial body is surrounded by 4 rings, the outermost of which, 1989N1R, displays non-uniformity of particle density never before observed in the solar system. Visited by Voyager 2, the mission found it to be characterized by a bright feature dubbed the "scooter," an atmospheric storm called the "Great Dark Spot", and not 2 moons, as was previously believed, but rather 8, including Despina, Larissa, and Proteus. With an nearly circular orbital eccentricity of 0.009, FTP name this planet, usually the 8th in distance from the sun.;;Neptune
Literature;;This group met regularly in the Apollo Room of the Devil Tavern, and were particularly noted for their frank, fanciful love poems.  Works of this group included "To Make Much of Time", "Delight in Disorder", "Aglaura", "Brennoralt", and "To Althea from Prison".  FTP, identify this literary group whose members included Thomas Carew, Robert Herrick, John Suckling, and Richard Lovelace, named either for their association with the court of King Charles I or for their mentor.;;Cavalier (Poets)|Sons of Ben|Tribe of Ben
Chemistry;;Closely linked to the compounds theobromine and theophylline, this odorless compound occurs naturally as a white powder or as silky needles, and is characterized by a bitter taste. Scientifically called tri-methyl-xanthine, it is very soluble in hot water, and upon cooling deposits crystals of its namesake monohydrate. A member of the alkaloid group, its toxic oral dosage is 10 grams, and more than half of American adults consume over 3% of that dose daily. A cardiac stimulant and a mild diuretic having formula C8H10N4O2, FTP name this substance commonly found in guarana, maté, tea, and coffee.;;caffeine
Geography;;Rising in the Gaumukh River, this river's source is traditionally held to be the sacred glacier Gangotori. Traversing some 1500 miles and draining one-fourth of its nation's land, it flows though the states of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar before emptying into the Bay of Bengal near Calcutta. Joining the Brahmaputra to form the Padma, FTP, name this sacred river of the Hindus.;;Ganges
Geography;;At the center of this city was a building symbolic of Mount Meru. Important until its capture by an army from Ayutthaya in 1431, it came to prominence in the late ninth century when King Yashovarman I moved there, and it is most famous for complexes erected by Kings Jayavarman VII and Suryavarman II.  FTP, identify this capital of the Khmer Empire noted for its Thom and Wat.;;Angkor
Music;;Famous arias in this opera include "Let her among you without fault" and "Steady! There you are! Nearly home!", while its orchestral sections are often performed separately under the title of "sea interludes". Based on a libretto by Montagu Slater, its protagonist, already under suspicion for the death of a previous apprentice, disregards the advice of Ellen Orford and takes on a second apprentice, who is also killed as they flee an angry mob, prompting the protagonist, a  Suffolk fisherman, to sink with his boat into the sea.  FTP, identify this most frequently performed English opera, composed by Benjamin Britten.;;Peter Grimes
Miscellaneous;;Beginning with a description of the priesthood of the "king of the wood," its author argues that the institution of divine kingships derived from the belief that the well being of the natural order depends upon the vitality of the king. Published in 1890, the work traces the mechanisms of thought from the modern, scientific stage back to the religious stage, and finally the magical stage. FTP identify this no longer accepted, though nonetheless revolutionary, work of comparative religion and mythology written by James Frazer.;;(The) Golden Bough
Literature;;This novelist depicted a talented writer based on Thomas Wolfe in Youngblood Hawke, and wrote of the founding of Israel in The Hope and The Glory. An aspiring New York actress is the focus of Marjorie Morningstar, while the Henry family is described in The Winds of War and War and Remembrance.  In his best-known work, Willie Keith narrates the story of Steve Maryk's rebellion against Captain Queeg on a World War II minesweeper.  FTP, identify this author of the 1952 Pulitzer Prize winning novel The Caine Mutiny.;;(Herman) Wouk
Geography;;This body of water contains the Hecla, Deer, and Black Islands, and is fed from many sources, including the Red River and a river of the same name, which means "muddy water" in the Cree Indian language.  A remnant of glacial Lake Agassiz, it is drained by the Nelson River to the Hudson Bay.  FTP, identify this lake which ranks as the 13th largest in the world and the third largest entirely within Canada, which shares its name with the nearby capital of Manitoba.;;(Lake) Winnipeg
World History;;Important members of this dynasty included Rimush, Manishtusu, Naram-Sin, and Shar-kali-sharri.  The Gutians and the Amorites brought about its downfall after about 200 years of rule. Founded circa 2350 BC and uniting much of southern Mesopotamia, FTP, identify this Sumerian dynasty begun by the 56-year reign of Sargon I.;;Akkad(ian) (Dynasty)
Religion/Mythology;;This religious text was originally transmitted orally, but an effort to compile a written version culminated in the Ninth Century with the efforts of Bokhari and Moshin. It consists of six compilations, the two most important of which are the Sahih Bukhari and the Sahih Muslim.  FTP, identify this complement to the Quran containing the traditions of the sayings and doings of Muhammed, the second most important text of Islam.;;Hadith
World History;;Planning to emancipate the serfs upon ascension, this ruler was forced instead to secularize clerical land due to debt left by the empress Elisabeth. This monarch successfully conducted war against Turkey and put down Pugachov's rebellion, and before her mysterious 1797 death engaged in an affair with Grigory Potemkin. A friend of the enlightenment FTP identify this German-born Russian empress known as "the Great"?;;Catherine (II|2|(the) (second|2nd){1}?){1}?|Catherine the Great
Art;;This artist's decorations for the Chapelle des Anges of S Sulpice included his "Heliodorus Expelled from the Temple". Rumored to be the son of Talleyrand, he debuted at the Paris Salon of 1822 with Dante and Virgil in Hell, while a trip to northern Africa provided inspiration for exotic subjects like The Women of Algiers. Creator of "The Massacre at Chios" and "The Death of Sardanopolus", FTP, who was this French Romantic painter of "Liberty Leading the People"?;;(Eugene) Delacroix
Physics;;The basis for the Venturi effect, this law can be used to explain the principle of flight. In it , compressibility and viscosity are assumed to be negligible. Equivalent to a statement of the law of conservation of energy, it states that the total mechanical energy of a fluid is the sum of the energy resulting from the fluid pressure and the potential and kinetic energies of the fluid. FTP, what is this law formulated in 1738 by its namesake Swiss scientist?;;Bernoulli('s) (Law|Principle)
Literature;;"Is it a fit time, said my father to himself, to talk of Pensions and Grenadiers"? is the entire content of Chapter 5 of Volume IV of this novel, while both Chapters 18 and 19 of Volume IX of this novel are completely devoid of content. At various stages we learn of the protagonist's uncle, who was wounded at the siege of Namur, as well as Hafen Slawkenbergius, who is an expert on noses. Full of typographical eccentricities and violations of the conventions of the novel, other characters include the Widow Wadman, Parson Yorick, Uncle Toby, and the protagonist's father Walter. FTP, what is this novel describing the Life and Opinions of a Gentleman, written by Laurence Sterne?;;(The) (Life and Opinions of) Tristram Shandy(, Gentleman)
Music;;This composer of the one-act opera "Overnight" showed an early interest in music, but had to wait for the "S" volume of an encyclopedia his family was buying on an installment plan before he could learn how to compose a sonata. Influenced by Richard Strauss, his Gurrelieder was one of the high points of post-romanticism. Departing from that style, he is famous today for works like "Moses and Aaron" and "Transfigured Night". FTP, name this German composer of "Pierrot Lunaire" who developed the 12-tone method of Composition.;;(Arnold) Schoenberg
Physics;;The centers of these objects consist of mesons and hyperons, its intermediate layers maintain a superfluid state, while its outermost kilometer is solid, reaching temperatures as high as 1 million Kelvin. Perhaps their most important characteristic are their magnetic fields, which cause surface ions to polymerize into long chains of iron atoms. Believed to result when a massive star undergoes a Type II supernove explosion, its mass is restricted to below two solar masses by the Oppenheimer-Volkoff limit. FTP, what are these extremely small, superdense stars named for the presence of a certain type of particle?;;neutron star(s)
World History;;United in 1632 by King Fasilides, its first permanent capital was Gonder. Home to the monolithic churches of King Lalibela, the youngest member of the Zagwe dynasty, a major event in its modern history was its repudiation of the Treaty of Ucciali, which led to its 1896 victory over Italy at Adowa, led by Menelik II. FTP, what is this African country whose most famous 20th century ruler was Haile Seslassie?;;Ethiopia
Religion/Mythology;;In the Thioreskssaga, he was the grandson of the King of Spain, wielded the sword Garm, and rode the fearless horse Grani, an offspring of Sleipnir. After killing Fafnir he captured the Andvaranant and was married before falling under the spell of Grimhild. Forgetting his wife, he married Gundrun, and was eventually slain by Gundrun's brother Guttorm. FTP identify this husband of Brunhilde and hero of the Ring Cycle.;;Siegfried|Sigurd
Philosophy;;Anticipated in the 11th chapter of Augustine's City of God, this philosophical statement served as the basis for its creator's entire philosophy, and created the basis of solipsism. It was first introduced in 1644's Principles of Philosophy, but its French equivalent received more notice in 1637's Discourse on Method. Based on the idea that the ability to doubt one's existence necessarily implies one does exist, FTP name this famous Latin dictum of Rene Descartes.;;Cogito Ergo Sum|I think(,) therefore I am
Miscellaneous;;Classified into 4 categories, the last is susceptible only to a tachyon heterodyne grid. Used in the Tomad Incident to destroy an S-4023 ship, its weakness, the inability to fire torpedos, was described by the Khitomer Conference and eventually overcome by the renegade Klingon vessel, Dakronh. Used and then set aside by Starfleet, FTP, identify this Romulan technology which allows star ships to conceal themselves.;;Cloaking (Device)
Literature;;Much of the information in this book comes from Floyd Wells, who is serving time in Lansing Prison. The central event is investigated by KBI agent Alvin Dewey, while other information and rumors are circulated in Hartman's Café. The original suspect, Bobby Rupp, is cleared after passing a lie detector test, and it is eventually learned that the murderers are Richard Hickock and Perry Smith. FTP, what is this work about the murders of Nancy, Gonnie, Herbert, and Kenyon Clutter, written by Truman Capote?;;In Cold Blood
Chemistry;;Solutions are called perfect is they obey this law over a wide range of concentrations. This law only holds for ideal binary mixtures, with positive or negative deviations occuring depending on whether the activity coefficient is greater than one or less than one. These deviations for mixtures of liquids result in the formation of azeotropes. Stated mathematically as p equals p sub 0 times X, FTP, what is this chemical law stating that the partial pressure of a solvent is proportional to its mole fraction?;;Raoult('s) (law)
Geography;;This area was originally known as Mukuntuweap National Monument, but was enlarged to 230 miles in area and made a national park. 1,500 fott high walls can be found in its fingerlike Koblob Canyons, but its main attraction is a canyon cut by the Virgin River. FTP name this national park that is home to Sentinel Mountain, East Temple Mountain, and West Temple Mountain, located in southwestern Utah.;;Zion (National Park|NP)
World History;;Originally a province of Scandinavia, its second incarnation reached its height under King Gundobad, but in 534 the Merovigians subjugated it. Broken up by the Treaty of Verdun and later by John the Good, its attempts to attain de facto independence were strengthened by dynastic marriages with the rulers of Flanders and reached their height under Duke Charles the Bold, but his death in 1477 brought it back under French control. Known for supporting England during the Hundred Years War, FTP, identify this region with capital at Dijon whose name also identifies a type of wine.;;Burgundy
Literature;;As this novel opens, one main character is returning from his first visit to Bombay in fifteen years. On the same plane is the other protagonist, an Indian film star who specializes in playing Hindu gods. After the plane is hijacked and explodes over the English channel, the two men, Saladin Chamcha and Gibreel Farishta, experience a series of metamorphoses, dreams, and revelations that imply a new interpretation for the founding of Islam. FTP, what was this controversial novel by Salman Rushdie?;;(The) Satanic Verses
Biology;;Members of this phylum possess gelatinous mesohyl regions through which food-collecting amoebocytes travel.  Most are hermaphrodites, lack nerves and muscles, and were not regarded as animals until the eighteenth century.  Water flows through the osculum in and out of the central cavity, called the spongocoel.  FTP, identify this invertebrate phylum which includes the sponges.;;Porifera
United States History;;The recipient of the first Political Science PhD from Harvard, this man began his political career in 1880. Co-author with Theodore Roosevelt of a book of "Hero Tales", like Roosevelt he issued a corollary to the Monroe Doctrine, his concerning the disapproval of sale of strategically important land by Latin-American countries. As chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations committee, he issued 14 reservations in opposition to Wilson's 14 points. FTP identify this Massachusettes politician whose grandson of the same name also went on to a career in politics.;;(Henry) (Cabot) Lodge
Miscellaneous;;While a student of the Ecole Normale in the 1870's this author of "Pedogogical Evolution of France" became acquainted with Jean Juares, the future leader of the French Socialist party. Impressed by Wilhelm Wundt, many of his ideas can be found in "The Rules of Sociological Method" and "The Elementary Forms of Religious Life", while in "The Division of Labor in Society", he expressed his belief in the existence of a social disconnectedness, which he termed anomie. FTP identify this French sociologist best-known for his 1897 study "Suicide".;;(Emile) Durkheim
Literature;;This author first gained acclaim for early novels line "The Victim" and "Dangling Man", while recent novels include "The Dean's December" and "The Theft". Known for drawing attention to the modern moral and social crises experienced by Jewish-Americans, his work ranges from the picaresque "The Adventures of Augie March" to philosophical works like "Mr. Sammler's Planet" and "Henderson, the Rain King". Winner of the 1976 Nobel Prize in Literature, FTP, who is this author of "Humboldt's Gift"?;;(Saul) Bellow
Noncomputational Math;;This mathematician's "characteristic" is defined to be the number of vertices of a graph minus the number of edges plus the number of faces. He introduced the symbols of pi and sigma to mathematics, and his phi function tells the amount of numbers between 1 and n relatively prime to n. He solved the Seven Bridges of Konigsburg problem, but went completely blind by 1766. FTP, who was this Swiss mathematicisn whose namesake identity involves the number e?;;(Leonhard) Euler
Literature;;This poetic work gives its name to the meter in which it is written, a 4-couplet mix of iamb and anapest. An unfinished supernatural romance, the title character discoveres Geraldine while praying for her fiance in the woods and brings her back to her father's castle. However, she soon discoveres Geraldine is an enchantress, but when she tries to warn her father Sir Leoline he fails to believe her. FTP, what is this gothic ballad by Samuel Taylor Coleridge?;;Christabel
Noncomputational Math;;Capable of being bounded by Gresgorin discs, Jacques Strum first studied these numbers in a general setting. Often labelled by a lambda, their constituent set is referred to as the spectrum, and are solutions to the characteristic polynomial. Their sum equals the matrix's trace, and their product equals the matrix's determinant. FTP, what are these "values" which for some value of x and matrix A fulfill the equation A times x equals lambda x?;;eigenvalue(s)|characteristic value(s)
Miscellaneous;;Returning from Athens, the protagonist of this work meets Polemarchos on the road and goes back with him to his home. Meeting Polemarchos' father, Cephalus, in the courtyard, the three men and Thrasymachus engage in a conversation during which Thrasymachus attempts to force the central figure to abandon his question-and-answer method. Dicussing the question of justice, the group concludes that justice favors the strong. A work in 10 Books, the tenth rejects poetry while the seventh contains the famous allegory of the cave. FTP identify this Platonic Dialouge in which Socrates describes the idea of the philosopher king and the government of an ideal state.;;(The) Republic
World History;;His father created him King of Chile, but his ambitions on France were renounced in the Peace of Vervins. His approval of the murder of Juan de Escobedo is one factor in the "Black Legend" of his cruelty. His successor was not produced until his final marriage, to Maximilian II's daughter Anna of Austria. Following the death of King Sebastian, he annexed Portugal, but his childless marriage to Mary I led to disaster in his English ambitions, culminating in the 1588 failure of the Armada. For 10 points, name this builder of the Escorial and successor to Charles V as King of Spain.;;(King) Philip (II|the Second){1}?;;(King) Philip
Biology;;Hyperplasia in this organ is associated with myasthenia gravis, while aplasia of it results from failure of the third and fourth pharyngeal pouches to develop and is known as DiGeorge syndrome. Keratinized cells called Hassall's corpuscles are found in its medulla, and dendritic cells at its corticomedullary junction recognize self-reactive cells. Epithelial cells in its cortex express MHC molecules that allow for positive selection. Found posterior to the manubrium of the sternum, this pyramid-shaped organ reaches its maximum size at puberty. For 10 points, identify this lymphoid organ, the site of T cell development.;;thymus
Religion/Myhtology;;In Latvia, the pagan holiday of Zvaignes was assimilated to this Christian feast, observed in Latin America by leaving one's shoes out the night before. In Orthodox Christianity, it is often accompanied by a Blessing of the Waters and usually called the Feast of the Theophany. Remembering the miracle of Cana and the baptism of Christ, it is also called Little Christmas in Ireland and the Day of the Kings in Spanish-speaking countries. It commemorates the visit of the three magi and marks the end of the twelve days of Christmas. For 10 points, name this Christian feast that takes place on January 6.;;Epiphany
Physics;;The de Hoffman-Teller frame can be found by a transformation setting this quantity to zero upstream and downstream of a shock. In some media it is equal to the drift velocity over the mobility, and for a moving point particle it has velocity field and acceleration field terms. A generalized form of Ohm's law relates it to the conductivity tensor and the current density. Poisson related its Laplacian to the charge density, and its surface integral is related to enclosed charge in Gauss's law. For 10 points, name this quantity which is proportional when static to the source charge over the distance squared, according to Coulomb's law.;;electric field(s)
World History;;It was re-established after the Battle of Tigranocerta, which freed it from the rule of King Tigranes of Armenia. It also fought Egypt at the Battle of Panium before being defeated by the Romans at Magnesia.. It reached its greatest extent after the 281 BCE Battle of Corupedium, where its founder defeated Lysimachus. In 250 BC, Bactria and Parthia succeeded from this kingdom, which was also expelled from Judea by the revolt of the Maccabees. Finally extinguished by Pompey in 63 BCE, its capital was at Antioch. For 10 points, name this kingdom founded by an Alexandrian general known as Nicator.;;Seleucid (Kingdom)
Literature;;This author is the primary subject of T.S. Eliot's "What Is Minor Poetry"? He thinks "how sweetly flows/The liquefaction" of the title garments in one poem, and "His Litany to the Holy Spirit" was included in the collection His Noble Numbers. Other poems include one in which he remarks that they should engage in the title activity "while time serves, and we are but decaying," and another in which he tells the title group to "Gather ye rosebuds while ye may". For 10 points, name this Cavalier author of the collection Hesperides, including "Corinna's Gone A-Maying" and "To the Virgins, to Make Much of Time".;;(Robert) Herrick
United States History;;A rejected version of its charter forbade lawyers, doctors, and preachers from serving in the legislature. The Treaty of Hopewell voided its attempt in the Treaty of Dumpling Creek to define one of its borders at the Little River. Eventually, forces led by John Tipton triumphed over the government of John Sevier, who had tried to colonize Muscle Shoals. This entity was inspired by North Carolina's withdrawn attempt to give part of its land to the US government, and lasted from 1784 to 1788. For 10 points, name this abortive U.S. state, named for a Founding Father, whose land was incorporated into the new state of Tennessee.;;(State of) Frankl(in|and){1}?
Art;;A second version of this painting adds a shield and plumed helmet propped against the pedestal on the right, and a nearby dancing pair holding hands. Both versions include a small dog mirroring the pose of a woman clutching a staff, who gazes back at the grove on the right while her partner leads the way downhill. The second version shows pennants flying from the mast of the ship waiting at the left for the various lovers, and both versions feature a garlanded statue of a goddess of love. For 10 points, name this fête gallant showing couples preparing for a trip to or from the birthplace of Aphrodite, a painting by Watteau.;;(The) Embarkation f(rom|or){1}? Cythera|(The) Pilgrimage to Cythera|(l')Embarquement de Cythere|(Le) Pelerinage a Cythera
Music;;This work's final movement slows to poco andante after the eighth variation, a double fugue based on a theme the composer had earlier written as a contredanse. English horns figure prominently in the third movement trio and in a fugue that follows the trio in the second movement's Funeral March. A solo horn also announces the recapitulation in the first movement before the rest of the orchestra. It opens with two short E-flat major chords and concluding with a set of variations on a theme used in The Creatures of Prometheus. For 10 points, identify this Beethoven symphony, originally dedicated to Napoleon.;;Eroica (Symphony)|(Beethoven's) Third Symphony
Music;;His prominent roles include the lead in Le Dieu Bleu and Le Pavillon d'Armide, as well as a setting of Weber's Invitation to the Dance. As the "poet" who with the title characters plotlessly seeks the ideal, he worked in Les Sylphides with Tamara Karsavina, who was his partner in the premiere of Daphnis et Chloe. He also danced the lead roles in Till Eulenspiegel and Jeux, works which he had choreographed. Admired for his roles in Fokine works such as Scheherazade and Petrouchka, for 10 points, identify this man who choreographed and danced in Afternoon of a Faun and The Rite of Spring during his tenure in Diaghilev's Ballets Russes.;;(Vaslav) (Fomich) Nijinsky
Psychology;;His theories were the basis of Rudolf Dreikurs's practical therapy. He argued that the unhappiness of homosexuals stems from failure to meet a social need to reproduce in What Life Could Mean to You. His theory about the personality traits of eldest, second, middle, and youngest children has become conventional wisdom, while his theory of socially useful and antisocial personality types and the struggle between social demands and self-idealization are discussed in 1912's The Neurotic Character. For 10 points, name this founder of individual psychology, who pioneered work on inferiority complexes.;;(Alfred) Adler
Literature;;In one story he is said to have a brother, Gormant of Ricca, and to cross rivers on the blade of Osla Big-knife. In that story he captures Odgar and fights a whole day to kill one piglet of the brood of Twrch Trwyth. He refuses to stop the slaughter of a bunch of ravens in "The Dream of Rhonabwy" while playing a game against Owain. He disappears after his butler Lucan dies after a battle that begins?? when an adder prompts a warrior to draw a sword. During that battle at Camlann, he kills and is fatally wounded by Morgause's treacherous son, Mordred. For 10 points, name this king who wields Excalibur in battle.;;(King) Arthur
Biology;;Notable species of this genus include longispinus, discovered by Charles Gilmore, and armatus, discovered by Othniel Marsh. Their lack of the antorbital fenestra is unusual among members of their order and suggests a relationship to crocodilians. Some have theorized that their tail and hindleg reflexes were improved by a second brain housed in the hip region of the spinal cord in these herbivores. Another physical feature may have functioned as temperature regulators, attractors of mates, or armor. For 10 points, name this genus of dinosaurs with rows of armored plates and spikes on their backs and tails.;;stegosaur(us)
Literature;;One notable comedic scene in this novel includes depictions of the main characters as a shepherdess, an Amazon, and Venus in a family portrait that is too large to fit in their home. Among the misfortunes borne with Job-like fortitude by the protagonist are financial ruin due to the bankruptcy of a merchant, the suspected abduction by Mr. Burchell of his daughter, and imprisonment at the hands of Squire Thornhill. Finally, Sophia and Olivia are reunited with George, Moses, and the protagonist, whose innate goodness is at last rewarded. For 10 points, name this novel about the titular cleric, Dr. Primrose, a work by Oliver Goldsmith.;;(The) Vicar of Wakefield
Earth Science;;These features are termed "leaky" when they show a small divergence. At sea they are typically associated with a fracture zone extending beyond the active region, which usually lies between offset ridge segments. When three of these meet they form an unstable triple junction, and at the unstable Mendocino triple junction two of these meet a trench. They accommodate conservative plate boundaries since they show little or no movement in the dip direction, instead moving in right-lateral or left-lateral senses of relative plate motion. For 10 points, name these specific linear structures where plates slip past each other, exemplified by the San Andreas Fault.;;(transform|strike-slip){1}? fault
United States History;;He negotiated the Tipitapa Pact with Moncada in Nicaragua, and was responsible for the closure of an organization led by Herbert Yardley, the "Black Chamber" or MI-8. He led the US delegation to the London Naval Conference in his capacity as Secretary of State under Hoover, and he is also known for discouraging the bombing of Kyoto and delineating a certain policy after a section of railroad in Mukden was destroyed by Japanese soldiers. For 10 points, identify this Secretary of War under Taft and FDR, who advised nonrecognition of territories obtained by aggression in his namesake doctrine.;;(Henry) (Lewis) Stimson
Literature;;In one of this author's stories, a man wins a round of the titular activity and refuses to let go of the button controlling the prize wheel. In addition to "King of the Bingo Game," this author worked on a novel whose central character adopts the moniker Movie-Man for a time before becoming Senator Sunraider. His essays "On Bird, Bird-Watching, and Jazz" and "Richard Wright's Blues" appear in the collection Shadow and Act. He wrote a novel whose central character works briefly at Liberty Paint company and later meets Ras the Exhorter. For 10 points, name this writer who left unfinished his novel Juneteenth and wrote Invisible Man.;;(Ralph) (Waldo) Ellison
Philosophy;;In one of this philosopher's works, he argues against a charge of treason by Odyssues in the Defense of Palamedes. In another work, via proof by exhaustion, he exculpates a different major figure of the Trojan War; that is his Encomium of Helen. In addition to Pyrhho, this philosopher's work is transmitted through Sextus Empiricus, who wrote of the metaphysical solipsism presented in this man's On Non-Existence. His eponymous Platonic dialogue features Polus and Callicles, who orders Socrates to debate himself. For 10 points, name this Greek, whose sophism, like that of Protagoras, is contrasted with Socratic philosophy.;;Gorgias
Literature;;Unseen in this play are the gossipy "neighbor Daphne and her little spouse". We also never see Argas, who left a casket of important papers with the head of the central family. The head of this play's central family hides under a table at his wife's insistence after that wife sees a ploy ruined by her hotheaded son-in-law Damis. The title character tears a fine handkerchief out of a copy of Pilgrim's Progress, calling it a "horrid profanation," during a scene between the servant Dorine and Cléante. The title character finally exposes himself by trying to seduce Elmire, the wife of his host, Orgon. For 10 points, name this Molière play featuring the titular religious hypocrite.;;Tartuffe
Chemistry;;This formula begins to indicate that the vapor pressure of a material varies with its volume as conditions approach those prompting a first-order phase transition; this is its most egregious failure. It can be understood as a second-order truncation of the more accurate virial equation. The attraction and repulsion parameters are represented by the coefficients a and b and reflect that this formula was proposed by its namesake to account for intermolecular forces and the size of individual particles in the interactions of gases, refining the ideal gas law. For 10 points, name this equation of state.;;van der Waals (equation)
Literature;;The protagonist of this novel flees as a boy after his grandmother's mulatto caretaker, Lunero, witnesses him murdering his drunken uncle. At the beginning of the novel his only comfort is the recordings of business transactions played to him by Padilla. After returning home from war he marries Catalina, the sister of Gonzalo, who is later disillusioned by Father Paez. The protagonist's son Lorenzo is killed in the Spanish Civil War, and the love of his life, Regina, is captured and hanged by Pancho Villa. A veteran of the Revolution of 1910, he recalls his life as the title event is coming near. FTP name this novel about a Mexican business tycoon by Carlos Fuentes.;;(The) Death of Artemio Cruz|(La) Muerte de Artemio Cruz
Geography;;In this country, women often wear nickels attached to a red and white string on their breasts for the first two weeks of March. The wearing of leather slippers called opinci remains common in the Maramures region, as does the consumption of oversized donuts. Tourists often see the "ladder of virtue," a wall painting at the Sucevita monastery, in this nation, which was inducted along with Bulgaria into the EU on January 1st, 2007. On December 1st, it celebrates the day on which Bukovina, Bessarabia, and Transylvania were originally united. Situated where the Danube flows into the Black Sea, this is, for 10 points, what Eastern European nation with capital at Bucharest?;;Romania
Noncomputational Math;;For a differential equation, the elliptic type of these occurs when the stability matrix is purely imaginary. The subfactorial of n gives the number of permutations of n elements with none of these; such permutations are known as derangements. For a continuous function f of x whose graph lies in the unit square, the intermediate value theorem applied to the function f of x minus x shows that f has one of these in the unit interval. Any continuous map from the unit n-ball to itself has one, according to a theorem of Brouwer. For 10 points, name these points which remain invariant under a differential equation or map, so that f of x equals x.;;fixed point(s)|(critical|stationary){1}? point(s)
World History;;The Taizong and Xuanzong emperors were notable members of this dynasty, which was founded by the governor of Shanxi ["Shanhsyee"] and ruled by the Turkic-derived Li family. It was the first dynasty to implement civil service examinations, and its capital at Chang'an was the eastern terminus of the Silk Road. The reign of Empress Wu and the An Lushan rebellion also occurred during this dynasty, which succeeded the Sui and was the time of the poets Du Fu and Li Po. For 10 points, name this dynasty that reigned in China from 618 to 907.;;Tang (Dynasty)
World History;;One of the military commanders under his administration wrote Holland and Belgium in their Mutual Relations. He appointed Adalbert Falk to be Minister of Education during one of his domestic programs, which was opposed by the Zentrum party. He was more strenuously opposed by Eduard Kullman, who tried to assassinate him after he issued the May Laws. He used a dispute over the succession to the Spanish throne to alter the Ems telegram, and he fought the influence of Catholicism in the kulturkampf. For 10 points, name this engineer of the Franco-Prussian War and first Chancellor of Germany.;;(Otto (von)) Bismarck
Economics;;The 1923 Supreme Court case Adkins v. Children's Hospital concerned a law establishing one of these. In a 1946 paper, George Stigler accounted for positive effects of them by noting that employers act as monopsonists in certain sectors. The 1985 case Garcia v. San Antonio Metropolitan Transit Authority allowed the continuing existence of these by upholding the Fair Labor Standards Act. A 1995 book by Card and Kruger controversially denied that they have any disemployment effect. For 10 points, the 110th Congress's Democratic leadership has stated an intent to raise what price floor, the lowest legal compensation by a for-profit employer for an hour of work?;;minimum wage(s)
Pop Culture;;His hobbies include raising show turtles and taking correspondence courses in Russian. He often relies on his right-hand man Octavio, whom he employed to destroy a ventriloquist dummy that triggered his childhood anxiety. The only document he has signed with his real name is the neighborhood block charter; for all else he uses the alias "Rusty Shackleford". He is oblivious to the fact that his wife Nancy cheated on him for fifteen years with the lead singer of Big Mountain Fudgecake, migraine therapist John Redcorn, who is thus the biological father of his son, Joseph. For 10 points, name this chain-smoking conspiracy theorist and neighbor of Hank Hill on King of the Hill.;;Dale (Gribble)|(D) Gribble
Geography;;Plateaus in the western part of this nation include the Nechako and Chilcotin, while mountains in the eastern part of this country include the Monteregian hills and the Long Range Mountains. This nation's northernmost drainage basin includes rivers such as the Liard, Parsnip, and Peace, while islands in its largest bay include the Belcher Islands, the southernmost part of this nation's newest territory. It's tallest peak is Mt. Logan, and it may become politically important due to the discovery of oil sands in one of its western provinces. For 10 points, name this country, home of the Athabasca, Fraser, and Mackenzie rivers and the Great Bear Lake, with capital at Ottawa.;;Canada
Literature;;In one of this man's works, Noorna, disguised as a crone, meets the barber Shibli just before he performs the title action, while the titular lowly boy meets and marries the upper class Rose Jocelyn in Evan Harrington. The speaker describes himself as the pilot of his own life after his wife cuckolds him in this author's best-known poem, Modern Love, but he is better known for a novel in which the prohibition of female encounters until the protagonist turns 25 leads to a young man's travails, The Ordeal of Richard Feverel. FTP name this author, also known for a novel in which the title character's relationship with Laetitia Dale reveals the harm of his excessive pride, The Egoist.;;(George) Meredith
Astronomy;;In his "The Nature of the Physical World," he postulated the Two Tables paradox to demonstrate the incommensurability of common-sensical and scientific inquiry. In that same work, he also promoted the first incarnation of the infinite monkey theorem, which held that "if an army of monkeys were strumming on typewriters, they might write all the books in the British Museum". More a scientist than a philosopher, however, he explained the pulsation of Cepheid variables, though he is better known for his work on black holes, in which he unsuccessfully opposed the idea of the Chandrasekhar limit. He also unsuccessfully attempted to establish the fine structure constant as exactly 1/137, a value now known as his number. For 10 points, name this British astrophysicist who discovered proof of gravitational lensing?;;(Arthur) (Stanley) Eddington
Art;;One of this man's works features the titular dark-skinned man in a gold-trimmed red garment with absurdly huge buttons, while a more recognizable one depicts a bird on the shoulder of the eponymous stein-bearing crone. A black shirt with red frills adorns the titular clown in his Jester with a Lute, and the titular woman's breasts are nearly popping out in Gypsy Girl, but he is better known for portraits of figures like Jacobus Zaffius and the Company of Saint George. Best-known, however, is a painting of a mustachioed hat-wearing man notably not performing the titular jocular action. FTP name this Haarlem painter best-known for his The Laughing Cavalier.;;(Frans) Hals
Music;;In the composer of this work's autobiography, he remarks that he was inspired to create it after viewing Titian's Assumption of the Virgin in Venice. Controversy surrounds the image of a bird flying out of a thornbush in this work, which features the "Midsummer Magic" music and the "Wahn" monologue. One of the title characters is beaten in the street while searching for Eva Pogner, who confides in the cobbler Hans Sachs about her anxiety over the contest at the center of this opera. Walther van Stolzing eventually saves her from the evil Jewlike Sixtus Beckmesser in, FTP, what opera about a vocal contest in a German city by Richard Wagner?;;(Die) Meistersinger von Nürnberg|(The) Mastersingers of Nuremberg
Literature;;In the preface to a book of his lectures this writer notes that the literary critic Henry Louis Gates was one of his students at Cambridge. He served a lengthy prison term that he described in the book of poems A Shuttle in the Crypt and in the memoir The Man Died. His novels include The Interpreters and Season of Anomy, and his satirical plays include Kongi's Harvest and The Trials of Brother Jero, but this author is best known for dramas that delve into Yoruba myth, like The Lion and the Jewel. For 10 points, identify this author who also wrote a play in which Olunde attempts to stop his father, the title servant, from committing suicide, Death and the King's Horseman.;;(Wole) Soyinka
Philosophy;;Arthur Pap theoriezed! a "functional" kind of this. David Hume termed it the "relations of ideas" as opposed to "matters of fact". An early version of it can be found in Plato's Meno, in which it takes the form of the "theory of recollection". Kant appealed to it for "necessary truth" and asserted its transcendental nature, claiming that it involved form rather than content, and that moral principles can only be discovered through it rather than experience. For 10 points, name this epistemological concept, a type of knowledge that is gained independently of empirical or "a posteriori" knowledge.;;a priori (knowledge|reasoning)
Biology;;Genera in this phylum include Haemonchus, Necator, Ancylostoma, and Trichuris. These creatures' ameoboid sperm is believed to be the only eukaryotic cell without G-actin, and they mate through the use of a chitin-coated spicule and often with the aid of specially bent tails. To avoid dessication, their epidermis secretes a keratin cuticle, which also means that they molt. Some also have cilia, but all move primarily through their hydrostatic skeleton. Sensory structures called phasmids can be found near their anus, which serves as the end of the pseudocoel of these triploblastic creatures, which include biological superstar C. elegans. For 10 points, name this phylum of worms that are round.;;Nematod(e(s)|a){1}?|Nemat(a|es){1}?
United States History;;Robert Conrad was elected mayor of Philadelphia after being revealed as a member of this group. In Massachusetts, it helped elect Senator Henry Wilson, while in Indiana it recruited congressman Schuyler Colfax. One member was the only man to defeat Boss Tweed in an election. Their presidential candidate was a former Comptroller of New York who led the Silver-Grey Whigs, while their vice-Presidential candidate was Kitchen Cabinet member Andrew Donnelson. For 10 points, name this political party formed out of the Order of the Star-Spangled Banner, which nominated Millard Fillmore for President and was defined by its secrecy and opposition to Catholic immigrants.;;(Know-Nothing|American){1}? (Party)
United States History;;His father was killed during Lord Dunmore's War, and his boyhood home was destroyed in the Battle of Piqua. His collaborators included Isaac Brock, a brother with whom he captured a fort commanded by William Hull, and Henry Proctor. After adopting the economic theories of Joseph Brant, he broke with Black Hoof and decried the abdication of land claims. Henry Proctor failed to show up to his final battle near Chatham, where he was killed, possibly by Richard Mentor Johnson, after rising to prominence as the brother of Tenskwatawa, a prophet. For 10 points, name this Indian leader, the loser at the Battle of the Thames and the Battle of Tippecanoe.;;Tecumseh
Miscellaneous;;The Egyptian general Ganymedes and regent Pothinus were both this type of person. One of them, Judar Pasha, won the battle of Tondibi against Askia Ishaq II, putting an end to the Songhai Empire. The theologian Tertullian claimed that Jesus was one of these, which was believed by the Russian Skoptzy sect. In China, one of these was responsible for the Tumu Crisis, while an influencial group of them was known as the Ten Attendants, and one of them is credited by Gavin Menzies with discovering Greenland, Antartica, and the Americas in 1421. Apart from Zheng He, they were often used to guard harems. For 10 points, name this type of court official, who has been castrated.;;eunuch(s)
Literature;;A key point in this novel comes when one of the characters realizes that a book written under the pseudonym Joseph Emory Prank was actually written by her acquaintance Miss Lavish. Miss Lavish had written about an actual event: a woman is kissed on a violet-covered terrace while wandering in search of Mr. Eager and Mr. Beere. This woman eventually breaks off her engagement to Cecil Vyse, and instead marries the man who had kissed her in Florence, George Emerson. Lucy Honeychurch is the heroine of—for 10 points—this E.M. Forester novel, which takes its title from her lodgings in Florence, from which one can see the Arno River.;;(A) Room with a View
World History;;After he came to power, he sent Wulfstan of Haithabu to the Baltic and fought the battle of Wilton. Made a Consul of Rome at the age of five by Pope Leo IV, this man forced Guthrum convert to Christianity and sign the Treaty of Wedmore after winning the Battle of Edington. He allegedly spied on his opponents by entering their camp as a minstrel, which allowed him to extend his lands all the way to Watling Street, deep into the Danelaw. He is credited with creating the shire system as well as standardizing English law. For 10 points, name this king of Wessex, called "the Great".;;Alfred (the Great)
Chemistry;;In Contact, Carl Sagan quipped that there was enough of this compound in galactic cloud W-3 to completely satisfy the entire population of the planet for the age of the solar system. Although used by humans since at least the Neolithic period, it was first isolated through distillation by Persian alchemists in the Abbasid Caliphate. Recent evidence has shown that this compound can in fact increase the growth of the bacterium responsible for pneumonia, meningitis, and urinary tract infections, contradicting a common conception about the ability of this compound to kill budding infections. For 10 points, identify this organic compound with empirical formula C2H6O used as a fuel additive and in adult beverages.;;Ethanol|(Ethyl|Grain){1}? Alcohol
Religion/Mythology;;One of this figure's forms, Khepri, was originally a separate deity with the head of a dung beetle. In another form he is combined with the ram-headed god Heryshaf, and in yet another he is depicted as the youth Nefertum, who masturbated the Ennead into existence. During his most important task, one of his protectors is Mehen, a snake-like deity with a namesake board game, while other assistants include Thoth and Seth. Seth uses a blade to accomplish what this figure usually does by transforming into a giant cat, namely, killing Apophis. Originally the chief god of Heliopolis, he was eventually merged with the Theban Amun. For 10 points, name this Egyptian solar deity.;;Ra|Re
Literature;;Although she claims that she is just on leave from from her job teaching high school English, she was actually fired for an inappropriate behavior with a student, and she was evicted from the low-rent Flamingo Hotel for her wild sexual affairs. These affairs are largely motivated by the guilt she feels as a result of the death of her husband, Allen Grey, who killed himself after she discovered that he was gay. At the end of the play, she is taken off to a mental institution, as she reveals that she has "always depended on the kindness of strangers". For 10 points, name this Southern belle, the female lead in Tennessee Williams' A Streetcar Named Desire.;;Blanche (DuBois)
Chemistry;;In 1964 Cotton elucidated the first report of bonding interactions specifically between these type of orbitals, in dirhenium complexes. The splitting between their e-gerade and t-1-gerade sets is directly proportional to the colors displayed by inorganic complexes, and the crystal field model was an early attempt to explain their orientations in space. The conventional z-squared one is actually a combination of two possible solution to the Schrodinger equation. For ten points, name these atomic orbitals with principal quantum number, and with one more node than p orbitals, originally "diffuse" in spectroscopic measurement.;;d (orbital(s))
Literature;;Major Effingham becomes a father figure in this character's life after his parents are killed by Mingo Indians. He refers to himself as a "younker" and fondly remembers attending Reformed church in Albany, suggesting that he may be of partial Dutch descent. He cries out to his protégé Oliver and to Oliver's wife Elizabeth after the death of his friend Chingachgook, and he ends up giving Chingachgook's son Uncas his gun Killdeer. La Longue Carabine, Lap Ear, Pigeon, and Hawkeye are among the nicknames of—for 10 points—this character, the hero of James Fenimore Cooper's Leatherstocking Tales.;;(Natty) Bumppo
Miscellaneous;;This term was used by Fred Hoyle in the 1980s as part of his promotion of the theory of panspermia, but its most well-known meaning has its roots in an 1850 book by Patrick Edward Dove. In 1873, Paleyite botanist George James Allman used the current meaning of the term at the annual meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science, but it is perhaps most famously associated with the Wedge Document, which outlined a public relations campaign meant to sway public opinion and policy and to obtain charitable funding for the Discovery Institute. However, John Jones found that it did not meet the Daubert Standard for scientific evidence in his decision in Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District. For 10 points, name this pseudoscientific theory that attempts to supplant Darwin's theory of natural selection with a biogenesis that involves a reasoning creator?;;Intelligent Design|Behe-creationism
World History;;Members of this class were initially prohibited from building tall houses or using saddles, and Mutawakkil forbade them from using horses at all and required them to wear blue and yellow turbans. Under the Ottomans, each group that fell under this heading, which was accorded to the Mandeans, but not the Yazidi, received a hierarchical place in the millet system. A person in this class had to provide three days of lodging to a Muslim upon request, was exempt from military service, and had to pay the jizya tax. For 10 points, identify this second-class but protected status given to non-Islamic monotheists such as Christians, Jews, and Zoroastrians under Islamic rule.;;dhimmi|People(s) of the Book|Ahl al-Kitab
Music;;These pieces were taken from the composer's Opus 8 collection, which he named "The Contest Between Harmony and Inventions". The composer noted that the viola part in the second movement of the first piece was imitating the bark of a dog, and in the sonnet that the composer wrote to accompany it, a goatherd sleeps in a meadow strewn with flowers. In the sonnet that accompanies the third piece, the composer describes the peasants' celebration of the harvest, and the fourth sonnet mentions an icy snow. For 10 points, name this collection of violin concertos written by Antonio Vivaldi to represent different times of year.;;(The) Four Seasons
United States History;;Whitlaw Reed succeeded this man at his longest-tenured job, in which capacity this man had endorsed Albert Brisbane's American interpretation of the Fourier socialist system. A former campaign writer for Thurlow Weed, he hired Karl Marx as a European correspondent and yoinked John Soule's advice to avoid "lounging in the cities" urging readers to "Go west, young man!". Later, he joined with Vice-Presidential nominee Gratz Brown to finish second to Grant in the 1872 election under the banner of the Liberal Republican Party. For 10 points, name this influential abolitionist editor of the New York Tribune.;;(Horace) Greeley
Biology;;A genetic defect in their synthesis is implicated in Zellweger syndrome, where the body is unable to oxidize certain long-chain fatty acids. Though proteins are not thought to use the endoplasmic reticulum to reach it, new evidence suggests it may have evolved from proteins related to that organelle, casting doubts on its supposed endosymbiontic origin. Key to production of the myelin sheath, it also plays a role in bile production as well as primarily breaking down ethanol into acetaldehyde and using enzymes such a catalase to deal with toxic waste products. For 10 points, name this cellular organelle, a major produce of hydrogen peroxide.;;peroxisome(s)
Literature;;He was prevented from bleeding to death when his girlfriend plugged his wound with her long hair. This man found a mysterious golden box in the forest, whose magnetic key falls apart when used. He meets a couple named Joseph and Mary who are squatting in a church, shortly after he takes a vow to never remain in the same place for more than three days. The intervention of Old Barbara keeps him from monogamy with Marianne, but he later has a son named Felix and declares that "art is long, life is short" to resolve his impulses towards domesticity and adventure. For 10 points, name this man whose "travels" and "apprenticeship" are described in two novels by Goethe.;;(Wilhelm) Meister
Music;;His most prominent symphony is his second, the Ocean. His opera Feramors is an adaptation of Thomas Moore's Lalla Rookh, and was the first in his planned construction of a genre called "sacred opera" which was to oppose Wagnerian principles of music. His other operas include The Maccabees, The Tower of Babel, Demon, and Fomka the Fool. While working for Elena Pavlovna, he founded the Russian Music Society, and he directed the St. Petersburg Conservatory while his brother founded the Moscow Conservatory. In the first graduating class of his time at Petersburgh was Tchaicovsky. For 10 points, name this Jewish-Russian opponent of musical nationalism, said to rival Lizst as the greatest of all pianists.;;(Anton) (Grigoryevich) Rubenstein
Religion/Mythology;;Larry Gonick writes that, in declining a piece of cannabis-based candy offered by the emperor, this man coined the phrase "high on life". He is said to have visited a land ruled by women, where he saved his friend Mardana from being turned into a sheep, and to have caused a mihrab to move by waving his feet around. Such tales of his exploits are collected in the janam-sakhis, which also described how his body turned into a pile of flowers after his death to resolve a burial-versus-cremation dispute among his followers. After that death, which ocurred at Kartarpur in the Punjab, he was succeeded by Angad. For 10 points, name this man who declared "there is no Hindu and no Muslim" and founded Sikhism.;;(Guru) Nanak
Psychology;;He conducted a successful experiment which applied his theories to the treatment of a fear of snakes, and he was able to quantify another study by noting how many of his subjects shouted "sockeroo!".  He formulated the idea of "reciprocal determinism," which states that behavior and environment have a back-and-forth influence, he is credited with starting the social cognitive theory in his book Social Foundations of Thought and Action. Perhaps his most famous experiment uses a toy and an actual clown to show that children modify their aggression based on whether they see a previous model punished. For 10 points, name this Stanford psychologist who conducted the "bobo doll" experiments.;;(Albert) Bandura
Pop Culture;;Created after a Crispin, Porter, and Bogusky executive found a plastic mask on eBay, this character engaged in a race with Jonathan Vilma of the New York Jets in December 2006. In one game starring this character, levels include a logging yard, a construction site, and a suburban lawn. In addition to Big Bumpin and Pocketbike Racer, he must perform more elaborate presentations of food to get points in the third game. For 10 points, name this advertising mascot who, in the past two years, has invited you to "wake up with" him and stared Darth Vader in the face, all in the name of providing chicken fries and Whoppers.;;(The) (Burger) King
Miscellaneous;;In one work of this genre, a man communicates to his crush by hiding under a porch and tapping her foot, and a brawl over a returned dowry leads to the title event occurring in the forest. The vocalization style used in it is named after the "Lapis Lazuli princess" of an earlier work and performed by the tayu; that style is known as joruri. The Courier for Hell, The Battles of Coxinga, and The Uprooted Pine are examples of these plays, which are accompanied by the samisen, a kind of lute. For 10 points, The Love Suicides at Sonizaki by Chikamatsu Monzaemon is a prominent example of what type of Japanese theater in which the story is performed by puppets?;;bunraku
Chemistry;;It has a characteristic green flame color, and its tetrahydride salt, often considered a good hydrogen storage medium for fuel cells, is a common organic reducing agent, although weaker than lithium aluminum hydride. The Davis-Besse nuclear power plant in Ohio was shut down for several months as a result of corrosion by this element's most common acid, commonly used as an emergency neutron moderator for nuclear reactors, as well as a pesticide. It forms electron deficient compounds and its covalent trihydride is a canonical Lewis acid. Mostly found in Turkey and the United States, for 10 points name this element with atomic number 5 and symbol B.;;Boron
World History;;He negotiated the freedom of his titular princedom from France at the Treaty of Cateau-Cambrésis, but he later found his lands confiscated when he refused to appear before the Council of Blood. One of his strategies was pre-empted by the arrival of the Sea Beggars at Brielle, which sparked the rebellion that he took charge of. He eventually became the first head of state ever assassinated with a firearm, but earlier, he opposed Perrenot Granvelle, the regent Margaret of Parma, and the Duke of Alba. For 10 points, name this stadtholder of the United Provinces of the Netherlands who engineered Dutch independence from Spain under the banner of the House of Orange.;;William (I|the First|the Silent|of Orange|Oranje|De Zwijger){1}?;;William
Religion/Mythology;;He is sometimes said to be the father of the companion of Aeneas who was transformed into a lizard. He is more usually called the father of the Calydonian boar hunter who married Hippodameia but failed in an attempt to join with Theseus and kidnap Persephone; that is his son with Dia, Peirithous. He was unable to pay a dowry to Eioneus when marrying Dia, so he threw that man, his father-in-law, into a fire, becoming the first man to kill a relative. This king of the Lapiths also bonked Nephele, a Hera-shaped cloud, thus creating the Centaurs. For 10 points, name this king who was punished for his misdeeds by being chained to a wheel of fire.;;Ixion
Art;;His aesthetic approach was based on Humbert de Superville's Essay on the Unmistakable Signs of Art and the integrationist approach of David Sutter. His final grand-scale work was Les Poseuses, which he followed with a painting whose subject he was secretly involved with, Jeune Femme se Poudrant. Another painting, Une Baignade, Asnières, demonstrates his technique of using tiny brushstrokes which become incoherent at a close distance. For 10 points, name this pointillist who depicted a pet monkey and some women with parasols in Sunday Afternoon on the Island of La Grande Jatte.;;(Georges) Seurat
Astronomy;;The gap between them has recently been proposed to be caused by very low frequency waves from lightning strikes in the atmosphere. Sometimes viewed as a solar-driven current, one is thought to result from electrons stuck in the earth's geomagnetic field, while the one closer to Earth has as it source the decay of neutrons from cosmic ray collisions. The latter approaches within 200 km of the Earth's surface in the South Atlantic, where nuclear testing in the 1960s caused their brief amplification. A purported obstacle to the Apollo missions, for 10 points name these regions of radiation bearing the moniker of a recently deceased University of Iowa physicist.;;Van Allen belt(s)
Literature;;One of this author's novels follows the accompanist to the singer Clement Sebastian, while, in another two characters climb Blue Mesa and Godfrey St. Peter uses the Oxford prize to purchase a new house. In addition to Lucy Gayheart and The Professor's House, this writer described the maiming of a woodpecker by Ivy Peters near the home of Captain Forrester, a performance as Sieglinde in Die Walküre by Thea Kronborg, Jim Burden's reuniting with a member of the Shimerda family, and the expulsion of Carl Lindstrom from Alexandra Bergson's house. For 10 points, name this author of A Lost Lady, The Song of the Lark, My Antonia, and O Pioneers!.;;(Willa) Cather
World History;;The only reference to it in the Latin sources is a single line in Aelius Spartianus's Augustan History. A museum at Maryport shows the life of a soldier assigned to it, tasked with watching for the Brigantes. It is shorter today than in ancient times because large portions of the top were removed to build the Jarrow and Lindisfarne monasteries Punctuated with milecastles, it extends seventy-three miles from Segedunum on the Tyne to Bowness on Solway Firth. For 10 points, name this barrier in the north of England, ordered by the successor of Trajan.;;Hadrian(')s Wall
Noncomputational Math;;The Fibonacci type can notably perform many common operations with almost constant amortized cost, and they are often used to implement priority queues. Key to executing many graph algorithms, such as Dijkstra's, they are often implemented in arrays with adjacent elements being widely separated by index. Its namesake sort has complexity bound of order n log n, and its nodes usually satisfy the property that the children are either consistently lesser or greater than their parents. For 10 points, name this tree-based data structure.;;heap
Geography;;This country is divided into 11 "saharlar" and 59 "rayons," and its agriculture is dependent on the Up per Shirvan and other canals that spread the Kura and Aras rivers to the Milskaya and Muga plains. The Apsheron Peninsula is the site of the city of Sumqayit as well as the capital, and is called the most polluted area on earth by this country's scientists. It controls the enclave of Naxcivan within neighboring Armenia and also borders Turkey, Russia, and Iran, and of course the Caspian Sea. For 10 points, name this oil-producing state, which disputes ownership of Nagorno-Karabakh with Armenia.;;(Republic of) Azerbaijan|Azarbaycan (Respublikasi)
Earth Science;;Its inner boundary is marked by the Lehmann discontinuity, and its interaction with the mantle in so-called ultra low velocity and rigidity zones may explain the phenomenon of nutation. Convection in it in the Glatzmeier-Roberts model is implicated as the driving factor behind the reversals of Earth's magnetic field, and its liquidity is due to its lower melting point compared to the silicates above it outweighing the higher pressure exerted on it. Composed mostly of nickel and iron, for 10 points name this layer of the Earth, located between 1200 and 3400 kilometers from the center of the earth between the inner core and the mantle.;;Outer core
World History;;Si Votha's ambition to occupy this office played into the hands of the French, and it was reduced to a figurehead by the time Monivong succeeded to this position. The current occupant played the title role in a 1967 film version of The Little Prince, while another person who held this title resigned after it was abolished in order to found the Sangkum Reastr Niyum. This office was recreated in 1993, and the person who held it until 2004 also did so from 1941 to 1955 and was later the elected head of state until overthrown by Lon Nol. For 10 points, identify this monarchial title twice held by Norodom Sihanouk.;;King of Cambodia
Literature;;In one scene, it is predicted that "all trades" will perish due to the "red pestilence," and one character is  told that his wit is to travel southward and get lost in a fog. Nicanor and Adrian provide exposition in this play, discussing recent events such as Cominius's attempt to follow the title character to Antium. Menenius attempts to instruct that character on sympathizing with commoners, but Sicinius and Brutus reject his attempt to become counsel. He had defeated the army of Tullus Aufidius to conquer the Volscians. For 10 points, the title general is so enraged at Rome's rejection of his political career that he joins the enemy and marches on the city in what play by Shakespeare?;;Coriolanus
Literature;;Nicholas Udall appears as a character in this man's trilogy of novels about Katherine Howard, which include The Privy Seal and The Fifth Queen Crowned. In another of his novels, Port Scatho fraudulently refuses to cash checks from a government mathematician, who later becomes an antique furniture dealer and falling in love with Valentine Wannop. He also wrote about the events leading to Nancy Rufford's mental collapse, which occurred after Florence Dowell's affair with Edward Ashburnham ended. For 10 points, Christopher Tietjens is the protagonist of Parade's End, by what author of The Good Soldier?;;(Ford) (Madox) (Ford|Heuffer){1}?
World History;;Their territory was gradually reduced by the rise of the ta'ifa kingdoms, such as Murci and Arjunah, decades after a ruler of this dynasty took the epithet "Victorious by God" after defeating Alfonso VIII at the Battle of Alarcos. The patrons of the Booksellers' Mosque, this group followed the theology of Ibn Tumart. Their various cities fell to the Abd al-Wadids, Hafsids, and Marinids in the mid-thirteenth century, while the defeat of their army at Las Navas de Tolosa is often rendered as the start of the reconquista. For 10 points, name this Moroccan dynasty which ruled in southern Iberia from the thirteenth to fifteenth centuries.;;(Al)mohad(s)
Biology;;Leptosporangia, spore-generating cells that develop from a single cell, are unique to them, and form the basis for a former system of internal classification. Cladistically, the lycopodiophyta, such as club mosses, are the most distantly related to other vascular plants and farthest down the evolutionary tree, although all exhibit alternation of generations, and their small, heart-shaped gametophyte is known as a prothallus. These plants, however, spend the majority of their life cycle as the sporophyte, a thin green, non-woody leaflike structure. For 10 points, name this group of seedless vascular plants also known as pteridophytes.;;Fern(s)
Literature;;Eino Leino was the first person to do this in Finland, while Balthazar Grangier was the first in France. The first volume of Ciaran Carson's attempt to do this came out in 2004, 350 years after Henry Cary became the first person to hit it big by doing this in English. More accurate twentieth-century efforts came from  Warwick Chipman and John Ciardi. Less accurate were Dorothy Sayers and Henry W. Longfellow, though all avoided the license Cary took when doing this, such as massaging the line "abandon all hope, ye who enter here". For 10 points, identify this activity involving the rendering of a certain theological epic into another language.;;translat(e|ing){1}? Dante|translat(e|ing){1}? the ((Divine) Comedy|Inferno|Purgatorio|Paradiso){1}?
World History;;These people were victorious at the Battle of Homs under Qalawun, who was succeeded by the long- ruling al-Nasur. They were defeated at the Battle of Marj Dabiq by a man who called himself the "Servant of the two holy shrines". They notably executed the general Kitbuqa at the Spring of Goliath, and are usually divided into Bahri and Burji dynasties, the last of which was mostly composed of Circassian peoples. As described above, they were victorious under Baybars over the army of Hulagu Khan at the 1260 Battle of Ayn Jalut. Defeated themselves at the Battle of the Pyramids and then later crushed by Muhammad Ali, FTP, name these people who set up a long-ruling dynasty around Egypt.;;Mam(e)luk(e)(s)
Religion/Mythology;;One man by this name owned the field in which the ark stood on its way from the Philistines' territory to Judah, and Zachariah saw another clothed in fresh robes and a mitre in a vision. The latter, the son of Josedec, also helped Zorobabel rebuild the temple after the Babylonian Captivity. The best known man by this name caused the sun and the moon to stand still at the battle of Gibeon, and it was he who was commander when the walls of Jericho fell. Also the name of the sixth book of the Old Testament, this is, FTP, what biblical name, also the given Hebrew name of Jesus, the most famous of which led the Israelites after the death of Moses.;;Joshua|Y(ehoshua|eshu){1}?|(I|J){1}?esue
Physics;;The Sellmeier equation relates it to wavelength for each absorption resonance, taking into account the dispersive effects of the medium. It can be defined for the group velocity as well, but is usually defined for the phase velocity so as to keep track with the actual motion of the medium itself. Negative values have recently been found as a result of exotic metamaterials, and the value itself is commonly expressed as the geometric mean of the permittivity and permeability of the medium. For 10 points, name this constant which describes how the speed of light is affected by a medium.;;index of refraction|refractive index
Music;;Upon this man's death he left sketches for a final opera about a woman with multiple husbands, The Polyandrist. He executed several sets of thematic variations, including Variations on the song "Among the Gentle Valleys" and another on Cherubini's Faniska. He wrote a number of songs after the works of Friedrich Schiller, including "The leafy grove howls" and "A voice from the other world". Also known for his Summer Night in Madrid, he is best-remembered for two operas, one featuring the evil dwarf Chernomor, the other a recurring chorus of Poles. FTP name this composer of an opera about Ivan Susanin, A Life for the Tsar, and one inspired by Pushkin, Ruslan and Ludmila.;;(Mikhail) Glinka
Literature;;The title character of Gustave de Beaumont's Marie goes with her husband to live among the Cherokee after failing to engage in this. The Garies and their Friends centers around the title characters engaging in various types of this, while more well-known characters who do it include Clare Kendry and Mike Driscoll. Morris Pietersen's guilt over attempting to live this way is at the center of Athol Fugard's The Blood Knot, and Coleman Silk notably does this in Philip Roth's The Human Stain. FTP name this sociological phenomenon which titles a novel by Nella Larson and is most notably engaged in by the narrator of James Weldon Johnson's Autobiography of an Ex-Coloured Man.;;Passing
World History;;This man, who served as his country's Minister of Supply and Shipping during a crucial period, authored a number of books including Homeward, With England on the Firing Line, and In the Cause of Peace. Late in life, he served as the head mediator of a commission dealing with an Ethiopia-Somalia border dispute. Years after being elected to the Storting, he came to his most famous post, where he appointed Ralph Bunche in charge of self-government matters, and where he'd be succeeded by Dag Hammerskjold. FTP, name this Norwegian statesman, who was the first Secretary-General of the United Nations.;;(Trygve) (Halvdan) Lie
Biology;;Those of spirochetes are contained in the periplasmic space, while those of archaea once thought to be homologous to bacterias' are now regarded as an example of convergent evolution due to morphological differences including growth at different ends and having ATP as a power source versus a cation gradient. A component of Michael Behe's argument from design in Darwin's Black Box, they are primarily made out of the 9+2 microtubule structure in eukaryotes. For 10 points, name these cellular organelles crucial to the motion of their attached organism.;;flagell(um|a){1}?
Geography;;Makoshika and Medicine Rocks are among the state parks in this state, while federally administered areas include the Grant-Kohrs Ranch. The Milk, Marias, and Tongue rivers are among the smaller waterways in this state, while the Flathead enters the "Clark" fork of a larger river near Lake Pend Oreille. Visitors here can see the Charles M. Russell museum along with the Museum of the Rockies or visit the sites of the battles of Big Hole and Canyon Creek. The Bitterroot Mountains divide it from Idaho, and in the south lie three entrances to Yellowstone Park. Home of the "Big Sky," this is, FTP what "Treasure State" with capital at Helena?;;Montana
Pop Culture;;Ads for the new SUX 6000 appear throughout this film, which also features a catchphrase taken from C.M. Kornbluth's story "The Marching Morons". The title character of the film was later played in TV adaptations by both Richard Eden and Page Fletcher. The accidental death of Kinney, an executive at OCP, leads to the scrapping of Dick Jones' plans to build more ED-209s. The title character tirelessly pursues Clarence Boddicker, whose ties to the Delta City Project are eventually revealed. The film's plot ultimately resolves itself through the grenade death of Bob Morton after his murderer says, "bitches, leave!". Featuring repeated use of the phrase "I'd buy that for a dollar," this is, FTP, what film about Alex Murphy, a police officer who is transformed into a cyborg.;;Robocop
Literature;;The evil stepmother of one character in this work frustrates her and her employers by repeatedly insisting that the Africans need to be civilized. The murder of Tulkinghorn by a French maid leads to the discovery of a group of letters in the possession of the junk dealer Mr. Krook, having earlier belonged to a man known as Nemo. The central female character turns out to be the daughter of Captain Hawdon and Lady Dedlock, and she ultimately chooses Allan Woodcourt over the patriarch of the central family, whose inheritance forms the backbone of the plot. FTP name this novel in which Esther Summerson gets caught up in the suit of Jarndyce vs. Jarndyce by Charles Dickens.;;Bleak House
World History;;Croatian Hague indictee Ante Gotovina is a former member, as was the assassin of the late Serbian Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic. After being deployed in the First Carlist War, their strength had only dropped to 500 men. Swiss units recruited for the Crimean War briefly introduced green uniforms, but that gave way to the now famous blue and red dress uniforms. Famous for their actions at the battles of Camaron and Dien Bien Phu, they were only deployed once in their home country, as a last ditch effort to relieve Paris in 1871. For 10 points name this military organization formerly based in Algeria, created by Louis Napoleon after the July Revolution resulted in foreigners being unable to serve in the French Army.;;French Foreign Legion
Literature;;Book 3 of this work describes Cicero's lost work Hortensius and its power to "sharpen the toungue". Book 10 describes the "truth-given Joy" which the soul can attain, and Book 11 discusses eternity as measured by the soul. The last two books discuss the exegesis of the Book of Genesis, while Book 2 recounts a story of thieves who steal from a pear tree and feed the pears to swine. After an account of the orator Marius Victorinus in Book 8, a young child tells the narrator to "pick it up and read it," which he takes as an omen that he should give up Manichaeism and convert to Christianity. FTP, name this autobiographical work by Saint Augustine.;;Confession(e)s
Noncomputational Math;;Leibniz's formula follows from its axiomatic definitions, among which include that it is alternating multilinear. The Wronskian is one, and it can be considered as the volumetric scaling factor arising from applying a linear transformation, a concept that is exemplified by the Jacobian. It is invariant with regard to similarity, and Cramer's rule makes use of them to solve systems of linear equations. For 10 points, name this type of matrix function, which allows invertibility if it is non-zero.;;determinant(s)
Music;;One of these by Iannis Xenakis is the third of his Three Poems, while the one in A Major by John Knowles Paine is his second. The one by Wladyslaw Zelenski is lost, while the work by this name composed by Rudolf Karel was geared against Nazi occupation in Czechoslovakia. A better known one took its name due to inspiration from poems by Adolph Boettger and allegedly gained its fifth movement after the ascension of the Bishop of Cologne to Cardinal. The one by Benjamin Britten ends with London, to Thee I do Present after progressing toward rebirth in the titular period. FTP give the common appellations of these works, the best known of which is Schumann's 1st.;;Spring (Symphon(ies|y){1}?){1}?
Religion/Mythology;;One of them in pheasant form was killed by a divine arrow which landed at the feet of their leader, who then hurled it through the heart of the shooter. The food one was murdered after vomiting up food for the moon, who was subsequently banished for his crime. Another was notably frightened when her brother threw a flayed piebald horse into her hall, after which she secluded herself in a cave until enticed out by another dancing on an upturned tub. The lesser ones were created from the storm one's sword and the sun one's jewels, while the union between Izanami and Izanagi produced the two major ones, Susanoo and Amaterasu. FTP name these divine figures, prayed to by followers of Shinto.;;Kami
Literature;;One character in this work suggests that another character write a story called "The Man Who Wished" about his failed attempts to become an author, an orator, and eventually to marry. The schoolteacher Medvedenko fathers a child with Masha, the daughter of Polina and the manager of the central family's estate. The central character is advised by Yevgeny Dorn and his uncle, Pyotr Sorin, while he shuns the thoughts of his rival Trigorin. He is ignored by his mother, Irina Arkadina, and desperately loves Nina, whose rejection of him eventually leads him to commit suicide. FTP name this play which begins with Konstantin Treplev shooting the titular bird by Anton Chekhov.;;(The) Seagull|Cha(y|i){1}?ka
Literature;;One literary circle here was the Flame Bearers, and one writer from this place was the first to win first prize at the Berlin Olympics of Arts, doing so with his novel Avoveteen. Carson McCullers wrote about Madame Zilensky and the King of this place, while the best-known novel to emerge from it concerns the travails of the sometime lumberjack son of Maja and Benjamin. That novel, Meek Heritage, was written by Frans Eemil Sillanpaa, while Louhi's daughters are courted and the Samppo is sought by Vainamoinen in its epic, compiled by Elias Lonnrott. FTPE name this nation, whose national epic is the Kalevala.;;Finland|Suomi
Astronomy;;The Nemesis theory states that a companion star to the sun passes through it every 26 million years, disrupting it and sending it subjects towards the solar system. Current theories regarding its formation cite gravitational interactions of planetesimals with gas giants, flinging the former out into wide elliptical orbits. Its inner disk ends at the Kuiper belt's ecliptic. Almost a light year in radius, for 10 points, name this still-theoretical cloud surrounding the solar system believed to contain several times the Earth's mass in comets, named for a Dutch Astronomer.;;Oort Cloud
Literature;;The book of collected essays by this man takes its title from an Emily Dickinson poem in which the title thing "was Gentleman and Ladies". A young recruit has an odyssey through the VD ward of a Navy hospital in his only drama, In the Clap Shack. Mason Flagg's rape of the beloved of Cass Kinsolving in Sambuco, Italy is the subject of one of his novels, while another takes place in the wake of the suicide of Peyton Lofts. In addition, he wrote a fictionalized account of a slave revolt from the perspective of its leader, Nat Turner. FTP name this author, best-known for a work in which a woman has to decide between her son and daughter in a Nazi camp, Sophie's Choice.;;(William) Styron
World History;;His reign saw both the publication of the legal treatise Quadripartitus and the earliest surviving European kingdom-wide financial survey, and the exchequer originated at Winchester at the behest of his minister Roger of Salisbury.  He fined William de Mandeville for allowing the escape of Ranulf Flambard from the Tower of London, and he had earlier ceded custody of Cotenin to his brother Robert Curthose to avoid war.  The wreck of the White Ship resulted in the death of his only legitimate heir, William Ætheling, and his childless marriage to Adeliza of Louvain resulted in his succession by Stephen of Blois.  For 10 points, name this man who won the lordship of Normandy in the battle of Tinchebrai, king of England from 1100 to 1135 and the first Norman ruler not named William.;;Henry (I|the First){1}?;;Henry
Art;;This man parodied Delacroix's Women of Algiers in his Parisian Women Dressed as Algerians, and his mistress appears in such canvases as In Summer and Woman Bathing with Griffon. Later in life he returned to a more traditional style as seen in Young Girls at the Piano and made an attempt at sculpture with Venus Victorious. A woman in a black and white striped blouse sits in front of a binoculars-holding man in his La Loge, while a better-known work depicts a crowd of dancing people at an outside party. Gustave Caillebotte sits on the right side of the Luncheon of the Boating Party by, FTP, what impressionist, also known for Moulin de la Galette?;;(Pierre-(Auguste)) Renoir
Psychology;;A recent Stephanie Madon led study has explored the connection of this phenomenon to parents' views of their kids drinking. The fictional Cartwright Millingville bank is at the center of the William I Thomas influenced work, Social Theory and Social Structure, from which the term for it derives. In that work it is defined as originating in a "false definition ... evoking new behavior". Elton Mayo's Hawthorne Studies lend to its validity and in the Povery of Historicism, Karl Popper identified the Oracle as the central player in the Oedipus myth and the cause of a certain effect. For 10 points-- name this Mertonian psychological term for an instance in which a prediction becomes reality.;;Self-fulfilling prophecy
Physics;;Recent research has examined a possible way to avoid the common problem of ‘blinking' via stabilizing them with thiol ligands. Cadmium selenide ones have been found to efficiently produce white light via electrical stimulation, and the core-shell type are sometimes found as occlusions due to thickness variations in quantum wells. Differing from the former only in the number of dimensions which electrons are forbidden to move in, the characteristic fluorescence depends on their band gap energy, which varies inversely with the square of their size. For 10 points, name these nanostructures often tipped as possible vehicles for qubit implementation in quantum computing.;;quantum dot(s)
World History;;He ordered an electric chair for his kingdom and then proceeded to use it as a throne when informed that it needed electrical power. Locked up by Tewodros II upon the eve of his ascension to the Shewan throne, he escaped several years later, married a prominent noblewoman from Gonder known as Taytu Betul, and claimed dominion of his home territory. Passed over again for the national throne by Yohannes IV, he assumed it in 1889 upon the former's death battling Sudanese dervishes. After taking exception to the treaty of Wuchalle and defeating the Italians at Adowa in 1896, he ensured Ethiopia's independence until the 1930s. For 10 points, name this 19th century Ethiopian leader.;;Menelik (II|the (Second|2nd){1}?){1}?|(Sahle) Maryam
Miscellaneous;;One program of this type was advocated by Jewish Egyptian Caleb Gattegno, who advocated mediators such as colors in foreign languages and Cuisenaire rods in mathematics. ‘Scaffolding' is the term sometimes applied to the approach to it advocated by the Zone of Proximal development of Lev Vygotsky. During the 1970's radical and social forms of the school splintered over the specific methodologies through which a student could be guided from one cognitive stage to the next. Advocated by luminaries such as John Dewey and Jean Piaget --for 10 points-- what is this learning by doing educational paradigm, whose name is shared by the artistic school of Kaspar Malevich.;;Constructivism
United States History;;One of the amendments discussed here called for succeeding Presidents to be from different states, while another would have annulled the Three-Fifths compromise. The official records attach no names to proposals or votes, but the doctrine of nullification was endorsed with regard to the hated Embargo Act of 1807. Its three commissioners sent to Washington to give terms were humiliated when news of the Treaty of Ghent beat them there. Famously satirized in a William Charles engraving of George III imploring the New England states to leap into his arms, this is for 10 points what secessionist convention suggested by Harrison Gray Otis that took place around the turn of 1815 in Connecticut?;;(The) Hartford Convention
Astronomy;;Theories for its formation tend to explain it by invoking the lack of plate tectonics on Mars and rifting caused by the uplift of neighboring Tharsis, although whether water or carbon dioxide decompression possible caused by the Oudermans crater was the primary erosion mechanism is highly debated. Surveys indicate that it formed over former seafloor crust, and the Noctis Labyrinthus' jumbled terrain provides some of the best evidence for flooding. Melas Chasma is the deepest part of, for 10 points, what several kilometer deep valley along the Martian equator that dwarfs the Grand Canyon.;;Valles Marineris
Music;;Notable 20th century examples of these compositions include Henri Dutilleux's Tout un Monde Lointain and one by Samuel Barber written for the virtuoso Raya Garbousova. Friedrich Grutzmacher notably altered Boccherini's ninth one, while the final movement of Shostakovich's first features a prominent timpani. Vivaldi's RV 531 is a double one, and Jacques Offenbach wrote a "military" one. Yuri Leonovich completed Tchaikovsky's only one last year, while Elgar's one in E minor was one of his final compositions, but the best-known one is probably Dvorak's no. 2 in B minor. FTP name this type of virtuoso piece for an instrument notably played by Pablo Casals and Yo-Yo Ma.;;Cello Concert(o(s)|i){1}?
Literature;;One of his works centers around a man who is reformed by the Quaker William Walters after trekking through Africa, and in another, the title character fights for France against his own people after abandoning his Virginia plantation. In addition to Colonel Jacques, he wrote about the licentious mistress of an unnamed landlord then an unnamed Prince in Roxana, while a better-known protagonist, alternately known as Mistress Betty, marries Humphry and Jemmy E after being raised among Gypsies. The author of A Journal of the Plague Year, this is, FTP, what author of Moll Flanders, best-known for a novel about a stranded man and his companion Friday, Robinson Crusoe.;;(Daniel) Defoe
Music;;One character in this work brags that he keeps his bastard son Leopold as a personal manservant. Propriety often dictates that the "hunt monologue" in Act One be cut from this work, the overture to which represents torrid sexual intercourse. Another character is responsible for the waltz "The Luck of the Lerchenaus," which plays after he breaks things off with the daughter of the Marschallin, having discovered that the title character is also Mariandel. The title character stutters in the aria "Mir ist die Ehre widerfahren," in which he presents the title object to Sophie. Ending with a famous soprano trio, this is, FTP, what opera about Octavian, aka "Quinquin," by Richard Strauss?;;(Der) Rosenkavalier|(The) Knight of the Rose
Geography;;An early incarnation of this place was the Principality of Zeta, in which the abdication of Durad in favor of Archbishop Vavil led to this place being governed by a vladika until 1852. Among the tourist destinations in this place are the Sveti Stefan resort peninsula, Lake Scadar, and an island created artificially on top of the wrecked ship Merito. It is also a semi-common pilgrimage site for Christians due to its Ostreg monastery. Violent protests broke out in Podgorica over which contestant to send to the 2005 Eurovision song contest due to tensions with its then-partner, Serbia. FTP name this recently independent Balkan nation.;;Montenegro
Pop Culture;;In the music video for this song the artists are occasionally featured as wooden bobble-head puppets singing and playing instruments. One of the guest artists on this song claims that she's "Flying first class from New York to" the band's namesake locale, while another giving honeys "eargasms" with his mellow accent. The primary singer tells us that "Curve's the words, spin's the verbs," hoping that "maybe in time, baby, I can get you in my ride". He tells "baby" that "you gotta pay to play," and that "I like the way you work it". FTP name this song featuring Queen Pen, Dr. Dre, and a verse in which the phrase "hey yo" is repeated 17 times, the best-known song by Blackstreet.;;No Diggity
Literature;;The title character of one of this author's stories recalls a newspaper story about a murder-suicide after shooting a duck. The narrator of another work accidentally kills his servants when he burns his house down to escape the titular Brazilian spirit, while daughter of Basile Walter is tricked into marrying Georges Duroy in one of his novels. Rachel the Jewess kills the titular brutal Prussian soldier in "Madamoiselle Fifi," while a Prussian general forces himself on a round prostitute in "The Ball of Fat," but better-known is a story in which the Loisels labor for a decade to replace an ultimately fake ornament. FTP name this author, best-known for "The Necklace".;;(Guy) (de) Maupassant
Noncomputational Math;;The micro variety, examples of which include L4 or the Carnegie Mellon developed Mach, often handle interprocess communication by message passing or delegating to the MMU, as opposed to the monolithic type, which shares process memory. Common features usually include an API, an interrupt request or call gate ability, I/O device management and thread scheduling. Linus Torvalds famously got in an extended debate over the nature of Linux's, and Mac OS X's XNU is an example of, for 10 points, what operating system component that provides a layer of abstraction between programs and the hardware.;;Kernel
World History;;Considerable debate exists as to whether it formally covers the selection procedures for the country's Supreme Court. The included Charter of Rights and Freedoms contains the controversial notwithstanding clause, which was used to ignore challenges to French-language legislation, even though the province in question has never formally accepted it. This came about because of a deal cut behind premier Rene Levesque's back, revoking the ability to opt out of federal funding. Failed attempts at amending it include the Meech Lake and Charlottetown Accords. For 10 points, name this successor to the British North America Act of 1867, the only UK Parliament act to be written in both English and French.;;Canadian Constitution
Religion/Mythology;;The ritual of the four watches of the night is associated with this entity, which is the namesake of a holiday celebrated annually on December 8th. Some of the texts of the religion with which this is associated give it a name meaning "that which changes daily," although its common name translates simply as "awakening". A descendant of this entity was created in the 3rd century BC at Anuradhapura in Sri Lanka by Asoka, who was responsible for the first shrine near it. Found at bodhgaya, it is the oldest angiosperm in the world, belonging to the group ficus religiosa. FTP name this plant, under which Siddhartha Gautama sat to achieve enlightenment.;;Bo(dhi) Tree|Pipal
Literature;;One scene in this novel centers around a discussion of the nationalization of fisheries between a public official and the secretary Toodles. Posters of scantily clad women and old copies of The Torch and The Gong line the shelves and walls of the main character's place of business, where he often meets "the Apostle" and "the Doctor". That character is called in by Privy Councilor Wurmt to be reprimanded by Mr. Vladimir, who suggests the action that leads to the death of Winnie's half-wit brother Stevie, the bombing of the Greenwich observatory. Mr. Verloc fails to incite unrest in, FTP, what novel about a useless spy by Joseph Conrad?;;(The) Secret Agent
Physics;;Its normal components are known as the Eotvos effect. The Rossby number determines its relevance on a given length scale, and its namesake scaling parameter depends on the latitude at which the event in question is taking place. Its double term comes from the change of velocity in both space and time as observed from the rotating reference frame. Long-distance missiles, but not bathtubs are subject to for 10 points, what fictitious force, a product of inertia and often confused with the centrifugal force.;;Coriolis (effect)
Philosophy;;This philosopher's most famous argument was modified by the "envy test" of Ronald Dworkin. One of his works uses the term "consultation hierarchies" to refer to benign non-democracies, while he outlines an "overlapping consensus" of the private sphere in his work Political Liberalism. He applied his "original position" argument to international relations in 1999's The Law of Peoples, while his most famous work discusses the "difference principle" and "fairness principle," and was criticized by Robert Nozick in Anarchy, State, and Utopia. FTP, name this American political philosopher who introduced the "veil of ignorance" in 1971's A Theory of Justice.;;(John) Rawls
Literature;;The narrator of one of this author's novels envies the passion of the rapist Harcamone while lusting after "Rocky's girl". The hideously ugly girl Leila has her eye put out by her shiftless husband Said in one of his works, while Divine and Seck Gorgui love the thief Adrien Baillon in Our Lady of the Flowers. The conflict between Snowball and Green Eyes is the subject of one of his plays, and Irma, the Queen, is the proprietress of the titular brothel of The Balcony, but better-known are plays about a troupe of actors of a certain race and Solange, a disgruntled servant of Madame who kills her sister Claire. FTP name this author of The Blacks and The Maids.;;(Jean) Genet
Art;;In one of this man's early portraits, the titular snob stares down at a red umbrella propped up against a green sofa. Still lifes by this artist include Mullet and Cabbage, the latter of which was looked down upon for its "turpitude" when first exhibited. Woman Eating Oysters and The Lamp Boy are characteristic of his candid portraiture, although his best-known portrait is a "double" depiction of himself in the mirror and/or made of ice. His middle period is characterized by a preponderance of skeletons and masks, but his best-known work shows hordes of people gathered under a banner reading "Vive La Sociale!". FTP name this artist of Entry of Christ into Brussels.;;(James) Ensor
Literature;;The title character of one of this man's poems is the "Prince of castaways," Flammonde, who amusingly exonerates a woman of ill-repute. His drama The Porcupine was never produced, while Van Zorn only ran for a short time. He wrote the verse novel Cavender's House, while a woman refuses to abandon her abusive husband in his "Eros Turannos," Many of his best-known poems were collected in Children of the Night and Dionysus in Doubt, including a poem about a man who is told to "Go to the western gate," "Luke Havergal". Creator of a suicidal commuter and a "child of scorn," this is, FTP, what poet of "Miniver Cheevy" and "Richard Corey"?;;(Edwin (Arlington) ) Robinson
Religion/Mythology;;The Yoruba incarnation of this type of deity refused to eat his wife's ear, resulting in the creation of the Oba River, while a viper with a saw on its skin is the symbol of the Finnish one, Ukko, who is occasionally merged with Ilmarinen. The Japanese one enjoys nibbling on navels and was caught in Uzume's bath, while Parjanya is one of several in Hinduism, the most notable of which slew the creature who had consumed all the water in the world, Vritra. The Norse one's chariot is pulled by the goats Tanngnost and Tanngrisni, and he will fight the Midgard serpent at Ragnarok, FTP name this type of deity, exemplified by Raiden, Thor, and Zeus.;;God(s) (of) (Thunder|Lightning){1}?|(Thunder|Lightning){1}? god(s)
World History;;The Jabalpur prison was notorious for housing informants from this group, who had to be protected from possible revenge attacks. In Around the World in Eighty days, Passepartout rescues a princess from the satti pyre after she is kidnapped by them. Interestingly, Muslim members were known to exist, even though they were nominally centered around worshipping Kali. They used a silken romal or handkerchief in the commission of their notorious acts, often following their victims for miles before doing the deed. For ten points, name this Indian death cult of highway robbers and murderers stamped out by British administrator William Sleeman during the 1840s.;;Thuggees
Literature;;In part two of this work, the author describes a "sphinx of cement and aluminum" and ends the section with descriptions of visions, dreams, and breakthroughs. Another part of this work addresses a group of people who "studied Plotinus, Poe" and "St. John of the Cross". The poet tells the work’s dedicatee, "While you are not safe I am not safe," later repeating "I’m with you in Rockland". A figure to whom idolatrous Israelites sacrificed children in Canaan, Moloch, is scorned repeatedly in part two, while part one describes a group of angelheaded hipsters. The poet "saw the best minds" of his generation "destroyed by madness," in, for 10 points, what poem by Allen Ginsberg?;;Howl
Biology;;The Class I type often undergoes posttranslational modification of its N-glycan region en route to the cell surface; it is similar to the Class II type in that both are dimers of homologous proteins, but the former interacts with cytotoxic T cells by displaying signal peptides bound in the ER, while the latter binds its peptides outside the cell, works with helper T cells concerned with extracellular pathogens. It is one of the most diverse genetic loci in humans, averaging hundreds of alleles, and is conjectured to play a rule on mate selection through the use of odor to encourage heterogeneity. For 10 points, name this protein, part of the immune system’s signaling network.;;MHC|major histocompatibility complex
Literature;;In one of his novels the protagonist falls in love with "the mouse," who, along with "the freak," is a mistress of Henry Breasley. The title character of another novel reconnects with Jane Mallory after visiting her husband Anthony on his deathbed. Another of his characters kidnaps Miranda Grey, thinking she’ll love him for his lottery winnings, while Nicholas Urfe is drawn into a "godgame" by the illusionist Maurice Conchis in The Magus. Better-known, however, is a novel in which Ernestina sues Charles Smithson after he breaks off their engagement to pursue Sarah Woodruff. For 10 points, name this author, best-known for The French Lieutenant’s Woman.;;(John) Fowles
Geography;;This body of water is home to a namesake species of giant catfish. Ernest Doudard de Lagree and Francis Garnier were the first to attempt to explore this river, early inhabitants of which include the Chenla and the Cham. Its lower portion runs past the Annamese Cordillera and was explored by Gerrit van Wuysthoff. In some areas it is alternately called Lancang,’It spawns the Bassac river as it nears its delta past its intersection with the Sab river, which leads to the Tonle Sap. Its source lies in the Yunnan highlands of Tibet, from which it flows through Myanmar, Thailand, Laos, Cambodia, and Vietnam. For 10 points, name this 13th longest river in the world.;;Mekong (river)
Art;;A tree can be seen In the background of this work through a window bisected by a stone column. Beneath the window lies a series of chests, one of which is being searched through by a child in white. The child’s caretaker, carrying a large gold and blue garment, looks after the child while on the right a small brown and white dog sleeps peacefully on a couch. Tapestries line the walls near the chests and green and beige tiles line the floor, and a green curtain obscures the back left portion of the room. On a red couch in front of the curtain rests the title character, who holds pink flowers in her hand as she stares at the viewer. For 10 points, name this painting by Titian.;;Venus Of Urbino
World History;;The seventh one lost power to Romanus Lecapenus and wrote a biography of his grandfather. The fifth one’s tomb was an object of veneration during sieges; that one was in power during the end of iconoclasm under the regency of his mother Irene, and was the final Isaurian ruler. The eighth succeeded Basil the Bulgar Slayer, and the ninth was in power during the start of the Great Schism. The eleventh succeeded John VIII Palaeologus and was killed by the forces of Mehmed II in 1453. For 10 points, what name is shared by the last Byzantine emperor and the Roman who renamed Byzantium after himself?;;Constantine
Social Science;;He hypothesized the existence of a geographic grouping defined by the contrast between plain and palatalized consonants and the lack of tonal significance, with the Uralic languages at the center. Claude Lévi-Strauss took the "distinctive feature method" from his work, and this man also transmitted the ideas of Russian formalism to the Western New Criticism. After forming a circle of like-minded linguists with Vilém Mathesius and Nicholas Trubetskoy, he propounded his ideas in Preliminaries to Speech Analysis and Fundamentals of Language. For 10 points, name this leading member of the Prague School.;;(Roman) (Osipovich) Jakobson
Physics;;For non-Lambertian surfaces, the value of this quantity depends on the incident angle of radiation. In remote sensing applications, the use of it has been augmented by a bi-directional distribution function. Changes in this quantity in the photosynthetically active radiation region can be used to characterize seasonality, especially given that clouds, water, soil, and vegetation often have dramatically different values of it. Fresh snow has an average value of about 0.9 while blacktop has a value of about 0.05. For 10 points, name this parameter whose name is derived from the Latin word for white; a parameter that measures the reflectivity of a surface.;;Albedo
Literature;;In one of this man’s stories, a thug attempts to avoid implicating his friend Benkowski while being interrogated by Captain Kozak. The protagonist of that story, Bruno Bicek, is ridden by guilt over the gang rape of his girlfriend Steffi in another story, "Never Come Morning". Roman Orlov’s descent into alcoholism is recounted in "How the Devil Came Down to Division Street," and Achilles Schmidt’s loss of Hallie Breedlove leads him to beat and blind Dove Linkhorn in A Walk on the Wild Side. Better known, however, is a novel about the guilt and crimes of the morphine-addicted card dealer Frankie Machine. For 10 points, name this author of The Man with the Golden Arm.;;(Nelson) Algren
World History;;This policy led Demetrio Tsafendas to assasinate its originator, who campaigned for it in the Strijdom cabinet. Denounced by British prime minister Harold MacMillan in the "Winds of Change" speech,. its foundations were in the Group Areas Act and the Pass Laws, and many of its opponents were imprisoned at Robben Island. Hendrik Voerword was the architect of this program, whose opponents were violently suppressed in the Sharpeville Massacre and the Soweto incident. For 10 points, F.W. de Klerk. ended what policy, named for a word meaning "apartness" and mandating racial segregation in South Africa?;;apartheid
Religion/Mythology;;This group is doctrinally distinguished by their use of the riman ceremony instead of the barashnom to purify that which has touched the dead, and by their celebration of Noruz with the ceremonial handshake known as the hamazor. The Rivayat is a collection of letters on theological topics between the Gabars and this group, which keeps its central fire at Navsari. This Gujarati-speaking group, whose community is centered on Bombay, prospered as merchants following the arrival of the British after leaving Iran due to persecution under Islamic rule. For 10 points, name this group of Zoroastrians which lives in India.;;Pars(ee|i){1}?(s)
Music;;The title of this opera comes from the subtitle of Wieland’s Lulu. In the finale of scene one, one character’s mouth being locked shut results in the quintet "hm hm hm hm," while act two begins with the trio "Du feines Täubchen, nur herein," in which slaves relate one character’s escape from the lusty moor Monostatos. Another character is revealed to be 18 rather than 80 after serving water to her birdcatching lover Papageno. The opera centers around the potential curse to be put on Pamina and Tamino, whose blood along with Sarastro’s is required to empower the Queen of the Night. For 10 points, name this opera about an enchanted instrument by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart.;;(The) Magic Flute|(Die) Zauberflote
Biology;;Organisms cited in the 1972 paper that put forth this theory include the families related to P. Bermundensis and Gryphaea. Its proponents argued that the "high table" suppressed this theory from receiving deserved consideration. Opposing the "phyletic" form of another idea, it explains the lack of transitional forms in the fossil record and supplants Darwinian gradualism. For 10 points, name this proposed method of evolution first put forth by Niles Eldredge and Stephen Jay Gould that argues that organisms undergo most of their evolutionary shifts in relatively short periods of time.;;punc(tuated) eq(uilibri(um|a){1}?)
Literature;;In one of this author's works a student is arrested and tortured upon suspicion of murdering Jacobo and Howlands, and he wrote a cycle of one-act plays including The Rebels and This Time Tomorrow. A coffin-building competition is at the center of "A Mercedes Funeral," while thieves and robbers clash in a prison in Devil on a Cross. Important non-fiction works include Barrel of a Pen and Decolonising the Mind. One of his better-known novels concerns the conflicting revolutionary sentiments of the farmer Mugo, while Abdulla, Karega, Wanja, and Munira are accused of burning a brothel in Petals of Blood. For 10 points, name this Kenyan author, best known for A Grain of Wheat.;;(James) Ngugi (Wa) (Thiong'o)
World History;;He enlisted theologians Martinus Gosia and Bulgarus to press forth his claims at the Diet of Roncaglia, and his further religious intrigues led him to sign the Treaty of Anangi, deposing the man whom he had installed as antipope Calixtus III. A contemporary source on his life was written by Otto of Freising and describes his struggles with Alexander III, with Roger of Sicily, and with Henry the Lion. For 10 points, name this Holy Roman Emperor whose most fatal conflict was with the Saleph River, where he drowned in 1190 while attempting to join the Third Crusade, possibly due to the weight of his colorful beard.;;Frederick (I|Lombard|Barbarossa){1}?
Literature;;In one play by this author, the union leader David Roberts leads a strike in a steel mill managed by the ultimately impotent John Anthony. The husband of Bianca Dallison falls in love with then abandons her model, Ivy Barton, In one of his novels, and Swan Song, The Silver Spoon, and White Monkey comprise his A Modern Comedy. Worsted Skeynes is the setting of his novel The Country House, while Irene, Annette, and Old Jolyon are members of the group at the center of his best-known work. For 10 points, name this author of a cycle of novels including To Let, In Chancery, and The Man Of Property about the family of Soames Forsyte.;;(John) Galsworthy
Music;;This work shares its name with a Jorge Luis Borges story about the condemned Nazi criminal Otto Dietrich zur Linde. Triplets in the timpani pervade this work's second movement, while a Viennese waltz appears at the beginning of this work's fourth movement. Fugues close movement six, "For here we have no lasting home," and movement three, "Lord, make me to know my end". The composer's opus no. 45, it is often compared favorably with the composer's later Triumphlied. Begun after the 1854 suicide attempt of Robert Schumann, this is, for 10 points, what non-liturgical work in commemoration of the death of the composer's mother by Johannes Brahms.;;(German|Deutsches){1}? Requiem
Philosophy;;He expanded his most influential idea in a book of case studies, The Essential Tension. He emphasized the role of textbooks in developing consensus and said that "incommensurability" makes objective evaluation difficult. He described puzzle-solving as the "normal" activity and explained that even observation can be theory-dependent. In the same work, he said that "crisis" is caused by the accumulation of unsolved "anomalies," which then leads to paradigm shift. For 10 points, name this physicist and philosopher who explained the development of science in The Structure of Scientific Revolutions.;;(Thomas) (Samuel) Kuhn
Pop Culture;;This writer of the comic strip The Angriest Dog in the World directed an earlier, less sexy version of the video for Chris Isaak's "Wicked Games". He used that song for a movie that included Sheryl Lee and Diane Ladd as Glinda and the Wicked Witch of the East, the Wizard of Oz-based Wild at Heart. In another of his films, club Silencio is one mystery facing Rita and Betty, played by Laura Harring and Naomi Watts. He also created a Dennis Hopper character who demands bourbon and sniffs from a gas mask. For 10 points, name this director of Eraserhead, Blue Velvet, and Mulholland Drive who created Twin Peaks.;;(David) Lynch
Chemistry;;A 2002 Science article estimated that 1% of the world's energy consumption was used in it, and it is one of the largest consumers of natural gas as both an energy source and hydrogen feedstock. It was patented in 1908 by a chemist working for BASF. It eliminated the need for a key import that came primarily from Chile, and was instrumental in enabling the Green Revolution. While uranium was originally used as a catalyst, today the primary catalyst is a treated form of magnetite that is injected into a reaction chamber at nearly 800 Kelvins and 250 atmospheres of pressure. For 10 points, name this chemical process that is named after a German chemist and is the primary method of producing biologically useful nitrogen.;;(Fritz) Haber (Process)|Haber-Bosch (Process)
United States History;;Jacob Brinkerhoff drafted it on behalf of its namesake, who was later apppointed to the Senate when Simon Cameron was made Secretary of War. William Yancey reacted to it by putting forth the Alabama Platform, which was later adopted by John C. Breckenridge's campaign. It was twice rejected by the Senate, after passing the House attached to Preston King's appropriations bill and to a bill funding the negotiation of the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, in 1846 and 1847. For 10 points, name this rider introduced by a Pennsylvania congressman, which proposed to ban slavery in territory gained from the Mexican War.;;(the) Wilmot Proviso
Religion/Mythology;;The marriage of one of this god's children was prevented when the suitor, the dwarf Alvis, spent all night in a test of wits and ended up being turned to stone. Another of his kids lifted Hrungnir's leg at age three, fitting since that child is the god of strength and strongest entity in the universe. Another of his children was the god of wrath and patron of the berserkers. Veggdegg, Saeming, and Yngve, Lorride and Throd are some of his offspring, as are Magni and Modi, and he fathered such children with both Jarnsaxa and Sif. For 10 points, Magni and Modi will inherit Mjollnir after Ragnarok from what Norse god of thunder?;;Thor
World Histroy;;Austin Bourke's The Visitation of God is a history of this event, which was slightly mitigated by John Heslow's extraction methods. It was worsened by the bungled "roads to nowhere" make-work program put forth by Charles Trevelyan, who was charged with handling this matter by Prime Minister Russell. Known locally as An Gorta Mor, it spurred the use of "coffin ships" for the emigration of 1.5 million people to North America and led to the repeal of the Corn Laws. Caused by phytophthora infestans, which triggers "late blight," it caused over a million deaths. For 10 points, name this 1845 to 1849 crop failure in Ireland.;;(Irish) Potato Famine|Great (Hunger|Famine){1}?|An Gorta Mor
Art;;He claimed to be related to Carlotta, the wife of Emperor Maximilian, and dabbled in cannibalism, recommending women's brains in vinaigrette as a tasty meal. His first important work, "Creation", was typical of his style, which depicted simplified figures in crowded, shallow spaces. Living at "The Blue House", where he served as host to an exiled Trotsky, his depiction of Lenin led to the destruction of his fresco "Man at the Crossroads". The husband of Freda Kahlo, FTP, who was this great Mexican muralist?;;(Diego) Rivera
Chemistry;;The Gibbs paradox deals with a faulty derivation of this quantity which erroneously suggests it is not an extensive variable. For a monatomic ideal gas, its value is given by the Sackur-Tetrode equation, while for a black hole it is proportional to the surface area of the event horizon. In general it is equal to Boltzmann's constant times the natural logarithm of the number of accessible states. According to the Second Law of Thermodynamics, it always increases in irreversible processes. Proposed by Rudolf Clausius and symbolized S, FTP, what is this measure of the disorder in a system?;;entropy
United States History;;As a state representative from Bridgeport, he introduced an 1879 anti-birth control law that the Supreme Court overturned in Griswold v. Connecticut.  He often played host to the elite of 19th century cultural life at his Oriental estate Iranistan. The self-styled "Prince of Humbugs", his rise to fame began with his purchase of John Scudder's American Museum, which he transformed into a forum for his promotions, including Charles S. Stratton, who he dubbed Tom Thumb. Known for organizing Jenny Lind's tour of America, FTP, who is this promoter known for the circus he ran with James Bailey?;;(P)(hineas) (T)(aylor) Barnum
Literature;;At one point the protagonist of this novel is forced to kill the rascal Giletti, which soon leads him into an affair with the actress Marietta Valsera. In his youth he joined the cause of Napoleon, killing a Prussian officer at Waterloo, but he soon returned to Italy, where he was soon mentored by Count Mosca, the lover of his aunt, Gina Pietranera. Imprisoned for killing Giletti, he soon falls in love with Clelia Conti, who helps him escape, but Clelia and his new son soon die, prompting him to retire to the title monastery on the river Po. Centering on Fabrizio del Dongo, FTP, what is this novel which with "The Red and the Black" is the masterpiece of Stendhal?;;(The) Charterhouse of Parma|(Le) Chartreuse de Parme
Geography;;The capital of this country faces the Gulf of Gonave, and its chief mountain system, the Massif du Nord, reaches its maximum height at Mount La Selle in the southeast. Its main waterway is the Artibonite River, while its most fertile region is the coastal plain known as the Plaine du Nord, which is dangerously overpopulated. These same population problems have also led to the massive deforestation which its neighbor to the east has avoided. With its capital at Port au Prince, FTP, what is this country which shares Hispanola with the Dominican Republic?;;Haiti
Religion/Mythology;;He tried to escape Manasseh's wrath by hiding in a hollow tree, but the king had it sawed in two.  His father Amoz was brother of King Amaziah, but he still took the side of the landless poor and said God would one day destroy the "city of confusion" that ruled the earth.  FTP, identify this prophet and namesake of an Old Testament book who lived through Sennacherib's attack and heralded the coming of the Messiah.;;Isaiah
Chemistry;;In discussing non-ideal gases, his name is given to the temperature at which the second virial coefficient multiplying the density vanishes. He showed that flames require air, and that sound does not travel in a vacuum. These facts appear in his 1660 work, The Spring of the Air and Its Effects, which discusses his experiments using an air pump he designed with the help of his assistant Robert Hooke. FTP name this Englishman whose law states that for an ideal gas at constant temperature, the product of pressure and volume is constant.;;(Robert) Boyle
Literature;;This author of the plays "The Confidential Clerk" and "The Elder Statesman" wrote fan letters to Groucho Marx and kept a picture of him on his mantle beside Yeats and Paul Valery.  His second volume of poetry, "Ara vos prec", carries his early cynicism to extremes, as seen in works like "Gerontion" and the Sweeney poems, while his conversion to Anglicanism in the late 1920s is reflected in his late poems, including "Journey of the Magi", "Ash Wednesday", and "Four Quartets". FTP, name this poet probably best known for his long poem "The Waste Land".;;(T(.))(homas) (S(.))(tearns) Eliot
World History;;Their gods included Illapa, the god of thunder, Mamaquilla, a moon goddess, and Viracocha, the great creator. Lesser powers were "huacas," spirits that inhabited natural objects such as rocks and mountains. None of them could save Huayna Capac from smallpox in 1527, or prevent civil war between his sons Huascar and Atahualpa. FTP, name this empire centered on Cuzco which was conquered by the forces of Francisco Pizarro.;;Inca(n(s)|s) (empire)
Psychology;;One founder was inspired by his attendance at lectures by Ehrenfels on recognizing transposed melodies. Based on concepts such as pragnanz, closure, and the constancy phenomenon, the legitimatacy of this school of thought was buttressed by studies of problem solving among the apes of Tenerife. It began as a reaction to Wundtian structuralism and later targeted behaviorism, arguing that a complex stimulus can't be broken down into atomistic thought units or stimulus-response components. Founded by Koffka, K?hler, and Wertheimer, FTP name this school of psychology focused mainly on perceptual phenomena such as the phi phenomenon, whose name is German for "whole".;;Gestalt (psychology)
Philosophy;;When a Sicilian tyrant tried to force the names of his associates from him, he bit off a piece of his tongue and spat it at his tormentors. The son of Teleutagoras, Plato said he was "tall and fair" and about age 40 at the time of his three-way conversation with Socrates and Parmenides. Using arguments like the "millet seed pile", he argued for belief in the "one" argued for by Parmenides, at the same time using arguments like the moving columns and the arrow to refute his opponents. FTP, name this philosopher known for attacking the concepts of motion and change with his paradoxes.;;Zeno (of Elea)
Biology;;Nicholas Cage and Bill Gates are major collectors of the remains of these creatures, whose Paradoxides harlani version grew to a length of 18 inches. Their compound eyes, the oldest visual system known, were used for hunting and were easily preserved because each was a calcite rod. They consisted of a thorax, to which was attached a head region called a cephalon and a tail region called a pyrgidium. FTP, what were these arthropods of the Cambrian Period named for their three body divisions?;;Trilobite(s)
World History;;Orde Wingate helped him organize an army of liberation, after which he was guarded around the clock by lions and cheetahs. Establishing himself as a progressive reformer as governor of Sidamo and Harer provinces, he soon overthrew his rival Lij Yasu, and was crowned emperor of his country after the death of the Empress Zauditu in 1930. Forced out of power by Marxist elements in 1974, he had earlier been forced into exile with the invasion by Italy in 1936. FTP, who was this emperor of Ethiopia?;;Haile (Selassie) (I)|Ras Tafari|Ras Makonnen
Music;;The section entitled "Dorabella" simulates the hesitancy of speech of a lady named Miss Penny, while "B.G.N". contains a famous cello solo. The 11th part was inspired by a swimming bulldog; the 5th paid tribute to the son of Matthew Arnold; and the 14th depicted the composer himself. Some have proposed Auld Lang Syne as the "hidden" theme indicated to be in it by the composer, who achieved his first success with the work. FTP, what is this set of variations on an original theme of Edward Elgar, named for their inscrutable nature?;;(the) Enigma (Variations)
Literature;;Early in his life, he worships the Indian Gray Beaver as a god, but is soon separated from his mother Kiche and ends up under the control of the coward Beauty Smith, who turns him into a professional fighter. Living under the credo "eat or be eaten", he experiences success until a fight with a bulldog who is impervious to his slashing attacks. Saved from death by Weedon Scott, he is domesticated, and later saves Weedon's father from an escaped convict. FTP, who is this wolf, the title character of the companion novel to "The Call of the Wild"?;;White Fang
Religion/Mythology;;One source claims that these creatures laid agate eggs, while another holds that a poisoned liquid will change color if served in a cub made for its claws. Although they waged war with the Amazons, a better known conflict is their frequent strife with the Arimaspians, who frequently raided their mines and stole their gold. FTP, what were these mythical monsters with the body of a lion and head and wings of an eagle?;;gr(iffin(s)|yphon(s)){1}?
Art;;The last of the artist's submissions to the Salon, it was first shown there in 1882. A bowl with tangerines rests near a bottle with the Bass Ale label in the bottom right corner, while a pair of legs in yellow stockings and green shoes is seen in the top left corner. The appearance of the central figure is echoed in the champagne bottles near her right hand, while a slanted mirror behind the central woman reveals a gentleman customer. Set in a famous Parisian nightclub, FTP name this Eduoard Manet painting.;;(A) Bar at the Folies-Bergere
Astronomy;;It is the only planet with four satellites within its Roche limit, and it radiates 2.6 times more heat than it receives from the sun, producing a turbulent atmosphere home to a continually shifting series of streaks dubbed "the Scooter".  Also known for two large dark ovals known as the "Small Dark Spot" and "Great Dark Spot", Voyager 2 discovered a number of new satellites, including Thalassa, Despina, Larissa, and Proteus. FTP, what is this planet orbited by Nereid and Triton, usually the eighth planet from the sun?;;Neptune
United States History;;The victors in this battle failed to follow up with an assault on Dorchester Heights, rendering their previous efforts pointless. Israel Putnum held the namesake location, but the fighting revolved around a nearby spot ordered fortified by General Artemis Ward. William Howe then led a series of assaults on the colonial forces, and after three days of heavy losses took the field, but only after colonial ammunition ran so low that Colonel William Prescott ordered his troops not to fire until they saw the whites of the enemy's eyes. FTP, what was this 1775 battle actually fought at Breed's Hill?;;(Battle of) Bunker Hill
Literature;;At one point the protagonist is taken in by the Reverend St. John Rivers, who she soon learns is her cousin. As a child she spent ten years with her hateful aunt-in-law Mrs. Reed of Gateshead Hall, but experienced happiness at Lowood School, where she soon became a teacher. Taking a job as governess of Adela Varens, she moved to Thornfield Manor, where she eventually agreed to marry her employer, Edward Rochester, only to discover on their wedding day the secret of his marriage to Bertha Mason, who he had kept hidden on the third floor. FTP, what is this novel, the best known work by Charlotte Bronte?;;Jane Eyre
Astronomy;;Their namesake features can be described with the density-wave theory developed by Lin and Shu. In 1920, before telescopes capable of resolving these objects were developed, Shapley and Curtis debated their nature. Fischer and Tully discovered that they obey a velocity-luminosity relation similar to the Faber-Jackson law for ellipticals. In about one-third, the arms extend from a bar-shaped center. The Whirlpool, Andromeda, and Milky Way are all examples of, FTP, what type of galaxy named for its shape?;;spiral (galax(y|ies){1}?)
United States History;;He had affairs with wives of his generals Gates and Biddle and may have caught a fatal chill leaving the house of a mistress.  He refused to visit France because he couldn't master the language and inherited a plantation named after his brother Lawrence's commander against the Spanish in the West Indies, Admiral Vernon.  FTP, name this man, the first president of the U.S.;;(George) Washington
United States History;;Jonas Caldwell, Patrick Carr, Samuel Gray, and Samuel Maverick were among the victims.  Robert Treat Paine led the prosecution, but failed to win the conviction of Thomas Preston and four other men represented by Josiah Quincy and John Adams¡ªdespite enflamed public opinion resulting, in part, from Paul Revere's depiction of the event.  For 10 points¡ªname this skirmish of March 1770, in which Crispus Attucks and four other men were killed by British soldiers.;;(the) Boston Massacre
Geography;;Its name is derived from the Guarauno meaning "a place to paddle," since it is one of the few major navigable rivers in the region.  It begins on Mount Delgado Chalbaud, passes through stone plateaus called tepuys on its way through the Guyana Shield, forms part of the border with Colombia, and enters the Caribbean through a delta after traversing the planes known as the llanos.  For 10 points¡ªname this longest river of Venezuela.;;Orinoco (River)
Literature;;He developed an interest in the supernatural soon before he died, producing such works as The Political History of the Devil and An Essay on the History and Reality of Apparitions years after he wrote such early English ghost stories as "The Ghost of Dorothy Dingley".  He wrote the mock ode "A Hymn to the Pillory" in prison in 1703, soon after writing the satiric poem "The Shortest Way with the Dissenters.," but is better known for the Jounral of the Plague Year and the novel Moll Flanders.  For 10 points, name this Englishman who retold the story of Alexander Selkirk in his novel Robinson Crusoe.;;(Daniel) Defoe|Foe
Biology;;Like GABA and glutamic acid, this nonessential amino acid can inhibit neurotransmitter signals in the central nervous system.  Though it is sometimes found in alpha helices, it is more common in triple helical molecules, such as collagen.  It is the only amino acid which is not optically active, due to its lack of a chiral center.  For 10 points¡ªname this amino acid whose possession of a single hydrogen as its R-component makes it the simplest amino acid.;;glycine
Literature;;Early in this work the author considers a scenario in which a small group of people has been placed on an island and cut off from society, forcing them to create their own government. Following this, the author attacks the unnatural state of a monarchy and the undesired effects of a hereditary succession system, as well as the complexities and absurdities in the English constitution, finally concluding that it is time for the colonies to declare independence and establish a government which will provide the greatest security at the least expense. FTP, what is this pamphlet which helped to provoke the American Revolution, written by Thomas Paine?;;Common Sense
Religion/Mythology;;Early accounts stating that this Arthurian hero's strength increased until noon and then waned hint at his origins in solar myth.  The son of Lot and Margause, he defeats and kills his mother's lover Sir Lamerok and Morgan Le Fey's son Sir Uwayne. He avenges the death of his father by killing Pellinore with his brother Gaheris, but is killed after twice challenging Launcelot to single combat. Known as "the Courteous", he is denied the Grail on account of his sins. For 10 points, identify this Arthurian hero who beheaded the Green Knight.;;(Sir) Gaw(ai|y){1}?n|Gwalchmei|Gauvain|Galvanus
World History;;Critics mocked him as "Comrade Lavatory Lover," because he insisted on equipping the Moscow Metro with the most up-to-date toilets while serving as regional party chief in the 1930s. During much of the 1940s he headed the Ukrainian Communist Party, where he organized the post-WWII reconstruction of the region. In his famous Secret Speech of 1956 he established the tenor of his time in power, secured after his defeat of his rivals Bulganin, Malenkov, and Molotov. Known for his role in the Cuban Missile Crisis, FTP, who was this successor of Stalin as head of the Soviet Union?;;(Nikita) (Sergeevich) Khrushchev
Literature;;She disapproves of the mentality represented by her in-law, Squire Winter.  While on vacation in Venice, she employs the gondoliers Daniele and Giovanni, while unbeknownst to her, Bertha Coutts has returned to Wragby, thwarting her plans.  Her family includes Hilda, her elder sister, and Sir Malcolm, her father, who disapprove of her husband Clifford.  She too despises Clifford, and as a result carries on an affair with the gamekeeper Oliver Mellors.  FTP, name this titular noblewoman of a once controversial D.H. Lawrence novel named for her lover.;;(Lady) (Constance|Connie) Chatterley
World History;;His father, Samuel, was a painter who specialized in drawing animals, and gave him an early background in sketching and tracing that helped him in his later career.  After tracing the scenes from the walls of the tombs at Bani Hassan, he worked under Flinders Petrie, who thought he would never become a competent excavator.  But after resigning from the British Antiquities Service, he won the sponsorship of Lord Carnarvon.  For 10 points¡ªname this achaeologist, the discoverer of the tomb of Tutankhamen.;;(Howard) Carter
Noncomputational Math;;GNU Guile is one language derived from it. It has a 1300 page draft standard, prompting the development of the Scheme dialect, a version stressing simplicity which is often taught in introductory CS classes and is specified in only fifty pages.  Invented by John McCarthy at MIT, it is known for its ability to manipulate information contained in parentheses, including other programs, leading to its extensive use in the field of artificial intelligence. FTP, what is this programming language whose name is short for "list processing"?;;LISP
Music;;This musician got his start replacing the legendary King Oliver in Kid Ory's band, and after serving as lead cornet soloist for Fletcher Henderson's band recorded his early masterpieces, the Hot Five and Hot Seven recordings, which included songs like "Potato Head Blues". He abandoned the cornet for his trademark instrument, and after forming his "All-Star" sextet became renown for both his non-stop tour schedule. and for his command of the high registers and melodic inventiveness, which contrasted with the gruff voice he used to became the first great jazz singer, incorporating scat singing on recordings of "Hello, Dolly!" and "Mack the Knife". FTP, who was this great trumpeter known as "Satchmo"?;;(Louis) Armstrong
World History;;He made a treaty with John XII extending the temporal power of the papacy, with a clause giving him the ability to ratify their election, and shortly thereafter deposed the pope and replaced him with Leo VIII. The brother of St. Bruno, he had to return home to quash his son Liudolf's rebellion soon after assuming the title King of the Lombards, and later fought back a Magyar invasion at the Battle of Lechfeld. The son of Henry the Fowler, FTP, who was this man who in 962 was crowned the first Holy Roman Emperor?;;Otto (I|(the) first|the Great)
Physics;;His name is given to both the "A coefficient of spontaneous emission" and the "B coefficient" used in the quantum theory of radiation, while in astronomy his name is used with that of de Sitter's to designate a type of universe in which the mean density of matter is precisely matched to the critical density. One of his equations holds that the maximum kinetic energy of electrons emitted in the photoemissive effect is hf minus W, while in chemistry his name is given to the element with atomic number 99. With Bose the namesake of the fifth state of matter, FTP, who is this scientist probably best known for his equation E equals mc squared?;;(Albert) Einstein
Literature;;In one plot development, Mauricio Babilonia is paralyzed after being shot due to his tryst with Meme, whose outgoing nature leads her to invite 72 of her friends home from boarding school. The fortune-teller Pilar Ternera and the gypsy Melquiades provide guidance to the members of the central family, which is held together for many year by Ursula Iguaran in spite of the turmoil caused by the rebellion of Colonel Aureliano Buendia. Set in the town of Macondo, FTP, what is this masterpiece of magical realism by Gabriel Garcia Marquez?;;One Hundred Years of Solitude|Cien a(n|ñ)os de Soledad
United States History;;The efforts of Edwin Sandys were greatly responsible for its formation. Originally consisting of 14 members, it soon expanded to 22 members who conducted business under the guidance of secretary John Pory. Originally established by George Yeardley, it governed alone during the Puritan Revolution, and consisted of two representatives from each settlement. FTP, what was this Virginia colonial assembly, the first elective governing body in the colonies?;;(House of) Burgesses
Art;;Later paintings like Persephone and Bower Meadow were created during his time as invalid recluse.  This followed a period that included such canvases as La Ghirlandata and Monna Vanna, but his prolific output would end after he disinterred some writings he had buried with his wife in 1869.  Today he is known for such paintings as The Girlhood of Mary Virgin, Ecce Ancilla Domini, and Beata Beatrix.  FTP, name this English artist, the leader of the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood.;;(Dante) (Gabriel) Rossetti
World History;;Later leaders of this family included Alexander Jannaeus, Queen Salome Alexandria, Aristobulus I, and John Hyrcanus. Alternatively named for their ancestor Hashmon, they were ousted from power by Pompey in 63 BCE. They rose to prominence with the rebellion of Mattathias of Modin, and after his death his cause was continued by his sons Simon, Jonathon, and Judas, who was the most successful due to his defeat of Antiochus IV. FTP, what was this Jewish family whose rededicating of the recently-desecrated Temple of Jerusalem is celebrated during Hanukkah?;;Maccabee(s)
Biology;;Composed of a median lobe and two lateral lobes, this organ's main product is a fluid composed of a mixture of acid phosphatase, citric acid, and fibrolysin. A conglomerate of 30 to 50 tubular or saclike glands surrounded by interstitial tissue, it is a chestnut-shaped organ directly beneath the bladder and surrounding the urethra which adds secretions to the sperm. FTP, what is this male organ known to become enlarged in the elderly?;;prostate (gland)
Literature;;His trip to Russia inspired the non-fiction work "All-Out on the Road to Smolensk" and the novel "All Night Long". He began writing as early as 1928, first publishing two novellas, "The Bastard" and "Poor Fool". He gained some fame for stories like "Saturday Afternoon", "My Old Man's Bailing Machine", and "Country Full of Swedes", but true success came with his novels centering on grotesque families, such as "God's Little Acre". The one-time husband of Margaret Bourke-White, FTP, who is this novelist responsible for "Tobacco Road"?;;(Erskine) Caldwell
World History;;As a result of his political activities he was kidnapped for 10 days while staying in London during his worldwide travels. Author of "Fundamentals of National Reconstruction", late in his life he organized the Whampoa Military Academy to encourage his proposed Northern Expedition. The first graduate of the College of Medicine in Hong Kong, he soon failed to instigate an uprising in Canton, and later founded the Alliance Society to promote nationalism, democracy, and livelihood, his "Three Principles of the People". FTP, who was this Chinese revolutionary, the first head of government after the overthrow of the Qing dynasty?;;Sun (Yat- Sen|Zhong Shan)
World History;;After the founding of Ayuthia, the power of this empire declined.  This had already begun when their capital was sacked by the rival Chams' state.  Its golden age began with the rule of Yasovarman I, a descendant of Jayavarman II, who had united this empire.  It held sway over the lower Menam and left its mark with the magnificent temple complex of Angkor Wat.  FTP, name this ancient kingdom of Laos and Cambodia that lent its name to a 20th-century Cambodian communist group known as the "rouge".;;Khmer (empire)
Music;;Its creator described it as "very loud and noisy," and admitted that he was only interested in the lucrative commission.  Composed for the consecration of the Cathedral of Christ the Savior for the 1882 Moscow Exhibition, it debuted on August 20th to immediate accolades, and was eventually made the composer's Opus number 49.  Using the Marseillaise and the Tsarist national anthem to depict two armies, it uses bells, cannons, and a fireworks finale to commemorate the 70th anniversary of the Battle of Borodino.  FTP, name this famous Tchaikovsky overture named for the year Borodino was fought.;;(The) 1812 Overture (in E-Flat) (Major)
Chemistry;;As a trace element, it is essential to human red blood cell development, in that it is required by Vitamin B12.  Isolated in 1753 by Georg Brandt, it has since been detected in Egyptian statuettes and glass at the ruins of Pompeii. Its German name was originally applied to ores thought to carry copper, but which were actually arsenic-bearing ores of this metal, perhaps explaining why its German name refers to goblins that live in mines. Most commonly used in magnetic alloys and its eponymous blue pigment, FTP, identify this chemical element with atomic number 27 and symbol Co.;;cobalt
World History;;Troops led by Karl von Bulow reached the site at about 6 PM, pressuring the eastern French flank.  Battalions from the Imperial Guard were moved from the main battle to prevent a rear attack, while La Haye Sainte was taken by Michel Ney.  The Imperial Guard arrived at about 7 pm, but so did von Zieten's corps, which reinforced the Duke of Wellington's troops.  After Ney's forces were repulsed, the Allies advanced, forcing a French retreat at, FTP, what June 18, 1815 battle, Napoleon's final defeat?;;(Battle of) Waterloo
Religion/Mythology;;In order to obtain them, Odin wounded himself and hung from Yggdrasil for nine days and nights, gazing into Niflheim plunged in deep thought.  Having won the knowledge he sought, he placed these upon the claws of the bear, the teeth of Sleipnir, Gungnir, and countless other things, giving him power over all.  FTP, identify these characters used first to signify magic and mystery and later for documents and records, the earliest alphabet of the Nordic people.;;run(e(s)|ic){1}?
Literature;;It opens with a solitary watchman who notices a light, signaling the title character's approach.  The title character returns to Argos after the fall of Troy, describing how his galley was the only one to make it out of a squall.  With him, he brings Cassandra, who foresees his murder as well as her own.  Unbeknownst to him, his wife has taken his cousin Aegisthus as her paramour.  She proceeds to murder him in his bath, turn on Cassandra, and have Aegisthus use his bodyguards to exact control over Argos.  FTP, name this Aeschylus play, the first component of the Oresteia trilogy, which details the murder of Orestes's father by his mother Clytemnestra.;;Agamemnon
Geography;;The city of San Juan del Sur sits on the southwest coast of this nation, but San Juan del Norte, which lies on its east coast, is further south.  Bluefields, on its Caribbean coast, is a center for drug trafficking. Le¨®n, which was its capital until 1855, is its second-largest city, while the city of Granada lies on its namesake lake, the largest in Central America.  FTP, name this nation with capital at Managua.;;Nicaragua
Biology;;In 2002, this compound was the first to be used successfully to prevent muscle loss in certain lung cancer patients.  It can be used to treat asthma and diabetes, and in the body it acts as a neurotransmitter, but its most important function was discovered by Fritz Lipmann and Herman Kalkar in 1941.  In cells, it readily loses a phosphate ion by hyrdolysis, providing the means for organelles to carry out biological processes.  The predominant source of energy in living cells, FTP what is this compound named in part for the D-ribose component's possession of three phosphate groups.;;ATP|adenosine triphosphate
United States History;;He personally killed 29 men and had 30 horses shot out from under him, prompting him to declare, "I finished a horse ahead".  During the Civil War, he rose from private to lieutenant general, taking part in the defense of Fort Donelson and constantly raiding Union supply lines.  Known for his bravery and such bright observations as "get there first with the most men," he is widely reviled for his assault on Fort Pillow, where his troops executed some 300 surrendering black soldiers, women, and children.  FTP, name this Confederate soldier, who later acted as the first Grand Wizard of the Ku Klux Klan.;;(Nathan) (Bedford) Forrest
Miscellaneous;;According to "Am I Annoying" dot com, she was the fourth-most annoying person of 2001.  Rumor has it that she guest-starred on Miami Vice, and she might be known around Seattle as Ree Perris, the writer of the play "For Women Only".  However, she is probably best-known for her recent works, including the book Keepin' It Real and a series of ubiquitous late-night TV infomercials displaying her garish clothing and Caribbean accent.  FTP, name this "psychic" spokeswoman for mindandspirit.com.;;Miss Cleo
Literature;;One scene reveals the heroine, accompanied by her lapdog, Shock, triumphing over the Baron in a game of ombre.  However, despite the protection of the Sylph Ariel, the Baron perpetrates the titular act, and chaos ensues, aggravated by the Gnome Umbriel.  After lamentations and an epic battle fought with a bodkin, the title object is made into a constellation that "the Muse shall consecrate to fame, and ¡®midst the stars inscribe Belinda's name".  Describing "what dire offense from amorous causes springs, what mighty contests rise from trivial things"..., FTP, what is this famous five canto mock epic by Alexander Pope?;;(The) Rape of the Lock
Physics;;In one of these processes, a neutron is formed and a neutrino emitted when an electron and proton collide, a process known as K-capture.  In another type, a proton decays, becoming a neutron, and a positron is emitted.  In the most common type, an electron and neutrino are emitted, and a new proton is formed in the nucleus from a neutron.  FTP, name this type of radioactive decay characterized by a unit increase in atomic number but no corresponding increase in atomic mass, whose rays are more penetrating than those of alpha decay.;;beta (decay|reaction)
World History;;This dynasty included the Yung Lo reign of Ch'eng Tsu.  Because Ch'eng Tsu feared that his nephew might return to claim the throne, he ordered naval expeditions which reached as far west as Aden and Hormuz.  He also moved the capital to Peking from Nanking, where it had been established in 1368 by Chu Y¨¹an-Chang, who ruled as Hung-wu.  Sandwiched between the rule of the Yuan and the Manchus, FTP, name this Chinese dynasty, known for its porcelain vases.;;Ming (Dynasty)
Art;;It is set during the early evening, as a full moon may be seen in the upper right corner, and pale orange streaks flow diagonally across a sky with six stars.  The title character is a dark-skinned woman whose left arm can't be seen.  She is dressed in a multicolored striped outfit, and has apparently been traveling barefoot through the desert with nothing but a walking stick, a lute, and a large red vase, and appears to be blissfully unaware of the large male lion that sniffs her head.  FTP, identify this painting by Henri Rousseau.;;(The) Sleeping Gypsy|(La) Bohmienne Endormie
World History;;Two legends describe his death: one posits that Caligula ordered him to commit suicide in 39 CE, perhaps for having led an attack on his enemies on Mt. Gerizim, while the other posits that he and his wife died peacefully after having embraced Christianity.  Taking his name from the term for a freedman's hat, he received his position due to the support of Sejanus, whose protection allowed him to challenge Jewish religious sensibility, as in the time he hung worship images of Tiberius throughout Jerusalem.  Faced with his most famous decision, he supposedly "washed his hands of it," saying of the condemned "¡­I find no fault in him".  FTP, identify this Roman procurator of Judea, the official responsible for condemning Jesus to crucifixion.;;(Pontius) Pilate
Literature;;The title characters are described as having "dried voices when (they) whisper", uttering sounds as "quiet and meaningless as rat's feet over broken glass". Its fifth canto begins with a parody of "Here we go round the mulberry bush", replacing the bush with the prickly pear. Opening with an epigraph from Heart of Darkness and a dedication offering "a penny for the Old Guy", it concludes with an imperfect repetition of the Lord's Prayer, having earlier described "stuffed men leaning together, headpiece filled with straw". FTP, what is this T.S. Eliot poem which ends with the words "This is the way the world ends, Not with a bang but a whimper"?;;(The) Hollow Men
United States History;;For a short time commander of chief in Ireland starting in 1782, his play, The Maid of the Oaks, was performed in honor of William Howe and his mistress, Mrs. Loring, but was not nearly as successful as The Heiress.  While a military commander, his immense baggage train consisted mostly of champagne, and hindered his troops as they tried to link up with St. Leger and Howe in Albany after taking Fort Ticonderoga in July of 1777, leading to his defeat by Horatio Gates and Benedict Arnold.  FTP, identify this British major general who surrendered at Saratoga.;;(John) Burgoyne
Biology;;These members of order Anoplura seldom grow over 1/12 of an inch.  They are capable of spreading themselves in cramped living quarters over 50 degrees Fahrenheit, especially near towels, bedding, and toilets, and can cause skin irritation and eczema. On occasion they may be found on eyebrows, eyelashes, and armpit hair, but as their scientific name Phthirus Pubis indicates, they are most often spread from genital region to genital region by means of close sexual contact.  FTP, identify this type of louse, given its popular name because its front legs resemble the claws of a certain crustacean.;;crab(s)|(crab|pubic){1}? lice;;lice
Music;;Act II of this opera includes the strophic aria "Voi che sapete!" in which a page expresses his love for Barbarina in song.  The act begins with the cavatina "Porgi Amor" in which Rosina prays that her husband will love her again.  Almaviva wants to partake in relations with Susanna, but is foiled when Rosina takes her place in, FTP, what Mozart opera based on a Beaumarchais play about the title character's nuptial affairs?;;(The) Marriage of Figaro|(Le) nozze di Figaro
Psychology;;This psychologist initially studied under and entered analysis with Karl Abraham, and later founded the American Journal of Psychoanalysis. Holding that men felt the urge to justify themselves in fields other than birth, a term she dubbed "womb envy", she rejected many of Freud's ideas, including "penis envy", leading to her expulsion from the New York Psychoanalytic Institute in 1941. Known for her emphasis on the environmental and social reasons for neuroses, FTP, who is this psychoanalyst, author of Feminine Psychology and New Ways in Psychoanalysis?;;(Karen) Horney
Literature;;In one incident, he pushed a soldier out of his yard, leading to a charge of sedition of which he was acquitted.  He declared that "all he knew was in the Bible," and designed a set of sketches for the Book of Job.  Explaining the new mythology that he created in The Book of Los, he said, "I must create a system or be enslaved by another man's".  Author of Jerusalem and The Marriage of Heaven and Hell, he described his most famous collection of poetry as "the two contrary states of the human soul".  FTP, identify this author of Songs of Innocence and Experience.;;(William) Blake
Philosophy;;First used in Russian literature to describe Pushkin, Prince Peter Kropotkin later defined this doctrine as a struggle for individual freedom, and its positive aspects are also highlighted in N.G Chenyshevsky's What is to Be Done?.  A crude form of positivism and materialism, it relied on science alone as the source of truth.  FTP, name this skeptical philosophy whose name is derived from the Latin for "nothing".;;nihilism
Religion/Mythology;;In this religion, the outside world is referred to as "Babylon" and its major scripture is the "Holy Piby".  Meditation is helped by the use of ganja and the deity is known as Jah.  Its practitioners often wear woolen caps of red and gold, although many of them quit the religion in 1974 after its leader's death.  FTP, name this religion associated with pot and reggae and the veneration of Haile Selassie.;;Rastafarian(ism)
World History;;The decline of this family became irreversible when the countship passed to the House of Chatillon.  The zenith of its power was reached when it was combined with Champagne under the leadership of Eudes II.  Founded by Thibaut the Cheat, its hereditary dominion extended from the Indre River to the Eure.  It entered British history when Henry became bishop of Winchester and his brother set aside Matilda for the throne.  FTP, name the short-lived English royal house of King Stephen.;;Blois
Literature;;Characters encountered in this novel include Roland Major, Denver D. Doll, and Ed Dunkel. Describing the narrator's adventures in San Francisco with Remi Boncoeur, his trip to Mexico with Stan Shepard., and his time in New Orleans being mentored by Bull Lee, it is an account of the narrator's time spent among the circle of Carlo Marx and Dean Moriarty. Narrated by Sal Paradise, FTP, what is this novel, the best known work by Jack Kerouac?;;On the Road
Biology;;In humans and some animals its most notable form may be ptyalin.  First purified from malt in 1835 by Anselme Payen and Jean Persoz, its discovery prompted the theorization of enzymes.  Important in the brewing process of some beers, this enzyme is also known as "diastase".  It hydrolyzes starch to create glucose, maltose and the limit-dextrins.  Necessary for the digestion of carbohydrates, FTP, name this enzyme most well known for its role in saliva.;;Amylase
Psychology;;The explanation for this concept's invention was put forth in a letter its originator wrote to Fliess in which he said that a long train-trip may have given him the opportunity to be sexually aroused by a certain naked individual. Introduced in the paper A SpecialTtype of Choice of Object Made By Men, it was famously used by Ernest Jones to explain Hamlet's behavior. It's devisor held that it was one manifestation of the early phallic stage, and that overcoming it gives rise to the superego.  FTP, identify this Freudian male analogue of the Electra Complex.;;Oedipus (Complex)
Religion/Mythology;;According to one myth, he was co-ruler of Latium with Camesus.  Other accounts list Uranus and Hecate as his parents and Camise as his wife.  He had an affair with the nymph Juturna and gave birth to the minor god Fons.  His most notable child was Tiberinus, who drowned in the Tiber River.  The first hour of each day and the first day of each month were sacred to this deity, while legions embarking for war walked through his gate in the Forum.  FTP, name this Roman god of beginnings, endings, entrances, and exits, best known for his 2-faced appearance.;;Janus
Literature;;In a house on Usher's Island, the protagonist of this story worries that his quoting from Robert Browning in his after-dinner speech will be over the listeners' heads.  However, his metaphor of the Three Graces is well received by Aunts Julia and Kate, as well as Mary Jane.  The climax is reached when the singing of "The Lass of Aughrim" causes Gretta to remember her old lover, Michael Furey, and the sight of snowflakes outside the window brings an epiphany to Gabriel Conroy.  FTP, name this last story in Dubliners, written by James Joyce.;;(The) Dead
Biology;;They contain 5 different kinds of positively-charged proteins rich in lysine and arginine residues and which are known as histones.  Known as "dyads" when duplicated, these biological structures contain a kinetochore at the centromere.  Also containing various transcription factors, they are primarily composed of a single molecule of DNA in eukaryotes.  FTP, name these structures which include X and Y varieties.;;Chromosome(s)
United States History;;This neighborhood includes a famous group of towers built single-handedly by Simon Rodilla out of discarded items such as broken glass and seashells.  According to an investigatory commission headed by John McCone, the passage of Proposition 14 precipitated the most famous event to occur here by blocking the implementation of federal fair housing legislation.  On August 11, 1965, a routine traffic stop led to $200 million in property damage, 34 deaths and 6 days of rioting.  FTP, name the Los Angeles neighborhood where this riot occurred.;;Watts
Geography;;Furnace Creek feeds into this region which is bounded on the west by the Panamint Range, which contains its highest point, Telescope Peak. Greatly popularized by the adventurer Walter Scott, its eastern border is the Amargosa Mountains, which share their name with a river which contains a small pool known as Badwater. FTP, what is this arid valley which reaches a depth of 282 feet below sea level, making it the lowest point in North America?;;Death Valley
Miscellaneous;;According to Plutarch, the first person to live in this type of structure was the first-century tribune, Livius Drusus.  One of the more well-known examples is the Farnsworth House in Illinois, designed by Mies van der Rohe, but the most notable such building includes a free standing "buffet bar" and a red brick cylinder containing the bathroom.  Due to the brick, the bathroom is the only room with any privacy in the New Canaan, Connecticut version designed by Philip Johnson.  FTP, identify this sort of structure who's residents shouldn't throw stones.;;(The) Glass House
Philosophy;;Modern editions of this philological work include the author's "Attempt at Self-Criticism" before the foreword.  Echoing Castiglione with his emphasis on music as the highest aesthetic form, the author discusses Archilochus at length before accusing Socrates of "killing" art.  Denouncing Euripides for destroying the wonderfully barbaric nature of Greek drama, the author extols the opera Tristan un Isolde as upholding the ideal Dionysian art over the Apollonian.  FTP, name this first philosophical treatise by Nietzsche, which discussed the origins of drama.;;(The) Birth of Tragedy (Out of the Spirit of Music)|Hellenism and Pessimism|(Die) Geburt der Tragoedie
Chemistry;;This element forms a passive oxide coating in air, and is obtained by heating its oxide with carbon and chlorine and then reducing the product by the Kroll process. Discovered by Gregor in 1789, its main sources are ilmenite and rutile. A white metallic transition element, its main use is in a large number of strong, light, corrosion-resistant alloys used in the construction of such machinery as ships and aircraft. FTP, what is this element with atomic number 22 and symbol Ti?;;titanium
Literature;;Early in his legal career, he studied rhetoric with Arellius Fuscus and Porcius Latro, and then became either the administrator of a prison or a mint before being promoted to judge.  Spurious works attributed to him include On Fishing and The Walnut Tree, while he defended his life's work in Ibis.  He wrote a long poem on women's cosmetics, Medicamina Faciei Femineae, and attempted to cure love in Remedia Amoris.  He composed letters between mythological heroes and their spouses in the Heroides, and in Letters from the Black Sea lamented the exile caused in part by his controversial Ars Amatoria. FTP, name this Latin poet probably best known for his Metamorphoses?;;(Publius) Ovid(ius) (Naso)
United States History;;Officially known as "Armored Cruiser #1", it was summoned to its final destination by Consul Fitzhugh Lee.  Captained by Charles Sigsbee, a 1976 investigation by Admiral Rickover contradicted the conclusion of the earlier Sampson Board of Inquiry by holding that the cause of its demise was most likely a coal burner fire rather than an externally caused explosion. At the time the largest ship ever to enter Havana harbor, FTP, remember this battleship whose 1898 sinking propelled the Spanish-American War.;;(USS) Maine
Music;;Once the deputy organist to Kerll at the Imperial Chapel, he originally studied under Heinrich Schwemmer.  His son Hieronymus became an accomplished musican in his own right, but this composer's better known student was Johann Christoph Bach.  Court organist at both Stuttgart and Nuremberg, some of his better known works include the motet Praise the Lord, the Hexachordum Apollonis arias and the Six Suites for Two Violins.  Also known for his Magnificat Fugues, FTP, name this Lutheran baroque composer of Canon in D.;;(Johann) Pachelbel
Literature;;In the climactic part of this play, Dowson, Swinburne and Baudelaire are all drunkenly quoted at length, while the sound of foghorns provides the primary metaphor of the last act. Off-stage characters include the cook Bridget and Dr. Hardy, who diagnoses Edmund's consumption.  Another symbol is the watering of the whiskey by the servant Cathleen and the dissipated son Jamie, while the mother, Mary, remembers her piano-playing days, shoots up with morphine and blames the death of Eugene on the acting career of her husband, James Tyrone.  FTP, name this semi-autobiographical play by Eugene O'Neill.;;Long Day(')s Journey Into Night
World History;;He transferred the last legion that had been under a senatorial proconsul to the command of an imperial legate.  He executed Naevius Sutorius Macro, the Praetorian prefect who made him emperor, and consecrated his own dead sister Drusilla as "Diva".  Eventually murdered by Cassius Chaerea, he had become unpopular due to mental instability and personal excesses, such as building a boat bridge across the Bay of Naples. Roman emperor from 37-41, FTP, name this son of Germanicus nicknamed "Little Boots".;;Caligula|Gaius Caesar (Germanicus)
Astronomy;;This man's namesake star is a supernova in Ophiuchus described in his book "De stella nova", while in "Dioptrice" he postulated a ray theory of light to explain vision. While professor of mathematics at Graz, he wrote "Mysterium cosmographicum", which brought him to the attention of his future mentor, whose astronomical calculations he completed as the "Rudolphine Tables". These calculations led to his most famous contributions to astronomy, found in "Astronomia nova" and "Harmonices mundi". FTP, who was this assistant to Tycho Brahe best known for his three laws of planetary motion.;;(Johannes) Kepler
Religion/Mythology;;The literary character Velutha is a member of this group. Placed below the Sudras, they do not have a varna, or color, associated with them. Recently, they have chosen to be known as "dalits", while earlier Gandhi had dubbed "Harijans" or "Children of God" in an attempt to improve their lot in life. FTP, name this group technically now known as the "Scheduled Castes", ostracized due to their employment in polluting tasks.;;Untouchable(s)
Physics;;New evidence from the Hanbury Brown-Twiss experiment indicates that electron pairs may act like these particles, which if cooled to extremely low temperatures condense and form a "super-atom".  They have integer spin measured in h-bar units, and do not obey the Pauli-exclusion principle.  A nucleus is defined as this type of particle if it has an even number of protons and neutrons.  They include weakons, gravitons, photons and gluons.  Distinguished from fermions, FTP, name this type of force carrying particles, which include Goldstone and Higgs varieties, whose name implies that they obey Bose-Einstein statistics.;;Boson(s)
United States History;;In 1807 he married his cousin Hannah Hoes, and later served two terms in the state senate before becoming a US Senator in 1821, during which time he formed the Albany Regency political machine.  After John Quincy Adams's election as President, he helped form the new Democratic Party, and in 1828 gave up the governorship of New York to become Secretary of State. The 1848 presidential candidate of the Free-Soil Party, he had won earlier on a ticket with Richard Mentor Johnson, but was cost reelection by the Panic of 1837. Known as the "Little Magician", FTP name this successor to Andrew Jackson.;;(Martin) Van Buren
Art;;This artist of House by the Railroad and Sunlight in a Cafeteria originally trained as an illustrator, and was influenced by his time studying under Robert Henri. He frequently painted urban scenes, as in 1927's Drug Store and 1930's Early Sunday Morning, and is known for his masterly use of lighting effects, as in Chop Suey.  For ten points, identify this painter of Nighthawks.;;(Edward) Hopper
Biology;;Its second layer is composed of flattened, closely packed cells containing the precursor eleidin, while its maintenance depends on cell divisions occurring in the rete mucosum of Malphighi, its bottommost section. The outermost section is the stratum corneum, and consists of dead, flattened cells composed of plates of keratin, while the basal layer contains the melanocytes which give it its color. Responsible for preventing water loss in the body, FTP, what is this outermost part of the skin?;;epidermis
Literature;;His first three plays, including "The Banqueters" and "The Babylonians", were produced by Callistratus, probably because he was considered too young to handle it himself.  Although little is known of his personal life, he is believed to have lived for a time on the island of Aegina, and was prosecuted by Cleon for mocking ambassadors from the Delian league.  "Kokalos", a play written for his son Araros, is said to have started the "New Comedy".  FTP, name this comedic playwright of Athens, author of  "The Knights", "The Frogs", and "The Birds".;;Aristophanes
Geography;;Tributaries include the Tiete and the Iguacu, while its Guaira Falls were completely submerged by the Itaipu Dam. It forms south of Brasilia, where a similarly named river joins the Rio Grande rivers.  It then flows southwest, and forms the southern border of Paraguay.  After a stretch in Argentina, it merges with the Uruguay River, and flows through Buenos Aires into the Rio de la Plata.  FTP, name this South American river, whose name might be confused with that of a vicious fish.;;Parana (River)
World History;;In 1934's "The Army of the Future", he defended a professional army based on mechinazation and mobilization.  In World War I, he fought at Verdun and spent two years, eight months in a POW camp.  He was the head of his country's provisional government following World War II, but resigned in January, 1946.  However, he was elected President in December, 1958, under the constitution of the new Fifth Republic.  FTP, name this French general and statesman who led the Free French forces during World War II.;;(Charles) de Gaulle
Physics;;Israeli physicist Yuval Ne'eman came up with this idea at the same time as its more famous discoverer, calling it by its mathematical name, SU(3).  This concept created a periodic table of strongly interacting particles, and like the elemental periodic table, was supported by discoveries that filled in gaps, most notably the omega minus particle.  Given its more common name by Murray Gell-Mann, this is FTP what framework of baryon and meson families which Gell-Mann named for the path to enlightenment in Buddhism?;;Eight fold (Way|Path){1}?
Literature;;The author of the folk history Twelve Million Black Voices and the essay "The Ethics of Living Jim Crow", his is considered to have written the first American existential novel with The Outsider, written after he moved to Paris.  He first came to public attention with stories like "Big Boy Leaves Home" and "Long Black Song", collected in the volume  Uncle Tom's Children. American Hunger served as the sequel to his autobiographical Black Boy. For ten points, name this American author best known for the novel Native Son.;;(Richard) Wright
Music;;The violin represents the moonlight, while the woman's speech is rendered on the violin and the man's on the cello. Set in a cold grove, it depicts the woman's confession that she is bearing another man's child and his response that they will raise it together. Originally scored as a string sextet, it is based on a poem by Richard Dehmel. FTP, what is this pioneering atonal work, the opus 4 of Arnold Schoenberg?;;Verklarte Nachte|Transfigured Night
Miscellaneous;;Implements used include the chawan, the natsume, and the chashaku, and any one of several kakemono can also be used, and are usually found in the tokonoma. Taking place in the cha-shitsu, in the 16th century Sen Rikyu perfected its wabi, a set of strict rules which constrain the actions of both the host and the guest. FTP, identify this ritual, whose deep philosophical and aesthetic meaning goes much further than simply enjoying a brewed beverage.;;(Japanese) tea ceremony
Literature;;The central male figure of this poem is described as possessing "coal-black curls" and wearing a "silver bugle" and a shield that "sparkled on the yellow field" while passing though the "purple night", but only comes to the attention of the titular figure after she hears him sing "tirra lirra". Only the reapers who harvest the barley hear her singing in the gray tower where she is fated to weave a magic, colorful web while only looking on the world through a mirror which cracks when she falls in love with Lancelot, invoking a curse which leads to her death. FTP, what is this poem set in Camelot by Alfred, Lord Tennyson?;;(The) Lady of Shalott
United States History;;One of the major causes of the tension preceding it was the trampling of native corn fields by livestock belonging to colonists.  Sparked when Josiah Winslow took Wamsutta by gun point shortly after the murder of John Sassamon, fighting broke out in the town of Swansea, and it ended the next year after its leader died while fighting a force lead by Benjamin Church. FTP, name this 1675-76 Massachusetts war drawing its name from the English name for the leader of the revolting Wampanoag, Metacom.;;King Philip(')s (War);;Metacom(')s (War|Rebellion){1}?
Astronomy;;Less than a dozen of the "bursting" type have been discovered. The most extreme ones are known as "millisecond" ones, while the binary ones were first discovered by Russell Hulse and Joseph Taylor, for whith they won the 1993 Nobel Prize in Physics. Their study began when Antony Hewish built a primitiver radio telescope to study scintillation effects, and soon discovered an unexpected source which was soon interpreted by Jocelyn Bell. FTP, what are these neutron stars which emit brief amounts of energy.;;pulsar(s)
Religion/Mythology;;She is sometimes called Elissa.  She was a wealthy and powerful princess in her homeland until her brother secretly murdered her husband Sychaeus.  Her brother, Pygmalion, concealed his deed to get access to her money, but his scheme was thwarted when Sychaeus appeared in her dreams, revealing the truth, and prompting her to take her gold and flee to Libya, where she founded a city.  FTP, name this native of Tyre who founded Carthage, where she fell in love with Aeneas.;;Dido
World History;;This battle occurred 15 days after the invading army landed at Milford Haven, and saw the death of John Howard in the initial skirmishing. Fought 12 miles east of Leicester, the king's army originally secured a superior position atop Ambien Hill. However, John Stanley and Henry Percy, the Earl of Northumberland, failed to assist the Yorkists in battle. Sir William Stanley led the charge into the Yorkist flank, resulting in victory for Henry Tudor.  FTP name this 1485 battle, the last of the Wars of the Roses, which saw the death of Richard III.;;(Battle of) Bosworth Field
Art;;The static nature of later paintings like "The Distribution of the Eagles" stands in contrast to early works like "Belisarius Asking Alms" and "Andromache Mourning Hector". He became known as the "Robespierre of the brush" after his election to the National Convention.  Works like "The Coronation of Napoleon" and "The Death of Socrates" have led him to be cited as a pioneer of modern art. FTP, who is this French artist of "The Oath of the Horatii" and "The Death of Marat"?;;(Jacques-Louis) David
Chemistry;;This chemist coined the term "catalysis" while proposing the existence of what he called a "catalytic force" in some substances, but he was unable to provide an explanation for it. During his work on elements found in sea-water he coined the term "halogens", and also named the concepts of "isomerism" and "protein". He provided invaluable evidence for many laws of stoichiometry by determining the relative atomic and molecular masses of more than 2,000 substances. For ten points, identify this Swedish chemist, discoverer of cerium, thorium, and selenium.;;(Jons) (Jakob) Berzelius
Psychology;;This man did his doctoral work performing studies of attachment behavior in rhesus monkeys with Harry Harlow at the University of Wisconsin, where he married his first cousin Bertha. After receiving his Ph. D. in 1934, he went to Columbia, where he worked with Thorndike on human sexuality.  A leading proponent of "third-force psychology", he penned the classic books Motivation and Personality and Toward a Psychology of Being. As department chair at Brandeis, he met Kurt Goldstein, who introduced him to the concept of self-actualization.  FTP, name this humanistic psychologist, famous for developing his hierarchy of needs.;;(Abraham) Maslow
World History;;The first king of this name ruled from 1125-1104 B.C., defeating the Elamites and returning the stolen statue of the god Marduk to Babylon.  Among the deeds of the more famous king of this name was the construction of two great walls to create artificial lakes to protect his city. The son of Nabopolassar, while still crown prince he defeated the Egyptians at Carchemish in 605 B.C., becoming king of Babylon the next year. FTP, name this king, known for destroying Jerusalem and for ordering the building of the Hanging Gardens.;;Nebuchadnezzar
Literature;;In 1954 she said "A woman can be both moral and exciting - if she also looks as if it were quite a struggle", which provides a good description of her recurring character Emma McChesney, as well as the writer Dawn O'Hara, the title character of her first novel.  She was a frequent collaborator of George S. Kaufman, their works together included "Minick", "Dinner at Eight", and "Stage Door".  She won the Pulitzer in 1925 for her story of Selina DeJong and her son entitled "So Big".  FTP, name this American author of "Cimmaron" and "Show Boat".;;(Edna) Ferber
Religion/Mythology;;This religious grouping currently has between 60 and 80 million adherents.  Among its holy sites is that of the Battle of Karbala near Kufa in modern Iraq, the site of a 680 battle, which saw the defeat of the forces of Hussein by those loyal to the caliph.  Hussein was the son of the 4th caliph, Ali, and the adherents of this sect believe the succession of caliphs should have been through Ali's line.  FTP, name this branch of Islam, opposed to Sunnites.;;Shi(')(a|ite(s)){1}?
Art;;It was inspired by Luca Signarelli's frescoes for Orvieto Cathedral.  Among its many figures is one of Saint Bartholomew holding his own skin with a depiction of the artist's face on it.  Above him is an Apollo-like rendition of Christ.  Illustrating Matthew 24:29-31, its creator began work on it 20 years after doing the ceiling for the Sistine Chapel.  FTP, name this Michaelangelo work, which depicts the end of times.;;(The) Last Judgement
Physics;;Dirac came up with a clever method for solving the quantum version of this system, using raising and lowering operators.  Though their best-known applications may be for keeping time, any system with a potential that is quadratic in displacement is one of these.  In fact, it can be shown that any system exhibiting small fluctuations about a stable equilibrium is one.  For ten points, identify this type of oscillator, the most common example of which is a mass and a spring.;;harmonic (oscillator)
United States History;;Death by hanging was the sentence handed down by Judge Joseph Gary to seven of eight men brought to trial over this incident. Matthias Degan and seven others died from a related incident stemming from demonstrations on Randolph Street for an eight-hour workday. Nine fatalities resulted from this event, one of which was a shooting death taking place in front of the McCormick Harvester Plant. Three surviving convicts were pardoned by Governor John Altgeld in 1893 for want of a fair trial. FTP, name this riot of May 4, 1876 in which a bomb thrown by anarchists in a Chicago Plaza was used to discredit the Knights of Labor.;;Haymarket (Square) (Riot)
Religion/Mythology;;Their initiates undergo a ceremony meant to bind student and teacher called the ahd, and full members are given the title of murid and expected to begin memorization of the Mathnawi. The first order was formed in Baghdad in 1166 by Abd al-Qadir al-Jilani, who espoused their central belief that poverty is needed to be in relation to God. All orders are united by celebration of the dhikr, or invocation of God, which for the Mevlevi order of Konya involves a unique form of exaltation. FTP, name these mendicant members of Sufism, known for their whirling.;;dervish(es)|fakir;;Sufi(s)
Biology;;Like several other organs, this organ is restrained by the peritoneum. Attached to the peritoneum below the capsule are the two ligaments that hold its protective serous and fibroelastic coats in place and allow this organ to expand and contract after digestion. Below the hilum, one of its coats reflects inward into branching sheets that radiate the trabeculae that separate its pulp-containing areolae, where the reticulum connects this organ to the lienal artery and allows it to fulfill its primary function. Made up of red and white pulp, in times of bone marrow breakdown it produces red blood cells. FTP, name this primary filtering organ for the blood.;;spleen
Literature;;On a number of occasions the poet refers to the title objects as keeping "a sort of Runic rhyme". Initially they foretell a "world of merriment", but are soon described as "ghouls" recounting a "tale of terror". In four stanzas of increasing length marked by alliteration, repetition, and assonance, they symbolize childhood, marriage, maturity, and finally death. FTP, what is this poem by Edgar Allan Poe?;;(The) Bells
Economics;;His first work accused his colleagues of "mental gymnastics" for rejecting mathematics to unify economic analysis. As consultant to the Committee of Economic Development in 1958, he answered the question "What is the most important problem to be faced by the U.S. in the next 20 years" with "inflation". Some of his recent works have attempted to describe Keynesian Economics with linear programs. Remembered for his "cost-push" inflationary theory, FTP, name this co-author with Nordhaus of Economics: An Introductory Analysis, a professor at MIT who won the Nobel Prize for Economics in 1970.;;(Paul) Samuelson
World History;;Much was achieved under its first leader, Sir Eric Drummond, including a successful 15 year administration of the Saar Region and the settling of the dispute over the Aland Islands, but it experienced failure when Poland failed to abide by its decision in the Vilnius dispute. Of the 26 articles in its covenant, article X caused the most trouble for its requirement that members defend each other from aggression, leading to opposition from Henry Cabot Lodge and the Senate's refusal to allow the United States to join. Established in the Versailles Peace Settlement, FTP, what was this predecessor to the United Nations?;;League of Nations
Literature;;One of its characters is a finicky schoolmaster who suggests reading lists of all of his students from the past 50 years to alleviate boredom. Some excitement ensues when a fire nearly destroys the town and Doctor Chebutykin is too inebriated to heal the wounded, but boredom returns after Tuzenbakh is killed in a duel and Vershinin is forced to leave with the regiment, leaving Masha to face her marriage to Kulygin and Irina to continue dreaming about Moscow. FTP, name this play about the Prozorov family by Anton Chekhov.;;(The) Three Sisters|Tri Sestry
Music;;Taught by his musicologist father, this performer gave his first public concert in Paris at the age of 6. Studing under Leonard Rose at Julliard, he is known for his many groundbreaking recording with the pianist Emanuel Ax, and received the prestigious Avery Fisher Prize in 1978, although in recent years he has professed a desire to give up his most famous instrument for the accordion. Known for his wide reportoire and combination of technical virtuosity and lyrical expression, FTP, who is this famous cellist?;;(Yo-yo) Ma
Physics;;A gravitational one that may cause a brief 2% reduction in weight is generated in the Podkletnov Effect. A magnetic variety is produced by energetic solar shockwaves that cause rapid fluctuations in the Van Allen Belts over a period of minutes. In classical mechanics, the equation that describes it is the result of multiplying both sides of Newton's Second Law by delta-t. FTP, name this measure of a force acting over a period of time equal to the change in momentum between two velocities, symbolized J.;;impulse
Geography;;In this country's south, the forearc basin and coast range that frames its central valley are partially flooded by the Corcovado Gulf and Moraleda Canal, leaving islands like Gran Guaiteca that make up its Los Chonos Archipelago. Its longest rivers are the Baker and its only perennial stream, the Loa, both located in the north, whose nitrate and copper wealth is tapped by the cities of Chiquicamata and La Serena. Its chief ports include Iquique, Coquimbo and Puerto Montt. FTP, name this country extending from the Atacama Desert to Tierra del Fuego, with capital at Santiago.;;Chile
World History;;Its participants initially denied complicity in incidents like the Lari Massacre and the murder of loyalist Chief Waruhu. In response, the local government launched Operation Anvil, imprisoning almost a third of the male population of the offending clan. Its power was weakened after the arrest of Dedan Kimathi and the Hola Massacre, but it eventually succeeded with increased Kikuyu representation in the colonial legislature. FTP, name this rebellion against European settlers by a secret society in Kenya from 1952-1956.;;Mau Mau (Rebellion)
Literature;;A meeting with actor William Macready convinced this writer to try his hand at stage writing, but his two published plays Strafford and A Blot in the Scutcheon were not as successful as early poems like "Count Gismond-Aix in Provence". A low point in his career was his Italian period, when poems like "Soliloquy in a Spanish Cloister" and "Porphyria's Lover" sold badly, but his poetry is optimistic even after the 1861 death of his wife, when he included poems like "Rabbi Ben Ezra" and "Caliban upon Setebos" in his collection Dramatis Personae. FTP, name this poet known for dramatic monologues like "Fra Lippo Lippi" and "My Last Duchess".;;(Robert) Browning
Philosophy;;Among the beliefs he set forth were the exercise of deifying virtues, which allow the fulfillment of human true nature, but not unification with God. Fundamental changes in his early philosophy came about through his participation in the Eastern expedition of Gordian III, whom he followed to India. There, he first added eastern metaphysical considerations to the emanation creationist theory of Philo the Stoic, though the body of his beliefs most closely resemble another philosopher. A disciple of Ammonius Saccus, FTP, name this teacher of Porphyry whose Enneads describe his development of Neoplatonism.;;Plotinus
Religion/Mythology;;Assuming the name Gagnrad, he traveled to the hall of his rival Vafthrudnir, and defeated him in a duel of wits by asking about the words he whispered into his dying son's ear. He attempted to hang himself upon learning of his doom in Ragnarok. His search for knowledge began with a trip to the Well of Wyrd, where its owner Mimir demanded an eye in exchange for a sip. FTP, name this Norse god of wisdom, the leader of the Aesir.;;Odin|Wo(tan|den){1}?
Chemistry;;This scientist discovered butylene and the correct formula for ether. The son of a weaver who took charge of a Quaker school at age 12, much of his early work focused on studies of the atmosphere, where he developed his characteristic distrust of other scientists' work and obsession with detailed record-keeping by means of a scientific diary. Determining that rain is due to changes in temperature, his interest in the atmosphere led to his studies in chemistry, detailed in his work "New System of Chemical Philosophy", where he deduced what would become known as Charles' Law, as well as the laws of multiple proportions and the law of partial pressures. FTP, who was this English chemist who proposed the theory of atoms?;;(John) Dalton
Art;;He first attained a perception of spatial depth through his invention of the schiacciato technique, which he used for the bald Zuccone, part of a series of prophets carved for the Campanile of his city. At about the same time, he worked on a famous scene for the Siena baptistery known as the Salome scene. His 1416 St. George and the Dragon shows his transition from gothic to humanistic perspectivism, while his later residency at Padua after 1443 saw the completion of the San Antonio Altarpiece and the equestrian statue, the Gattamelatta. FTP, name this early Renaissance Florentine sculptor who created the first large bronze freestanding nude since classical times, known as The Boy David.;;Donatello|Donati di Niccolo (di Betto Bardi)
Miscellaneous;;"Shame to him who thinks evil of it" is the motto of this group whose membership consists of its country's sovereign, a prince, and 50 "knight companions". Founded in 1348, legend holds it was created after an incident during a dance between the Countess of Salisbury and Edward III, who put on an item of clothing which had fallen off the Countess. Considered the highest honor in England, FTP, what is this English order of knights?;;(Order of the) Garter
Literature;;At the end of this book the narrator's friend Carl gets him a job at a newspaper and he helps his friend Fillmore escape a suffocating marriage. At one point he does odd jobs for the eccentric Indian pearl salesman Mr. Nanantetee and befriends a follower of Gandhi, who he takes to a brothel. Earlier, he led a deliberately aimless life in Paris after leaving his wife Mona, and provided an explicit catalog of his sexual experiences with various prostitutes. FTP, what is this controversial book by Henry Miller?;;Tropic of Cancer
Earth Science;;It frequently weathers into other minerals like margarite, zoisite, and kyanite. Produced by the Verneuil Process, it has been largely replaced in industrial applications by synthetic materials like alumina. When mixed with iron oxides and other minerals it is known as emery, and its finer varieties include sapphire and ruby. A naturally occurring aluminum oxide mineral with formula Al2 O3, FTP, what is this mineral whose Mohs hardness of 9 makes it the second hardest natural substance?;;Corundum
World History;;In this battle, the opposing commanders set up camp on opposite sides of the Montmorency River. On July 30, grenadiers crossed Orleans Island and attempted to row towards the city, but were halted by submerged rocks and cut down while attempting to cross the Beauport Shore. After relocating to Point Levis, the British general found a narrow, hidden path, which he used to secretly disembark 4,000 men on September 12, making possible the charge by Wolfe's men across the Plains of Abraham. FTP, name this decisive 1759 British victory of the French and Indian War that saw the taking of a strategic site on the St. Lawrence River and the death's of Wolfe and Montcalm.;;(Battle of) Quebec
Art;;A passage in which two dark figures are reclining separates a crowd of onlookers who are obscured by shadow in the background of this painting, while a skylight not visible to the viewer illuminates the forehead of one of the central figures. On the left, a man behind a desk is writing on a piece of paper above a woman who raises her hands in a clawlike gesture to shield her view from the central action. Blood covers the fingers of the central figure, who stares out at the viewer, while four figures with scalpels at right concentrate on a naked form. FTP, name this painting by Thomas Eakins.;;(The) Gross Clinic
Literature;;Much of the comedy in this play is provided by the dim-witted constable Elbow and the flamboyant bachelor Lucio. After setting the plot in motion, one central figure disguises himself as Friar Lodowick to witness the subsequent action. The plot concerns Angelo's enforcement of Vienna's long-ignored fornication laws, leading to the arrest of Claudio for seducing his betrothed, Juliet. However, all ends well when Duke Vincentio catches Angelo attempting to force Claudio's sister Isabella to yield to him. FTP, what is this comedy by Shakespeare?;;Measure for Measure
Biology;;In contrast to other related compounds, these compounds have their acidic side chains esterified with methanol or phytol. The "e" type is a rare type found in golden algae, while the "c" and "d" types are often found with the "a" type, which with the "b" type is the major type found in land plants and green algae. Found in the grana of plant cells, they are porphyrins which contain magnesium. FTP, what is this green pigment which allows plants to carry out the process of photosynthesis?;;chlorophyll
Sociology;;An extramarital affair partially prompted his critique of the conflict between eroticism and religion in the essay "Religious Rejections of the World and Their Directions". The emotional domination exerted on him by his father led both to his 1898 mental breakdown and his advocacy of "Liberal Imperialism" to solve Germany's agrarian problems in his famous Freiburg Address. He gained fame for his analysis of German political and economic life in Economy and Society, but is more famous today for his investigation of the roots of the "spirit of capitalism". FTP, who was this German thinker, author of The Protestant Ethic?;;(Max) Weber
Religion/Mythology;;Another name for this goddess is "Bo?pis", making reference to her beautiful, round "cow-eyes", and according to legend she could restore her youth and virginity every year by bathing in the waters of Canathus near Nauplia. Most famously worshipped in antiquity in Argos and Samos, the cuckoo and the peacock which held the eyes of her faithful servant Argos were sacred to her, and while one legend held that she conceived one son by eating lettuce, her children Hebe, Ares, and Hephaestus are usually held to have been fathered by her husband, the sky god. For 10 points name this goddess of marriage and childbirth, the wife of Zeus.;;Hera
World History;;A famous anecdote about this man relates how he went to register for the census and described his military service by stating he had served in sixteen victorious campaigns, all under his own command. Among these campaigns were his defeat of Sertorius in Spain, his suppression of the Cilician pirates in six months at sea, and his final conquest of Mithridates in the East, and it was for these successes, as much as his youthful resemblance to Alexander of Macedon, that Sulla gave him his famous cognomen. For 10 points name this Roman, the best general of the late Republic, who finally met his match against his former father-in-law and fellow triumvir Julius Caesar at Pharsalus.;;Pompey (the Great)|(Gnaeus) Pompeius (Magnus)
Literature;;The protagonist of this novel loses interest with her internship at a magazine, finds herself unable to lose her virginity to a UN interpreter, is nearly raped on a blind date, and discovers she has been rejected for a summer writing class. Returning home from college, she discovers she is unable to shake off her malaise with psychotherapy and attempts suicide, but after successful shock treatments under the direction of Doctor Nolan she finds her poor spirits lifting, and manages to leave the sanatorium in time to lose her virginity to a math professor and return to school in the fall. FTP, such are the struggles of Esther Greenwood in what novel by Sylvia Plath?;;(The) Bell Jar
Astronomy;;His 1686 his map of the world showing the distribution of prevailing winds over the oceans was the first meteorological chart to be published, while his Breslau Table of Mortality was one of the first attempts to relate mortality and age in a population. Publisher of Newton's Principia Mathematica, he was the first to use isolines in cartography, but is better known as the astronomer who succeeeded John Flamsteed as Astronomer Royal and whose visit to Saint Helena in 1676 resulted in the first stellar charts made of Southern Hemisphere. FTP, name this man who first theorized that comets traveled in an ellipse, which enabled him to plot the return of a comet from 1682 that would revisit earth every seventy-six years.;;(Edmund) Halley
Geography;;The northern four-fifths of this river's valley is covered by an artificial lake created in 1965 by the Akosombo Dam, located where it cuts through the Akwapim-Togo Range. Its two main branches are the Mouhoun and the Nakambe, or "Black" and "White", and it picks up such tributaries as the Afram and the Oti en route to the Gulf of Guinea. With a Portuguese name meaning "twisting", FTP, what is this chief river system of Ghana which supplied the colonial name for Burkina Faso?;;Volta (River)
Pop Culture;;One memorable scene sees the male protagonist taught his first words by a blind violinist whose forest hut he has stumbled upon. The stylized movements seen in the film "Metropolis" were imitated in the movements of the title character, memorably played by Elsa Lanchester. Lanchester is also seen portraying Mary Shelley in the prologue, which is followed by the film proper, in which Dr. Praetorius determines to create a mate for the creature created in an earlier film. Directed by James Whale, FTP, what is this film whose title figure is famous for her towering, lightning-streaked hair?;;(The) Bride of Frankenstein
United States History;;A one-time employee at the U.S. consulate in Budapest and interpreter for Ellis Island, he was elected to the House of Representatives in 1916 and, after serving as a fighter pilot in World War I, was returned to the House in 1918. Director of Civilian Defense during WWII, his most significant legislative effort consisted of his co-sponsorship of an act which freed members of labor unions from "yellow-dog" contracts and from court injunctions of private labor disputes. As part of the "Fusion" party ticket he was elected to his most famous post in 1933, gaining a reputation for honesty and reform. Known as the "Little Flower", FTP, name this long-time mayor of New York city, whose aviation connections were reinforced by the construction of the airport named for him.;;(Fiorello) (Henry) La Guardia
Literature;;The entrance of his brother into a Carthusian monastery is said to have inspired this man's Secretum Meum, while other interesting works include his Italia Mia, inspired by his friendship with the Republican revivalist Cola di Rienzo, and Africa, an epic poem on the Second Punic War.  Other famous works include De viris illustribus, a series of biographies of the most famous men of all time, and Metrical Letters, but he is perhaps best known for works in the Italian vernacular he helped to popularize, such as Trionfi and the poems inspired by a woman he first saw in the Church of St. Clare at Avignon on April 6, 1327. FTP, name this man, who employed his namesake sonnet form in ths Canonziere or Rime addressed to the mysterious Laura.;;Petrarch|(Francesco) Petrarca
Music;;His efforts in opera were almost completely unsuccessful, chiefly due to the asinine libretti seen in efforts like Alfonso and Estrella, The Twin Brothers, and Fierribras. The inventor of the "Moments Musicaux", his chamber works include the Grand Duo Piano Sonata in C Major, a series of Impromptus, and Fantasy in F Major, but he is better known for works in another genre that include "Gretchen at the Spinning Wheel", "Hark, Hark, The Lark", and "The Doppelganger". FTP, name the prolific composer of lieder probably best known for his 8th symphony, which was left unfinished.;;(Franz) Schubert
Noncomputational Math;;Invented by Tony Hoare in 1961, its advantages include its ability to operate in place and the velocity of its inner loop. Its effectiveness can be greatly increased by using various strategies to choose an efficient pivot. After a pivot is selected, all numbers less than the pivot are placed to the left, and all numbers larger than the pivot are placed to the right, with the algorithm then implemented recursively on the smaller lists. FTP, what is this computer science sorting algorithm named for its purported speed?;;quick sort
United States History;;Warned at midnight of the approach of the enemy, Captain John Parker assembled his company of 130 men and awaited further developments while keeping warm at the Buckman Tavern. Consequently, when six companies of regulars under Major John Pitcairn finally arrived at dawn, only one-half of Parker's force was assembled. Parker was in the process of ordering a withdrawal when firing started, and after a volley and a British bayonet charge, eight Minutemen were left dead and ten were wounded, while only one British soldier was wounded. FTP, what was this brief April 19, 1775 battle, after which the Redcoats were defeated at Concord?;;(Battle of) Lexington
Philosophy;;Like Montaigne, this thinker wrote a collection of brief articles known as "The Essays", although his are also known as "The Counsels, Civil and Moral". Described by Pope in "An Essay on Man" as "the brightest, wisest, (and) meanest of mankind" both for his intellectual gifts and for the disgrace suffered when he accepted a bribe from a litigant as a civil servant,. he held that knowledge should be amassed and studied in a systematic fashion, prompting his attempt to create the ambitions "Instauratio Magna", parts of which described his method of induction and his "idols of the mind". FTP, who was this British philosopher, author of "Novum Organum", "The Advancement of Learning", and "The New Atlantis"?;;F(rancis) Bacon
Literature;;Though his parents had supported Parliament during the civil war, this poet demonstrated his loyalty to the returning Charles II in such poems as "To His Sacred Majesty" and "Astrea Redux", and even created the part of Florimel in his play The Indian Emperor for the king's mistress Nell Gwynne. In such later works as Annus Mirabilis and Absolom and Acitophel, he continued to support Charles, who had rewarded him in 1668 by appointing him the first poet laureate. The rival of Thomas Shadwell, FTP, name this English author of MacFlecknoe and All For Love.;;(John) Dryden
Chemistry;;Sometimes produced by the Sicilian process, this element takes on a reddish-brown solid form known as its "plastic" form when cooled from a molten state. Combining with nearly all other elements at valencies of 2, 4, and 6, its natural form consists of 8 atoms held in a so-called "puckered" ring. It is attached to two hydrogen atoms in its most famous compound, known for its smell of rotten eggs. FTP, what is this yellow nonmetallic element with atomic number 16 and symbol S?;;sulfur
Art;;His Adoration of the Magi features portraits of the Medicis holding the foot of Christ, while the monk looking at the viewer may be his own self-portrait. Born with the surname Filipepi, this man's more famous name may have come from the name of the goldsmith to whom he was apprenticed before studying under Fra Lippo Lippi. Painter of Man with Medal and Judith, his thriftiness and association with the religious movement of Savonarola led to poverty in his later years, despite a successful career in which he was known for illustrations of  The Divine Comedy and the painting Primavera. FTP, name this artist best known for the Birth of  Venus.;;(Sandro) Botticelli
World History;;Under its terms Brandenburg obtained eastern Pomerania, while France obtained secure possession of the Alsace, Metz, Toul, and Verdun, thus gaining a firm frontier west of the Rhine River. Sweden received western Pomerania, Wismar, Bremen, and Verden, giving it control of the Baltic Sea. Due mainly to the efforts of Count von Trautmansdorff, it confirmed the independence of United Provinces of the Netherlands and the Swiss Confederation, with all other secular lands restored to who had held them in 1618, before the start of the conflict it resolved. FTP, what was this 1648 agreement that ended the Thirty Years' War?;;(The) (Peace of) Westphalia
Literature;;Born circa A.D. 46 in Chaeronea, this man studied philosphy in Athens and Alexandria before travelling to Rome, where he befriended the emperor Trajan and gave a popular series of lectures despite knowing almost no Latin. Among his lesser-known works are a series of dialogues covering various political, religious, and philosophical issues entitled The Moralia, but he is more famous for his biographies. For 10 points name this Greek author known for comparing the exploits of famous Greeks and Romans in his Parallel Lives.;;Plutarch
Biology;;Later in life this man turned to the study of malaria and found that the tertian and quartan types of the disease were caused by different species of the protozoan parasite Plasmodium. He is better known for his study of nerves, for which he developed the technique of staining nerve cells with silver nitrate and found the point at which sensory nerve fibres end in rich branchings encapsulated within a tendon, the tendon spindle named for him. For 10 points name this co-winner of the 1906 Nobel Prize for Medicine best remembered for his discovery of an irregular system of fibrils, vesicles, and granules in the cell known as his  "apparatus".;;(Camillo) Golgi
Religion/Mythology;;The term may be Egyptian and derive from the word meaning "dust", indicative of the low status of those who were called by it, or from a word meaning "moving on", suggesting that it applied to nomads. In either case it was regularly used as a pejorative term and at first those who were identified by it never used it to describe themselves, although it is used to describe Abraham in Genesis 14:13 and seems to become more accepted and widely used throughout the rest of the Bible. For 10 points identify this noun, the name of a book of the "New Testament" still sometimes used to describe Israelites and most commonly employed to describe the language they speak.;;Hebrew(s)
Chemistry;;This scientist gained fame for his improvements on the street-lighting system in Paris, and by 1775 he was put in charge of gunpowder production for the whole of France, where he made a fortune. He also made agricultural improvements in France and discovered new fertilising techniques, but he is best known for naming oxygen and for discovering the role it plays in combustion, which ended the phlogiston theory. For 10 points name this chemist, whose many accomplishments did not save him from being guillotined in 1794.;;(Antoine) Lavoisier
World History;;First ascending to power in 1456, this ruler was a member of a princely dynasty begun by Basarab I. Taken hostage by the Sultan as a young boy and raised in Turkey, he used Turkish support to oust his father, who was known as "the Devil". Three times prince of Wallachia, he is best known in some parts of the world for his association with the Order of the Dragon and his orders to display the bodies of his enemies in fields of spikes. FTP, who was this basis for the Dracula legend, known as the "impaler"?;;Vlad (III|the Impaler|Tepes|Dracula)|Dracula
Art;;Facing La Disputa in the Stanza della Segnatura, the elements of this painting are reminiscent of Leonardo's The Last Supper, and Bramante's St. Peter's Basilica, and the works of Michelangelo, who appears at bottom center.  The background contains statues of Apollo and Athena overlooking a mass of people gathered around four steps. The table in the front center is being written upon by Pythagoras, while to the side Euclid is seen drawing triangles. The center is dominated by Aristotle, Plato, and Socrates.  Located in the Vatican Palace, FTP, name this 1511 fresco by Raphael.;;(The) School of Athens
Literature;;This poem is composed of ten line stanzas, with lines 5, 6, and 7 rhyming with the last three lines in a constantly shifting pattern. Stanza four opens by describing a "mysterious priest" leading a heifer to a "green altar". It opens by describing the title object as a "still unravished bride of quietness" and "foster child of silence and slow time" before describing trees which will never shed their leaves and a lover who will never catch his beloved but never lose her either. FTP, what is this ode about a piece of pottery by John Keats?;;Ode on a Grecian Urn
Chemistry;;In its ideal form, a gas is heated at a constant pressure, expands isentropically, cools at a constant volume, and then is compressed isentropically before heating again. In practice, a compression ratio of between 15 and 25 to 1 is necessary to implement it. Extremely useful in situations when weight is not an issue, it is frequently implemented as a 4-stroke engine in which no spark is necessary, as the oil sprayed into the compression chamber ignites on contact with heated air. The most efficient of all internal combustion engines, FTP, name this common type of engine, seen in boats, trains, and trucks.;;Diesel (engine|cycle)
Religion/Mythology;;The nymph of this name helped Zeus in his battle against the Titans, although as the wife of the titan Pallas she gave birth to Bia, Cratos, Zeles, and Nike. The geographic feature of this name is known for its Adamantine Gates and for the oaths sworn over it by the Greek gods, who were punished for breaking their word by drinking water that would cause them to lose their voices for nine years. With a name meaning "hate", it was said to wind seven or nine times around Hades. Thought to be crossed by Charon, FTP, what is this river of Greek myth in which Achilles was dipped to gain invulnerability?;;Styx
Economics;;A major innovation in the analysis of this concept was the conjectural variation due to Bowley, which anticipated the so-called "sophisticated" seller analysis known as Stackelberg's Model. The assumption that the seller will not have to deal with an independent change in market price is central to Bertrand's Model, which was intended to refute the original treatment of this concept developed by Antoine Cournot. FTP, what is concept describing a market state in which there are only two firms?;;duopoly
World History;;She gained the throne after a struggle with a woman claiming to be the daughter of her deceased half-brother, King Henry IV.  She backed Cardinal Jimenez's (him-EN-ez-es) efforts to reform the Church in her nation, though the Cardinal burned many Muslim manuscripts on behalf of her attempt to push the Moors out of Granada.  Known for backing the Inquisition and supporting Christopher Columbus's expedition to the New World, FTP, who was this woman who became ruler of Castile in 1474 with the help of her husband, Ferdinand of Aragon.;;Isabella (I|the First) (of Castile|the Catholic)
Religion/Mythology;;Its heaviest concentration of membership is in East Africa, followed by the United States, where early in their history Mary Dyer and four others were executed for their beliefs. One notable division occurred during the feud between John Wilbur and Joseph Gurney. The sect was formed during the English Civil War, when its founder proclaimed, "since there was that of God in every man," a formal church structure and educated clergy were not necessary.  Divided into Orthodox, Conservative, and Hicksite subgroups and emphasizing the "inner light", FTP, identify the Christian denomination founded by George Fox and spread in colonial America by William Penn, named for their tendency to "tremble" before God.;;Quaker(s)|Society of Friends
Literature;;This author's early essay "A Style Reader" is considered a classic of criticism. Showing the influence of Poe in his first stories, such as "The Tattooer", he soon developed a more traditional style described in his famous essay "In Praise of Shadows", which led to such middle-period novels as "Quicksand" and "Some Prefer Nettles", while an analysis of human sexuality concerns his last two novels, "The Key" and "Diary of a Mad Old Man". Often cited as the best modern Japanese novelist, FTP, who was this author of "The Makioka Sisters"?;;(Junichiro) Tanizaki
Chemistry;;Although likely not the first to do so, he prepared and inhaled nitrous oxide to prove that it didn't cause disease, and thus discovered its respiratory effects, but later nearly died from inhaling water gas.  Later, he conducted work on electrolysis, laying the foundation for the modern electrochemical series, leading to his discoveries of sodium, potassium, barium, and calcium. Mentor to Michael Faraday,  FTP, name this 19th century British scientist, exponent of the scientific method and inventor of the miner's safety lamp.;;(Sir) (Humphry) Davy
United States History;;He was Speaker of the House from 1835 to 1839 and later Governor of Tennessee. As president, he established the nation's first independent treasury and oversaw the admission of three new states, including Wisconsin and Iowa. The first "dark horse" candidate, he secured the Democratic nomination over Martin Van Buren and defeated Henry Clay for president. For ten points, name this 11th president who oversaw the Oregon Treaty of 1846 and the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo.;;(James) (K.) Polk
Philosophy;;Early in this work, the author advocates philosophies developed by so-called "free spirits" not caught up in any particular point of view, while later he asserts the existence of an "order of rank", with which the spiritual strength of people can be measured, prompting an 8-page tirade against women. Near the end he attacks nationalism and promotes the "good European" who rises about national sentiment, while the final chapter asks the question "What is noble?,", answering it with the idea of the solitary, suffering soul. A collection of 296 aphorisms, FTP, what is this work of philosophy by Friedrich Nietzsche?;;Beyond Good and Evil
Literature;;This writer called sex "the punishment for being together," yet he frequently slept with prostitutes.  An employee at the Workers' Accident Insurance Corporation in Prague, he reluctantly published some of his shorter works, including Meditation, The Judgment, and In the Penal Colony. He ordered his friend Max Brod to destroy his manuscripts on his death, but Brod instead published them. FTP, who is this author of Amerika, The Trial, and The Metamorphosis?;;(Franz) Kafka
Biology;;A thin plate of this material called the epiphyseal plate persists at the ends of growing bones during human development. It is interspersed with chondrocytes, which receive nutrition by diffusion through a surrounding gel. It comes in three main types, with the hyaline type the most widespread, but the best known may be the yellow, or elastic, type, which composes the epiglottis and the external ear. FTP, what is this flexible connective tissue of the body?;;cartilage|gristle
Art;;Built on the site of an abandoned lumber mill, this building was featured in a recent Lexus commercial.  Computer aided design was used to translate abstract shapes into a usable form that from the front looks like two ships colliding.  From above, the building looks like a flower with boot, sail, snake and fish forms. Specially fabricated, ultra-thin titanium tiles that look like scales surround galleries of varying size.  FTP, name this museum that opened in 1997, the finest achievement of architect Frank Gehry.;;(Guggenheim (Museum)|(Museum) Guggenheim){1}? (in) (Bilbao) (,) (Spain)
World History;;Great architectural feats were achieved in this empire by the poet-architect Es-Saheli, who built the great mosque of its main city. This empire was founded by Sundiata Kieta, and at its height it included the cities of Niani and Jenne.  Reaching its peak in the 14th century under Mansa Musa, after its decline it was conquered by the Songhai empire. FTP, what was this African empire centered on Timbuktu, now the name of a country with capital at Bamako?;;Mali
Geography;;A group of about 200 small islands, their highest point is Mount Usborne at 2300 feet. Its government also administers the Shag and Clerke rocks, as well as South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands. Dominated by two islands appropriately known as East and West Island, sheep grazing is their main industry, which can be seen on their flag that features a ram, the ship of the island's discoverer, and the Union Jack on the top left.  FTP, name this British territory of the South Atlantic with capital at Stanley, the subject of conflict between Great Britain and Argentina.;;Falkland (Islands)|Islas Malvinas
Literature;;It opens with Almustafa about to board a boat from Orphalese, the city where he has lived for 12 years, but he is stopped by the townspeople.  In chaptesr including "Love", "Marriage", "Grieving", "Friendship", "Prayer", and "Religion", Almustafa acts as the mouthpiece for the author, expounding his quasi-mystical beliefs.  For ten points, identify this popular volume of prose poems, published in 1923 by Kahlil Gibran.;;(The) Prophet
United States History;;It lasted a little over a month, and at one point saw soldiers hold a mock session of the state legislature, repealing ordinances passed by the officials who had just fled Milledgeville. Hugh Kilpatrick led the cavalry, while the left and right wings were headed by Henry Slocum and Oliver Howard. Opposed only by the ineffectual raiding of Joe Wheeler, it inflicted damages amounting to $100 million while taking Sandersville, Louisville, Millen, and finally Savannah, which was then offered as a Chrismas present to Lincoln. Beginning with the burning of Atlanta, FTP, what was this 1864 campaign in which Georgia was decimated by William Sherman?;;(Sherman(')s) March to the Sea|(Sherman(')s) Georgia Campaign
Physics;;The angle through which radiation is dispersed in this phenomenon varies inversely by the fourth power of wavelength, enhancing the shorter wavelengths.  It can be considered elastic, because the energies of the scattered photons are not changed, and it specifically refers to interactions with molecules with diameters less than 1/10 of the wavelength.  FTP, name this type of scattering discovered by its namesake in 1871 that accounts for why the sky is blue.;;Rayleigh (scattering)
Music;;Soon into his musical career, he turned to Zen Buddhism and the I Ching for guidance, which led to his advocacy of indeterminism.  Associated with the choreographer Merce Cunningham, he wrote the books M, Notations, A Year from Monday and Silence.  His major musical compilations include Roaratorio, Bacchanale for prepared piano, and Imaginary Landscape No. 4 for 12 radios.  A student of Arnold Schoenberg, FTP, name this avant-garde composer who is most famous for 4'33".;;(John) (Milton) Cage
Chemistry;;A series of accurate measurements of the rate of this process for different combinations of substances was made in 1870 by Loschmidt using his namesake tube. It occurs roughly 100,000 times faster in gases than liquids, as indicated by Fick's Law, while the best-known law concerning it holds that the rate at which it occurs for gases is inversely proportional to the square roots of their densities, a relationship known as Graham's law. FTP, what is this chemical process in which different substances mix as a result of the random motions of their components?;;diffusion
Religion/Mythology;;According to one myth this figure has a doppleganger that tempts her husband away from court, while another tells of her youth in the house of Duke Cador and subsequent abduction by King Melwas. Various versions of the story describe her entry into the Convent of Caerleon or Amesbury after Agravain brings her scandal into the open, although versions differ over whether the man involved is Mordred or Lancelot. FTP, who is this adulterous wife of King Arthur?;;(Queen) Guinevere
Literature;;At the end of this novel the execution of the protagonist is witnessed by the grotesque expatriot dentist Mr. Tench. Based upon material found in the author's travel account "The Lawless Roads", a key moment occurs when the protagonist is reunited with his bastard daughter Brigida. His attempt to provide last rites to a dying American bandit is a trap that leads to his arrest by the young lieutenant, who has been pursuing him ever since the revolutionaries outlawed the Catholic Church. FTP, what is this novel about an alcoholic priest on the run in Mexico, written by Graham Greene?;;(The) Power and the Glory
United States History;;Early in his life this man served as teacher of ancient languages and literature at what would become Hiram College, where he soon served as president. During the Civil War he led the 42nd Ohio volunteers, distinguishing himself with his heroics at Chickamauga, but resigned to become a radical Rupublican in the House of Representatives. As campaign manager to John Sherman, he was nominated for president as a compromise candidate, defeating Winfield Scott Hancock. FTP, who was this president who in 1881 was assassinated by Charles Guiteau?;;(James) (A.) Garfield
United States History;;This decision was unanimously extended in Argersinger v. Hamlin. Writing for the majority, Justice Black stated that the court was "returning to old precedents" in deciding the fate of a man convicted of intent to break and enter a poolroom. Swayed by the arguments of the plaintiff's lawyer, Abe Fortas, the court ruled 9-0 that the 6th and 14th Amendments required the abandonment of the precedent of Betts v. Brady. FTP, what was this 1963 case which guaranteed counsel for defendants in felony cases?;;Gideon (v(s)(.) Wainwright)
Art;;His cartoon for the "Battle of Cascina" was considered a marvel of the age, while his "Holy Family" is considered one of his best paintings. Better known as a sculptor, he got his start under Ghirlandajo, soon producing "The Rape of Deianira" and "The Battle of the Lapiths and Centaurs". While working on tombs for the Medicis he created his famous reclining figures of "Day", "Night", "Dawn", and "Dusk", but his work on the tomb of Julius II was never completed, despite the creation of the colossal "Moses". FTP, who was this artist perhaps best known for painting the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel?;;Michelangelo (Buonarotti)|Buonarotti
Physics;;Its value for various substances include 2.25 for paraffin, 78.2 for water, and about 2,000 for barium titanate. Air has a value of 1.00059, which is slightly higher than the value for a vacuum, whose value of 1 is the smallest possible. Identical to permittivity in the cgs system, it is symbolized by the Greek letter kappa, and is usually calculated by taking C over C naught. FTP, what is this constant, the measure of the increase in effectiveness of a capacitor when filled with an insulating material?;;dielectric (constant)|relative permittivity|specific inductive capacity
Literature;;A key moment of this novel concerns the revelation by a drunk known as "Owl Eyes" that the titular character's books are uncut, thus giving a hint of his shallow character. While dating the golfer Jordan Baker, the narrator begins to learn about the protagonist, who rose to prominence under the tutelage of the yachtsman Dan Cody. The climax occurs with the murder of the protagonist by George Wilson, who was avenging the death of his wife in a car accident caused by Daisy Buchanan. Narrated by Nick Carraway, FTP, what is this Jazz Age novel, perhaps the best known work of F. Scott Fitzgerald?;;(The) Great Gatsby
World History;;His long campaign to win Livonia eventually met failure at the hands of Stephen Bathory, but he did conquer Kazan and Astrakhan and made the first Russian inroads into Siberia. The son of Vasily III, his reign was characterized by his struggles with the boyars, leading him to call the first national assembly, the zemski sobor, and establish his own state called Oprichnina within Russia. After the death of his first wife Anastasia in 1560 he experienced a decline in emotional stability which is the source of his current fame. FTP, who was this first czar of Russia, known as "Grozny"?;;Ivan (IV|(the) Terrible){1}?
Pop Culture;;A moment of levity in this film occurs when the protagonist accidentally starts a fire after lighting a candle in a shrine to his hero Balzac, whose paraphrased lines in a school paper result in accusations of plagerism against him. While skipping school he sees his mother conducting an affair, prompting him to claim his mother is dead to excuse his absence. When his lie is discovered he runs away, but winds up in the French penal system after he is caught stealing a typewriter from his father's office. With a title meaning "raising hell", FTP, what is this film about the youth of Antoine Doinel, directed by Francois Truffaut?;;(The) 400 Blows
Psychology;;His attachment to one of his most famous theories led to a lengthy feud with William Bayliss and Ernest Starling. He expanded on Sherrington's explanation of the spinal reflex, while his noted ambidextrous skill as a surgeon and his invention of a non-intrusive namesake "pouch" allowed him to study the digestive process in dogs. His research linking digestion to the nervous system won him the 1904 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine, but he is now better known for other work with dogs. FTP, who is this Russian who taught a dog to associate food with a ringing bell?;;(Ivan) Pavlov
Geography;;This state is highly mountainous, reaching its maximum height at Legge Tor. With the exception of its capital, the only other city of more than 50,000 people is Launceston. It includes many offshore islands, including the Hunter Islands and the islands of Flinders, King, Bruny, and Macquarie, the last of which is subantarctic. With its capital at Hobart, it is separated from the mainland by the Bass Strait. Originally known as Van Diemen's Land, FTP, what is this island state of Australia known for its indigenous "devil"?;;Tasmania
Literature;;"Shadows in Paradise" is a posthumously published novel by this author who married the movie-star Paulette Goddard after moving to the United States. Supporting himself early in life as a stonecutter and racecar driver, he later turned to writing, penning works like "The Black Obelisk", "Flotsam", "Three Comrades", "Arc de Triumph", and "The Road Back", the last a sequel to his most famous novel, which tells of Paul Baumer's experiences in the first World War. FTP, who was this German antiwar novelist, author of "All Quiet on the Western Front"?;;(Erich) (Maria) Remarque
World History;;The current term used to designate this people was introduced by the historian Manetho. Facilitating their conquests using an innovative rectangular fortification of beaten earth, they were a northwestern Semetic people who at their height ruled an empire including Syria and Palestine. Establishing a capital at Avaris, they fell to Amasis I at the Battle of Tanis, ending over 100 years of rule in Egypt. FTP, who were these "rulers of foreign lands" known for their introduction of the horse-drawn chariot?;;Hyksos
Religion/Mythology;;Its final four chapters are an analysis of memory, time and eternity, and the Book of Genesis. Earlier, the author describes his two trips to Carthage, which he calls a "cauldron of illicit loves", and his time in Ostia, where he shares what he calls a vision of "eternal wisdom". Gradually growing dissatisfied with his life of indulgence in sex and other sensual pleasures, a conversation with his friend Alypius prompts his to convert to Catholicism in the garden of his home in Milan, fulfilling the wishes of his mother Monica. FTP, what is this famous autobiographical account of the religious struggles of St. Augustine?;;(The) Confessions (of) (St.|Saint) (Augustine)
Physics;;Dynamically, it is governed by the Kruskal-Shafranov criterion of stability and the Vlasov, or collisionless Boltzmann, equation, and it frequently exhibits Langmuir waves, which are named for the man who first coined this term. Its behavior is governed in part by the Debye length and by its net Coulomb force, which causes collective modes of motion as well as its high susceptibility to magnetic phenomenon. Found in the Solar Wind, ionosphere, and the interiors of stars, it is thought to compose 99% of the matter of the universe. FTP, what is this fourth state of matter?;;plasma
Literature;;Her wartime experiences influenced the novels "The Marne" and "A Son of the Front", while her early fame came for her writings on interior design like "The Decoration of Houses" and "Italian Villas and Their Gardens". Much attention to architecture and interior design is found in her novels, starting with "The Valley of Decision", while her passionate affair with W. Morton Fullerton inspired "The Reef". Better known are her characterizations of women in "The Custom of the Country" and "The House of Mirth", and her satiric depictions of the New York aristocracy. FTP, who was this author of "The Age of Innocence" and "Ethan Frome"?;;(Edith) Wharton
United States History;;This battle was preceded by the desertion of Walk-in-the-Water and his followers, while during the battle the British commander escaped to Burlington Heights, where he was reprimanded for cowardice. Using information gathered by Colonel Wood, the Americans made a last minute change to their plans, ordering a cavalry charge led by Richard M. Johnson. After Henry Proctor's retreat, the Native Americans fought valiantly until the death of their leader, Tecumseh. FTP, what was this decisive War of 1812 victory for William Henry Harrison which shares its name with a British river?;;(Battle of) (the) (Thames|Moraviantown){1}?
Music;;A premonition of the title character's death is found in her "Card Song", while another major moment of the opera is the duet "Seguidilla". The male lead's fate is sealed when he draws his sword on Captain Zuniga, leading him to flee to the mountains and join the smuggling gang led by Lillas Pastia. Shortly after singing his "Flower Song" he abandons his sweetheart Micaela, but his beloved soon cuckolds him for the bullfighter Escamillo, who sings the famous "Toreador Song". FTP, what is this opera about a gypsy woman, the masterpiece of Georges Bizet?;;Carmen
Literature;;At one point the protagonist compares himself to a gadfly that stings a lazy horse, and at another point is accused of belief in a semi-divine, daemon spirit. The third section argues that death should not be feared, since it is either a peaceful sleep or another world filled with heroes from the past. The second part sees the protagonist propose that Athens punish him with free board at the public's expense for his crimes; earlier, Meletos was led into a series of contradictions, but nonetheless Meletos and his two fellow accusers are victorious. FTP, what is this Platonic dialogue concerning Socrates' defense against charges of sacrilege and corruption of the youth?;;(The) Apology (of Socrates)
Religion/Mythology;;Some alternate legends hold it was the child of Styx and Pallas. After its death, its killer dipped his arrows in its blood, making them incredibly poisonous. During the battle, the hero's feet were attacked by a crab sent by Hera, while his nephew and charioteer Iolaus aided him with a flaming torch, which was used to cauterize the wounds of this beast of Lerna. Eventually, Heracles buried the invulnerable part of it under a boulder, completing his second labor. FTP, what was this beast known for its regenerating heads?;;hydra
Literature;;A pattern of green leaves often covers the stage in this play to symbolize better times for the protagonist, who is fired by Howard Wagner shortly after he recounts the story of Dave Singleton, a well-liked fellow employee whose funeral was well attended. One of the protagonist's sons fails to secure a loan from his former employer, Bill Oliver, continuing a series of failures which began with his discovery of his father's affair with "the Woman" in a Boston hotel room. Linda is alarmed at the series of car accidents suffered by her husband, who kills himself for the insurance money after he believes he has been reconciled with his son Biff. FTP, what is this play about Willy Loman, written by Arthur Miller?;;Death of a Salesman
Art;;A barely-visible clock in the top left indicates the time of the scene as 7 o'clock. In the bottom right is a teapot on a stand, while another is seen in the hand of the woman on the right, who is pouring drinks. One woman has her back to the viewer, while a lamp hung from the ceiling illuminates the faces of the other four people, two of which are reaching for food with their utensils, while the third holds up one of the titular foodstuffs. FTP, what is this early masterpiece depicting peasants at dinner by Van Gogh?;;(The) Potato Eaters
United States History;;Early in his career this man served as a brigadier general in the Philippines and as a military instructor at the University of Nebraska, while from 1921-24 he served as Army chief of staff. Greatly influencing U.S. WWI policy with his "General Organization Report", he gained his nickname from his command of buffalo soldiers. During WWI he successfully conducted the assault on Saint-Mihiel and aided in the Meuse-Argonne offensive while maintaining the independence of U.S. forces. FTP, who was this commander of the Allied Expeditionary Force, known as "Black Jack"?;;(John|Jack) Pershing
Biology;;It can be prepared by the hydrolysis of ethanal cyanohydrin or the oxidation of propan-1,2-diol using dilute nitric acid for use in the dying and tanning industries. Having formula CH3 CH(OH) COOH, it is produced from pyruvic acid in active muscle tissue when oxygen is limited, causing cramping pains before being removed to the liver to be converted to glucose. FTP, what is this end product of bacterial fermentation, the most common acidic constituent of fermented milk products?;;lactic acid
Religon/Mythology;;The central story concerning this deity is sparked by a series of insults perpetrated by her brother, culminating in his throwing a flayed horse into her weaving hall. Born from the left eye of her father, she bore many children by her brother after chewing and spitting out pieces of the sword her gave her while he did the same with her jewels. His rude behavior led her to retreat into a cave, but the other gods gathered together a number of cocks and hung a mirror on a tree, and teased her outside by laughing at the disrobing of Amenouzume, thus returning light to the world. FTP, who is this Shinto sun goddess?;;Amaterasu (Omikami)
United States History;;Early on, reference is made to the "urgency of now", arguing that it is "no time to engage in the luxury of cooling off or to take the tranquilizing drug of gradualism". Earlier, the speaker holds that the founding fathers were in effect signing a promissory note to all Americans, but that some had been given bad checks which have come back marked "insufficient funds". Opening with a reference to an event occurring "five score years ago", its most famous section is found near the end, when the speaker tells of his hope that people will soon sit together at the table of brotherhood on the red hills of Georgia, that the state of Mississippi will be transformed into an oasis of freedom, and that his four children will be judged not by the color of their skin, but by the content of their character. FTP, what was this 1963 speech by Martin Luther King?;;I Have a Dream (speech)
Literature;;A published poet at the age of 19, this author's first collection, "Double Persephone", was followed by the critically acclaimed "The Circle Game". In the 1970s she turned to the novel, with early efforts like "Surfacing" and "Lady Oracle" analyzing the lives of women in a male-dominated society, a theme to which she would return in "Cat's Eye" and "The Robber Bride". FTP, who is this Canadian author probably best known for the dystopian novel "The Handmaid's Tale"?;;(Margaret) Atwood
Religion/Mythology;;Much of the information about them comes from master negatives found at the Huntington Library in San Marino, California. It includes works like "The Manual of Discipline", "The War of the Sons of Light with the Sons of Darkness", and the "Thanksgiving Psalms", as well as a commentary on the Book of Habakkuk and copies of "Jubilees", "Tobit", "First Enoch", and "Isaiah", while the most extensive part is a document containing ritual law known as the "Temple Scroll". FTP, what were these leather and papyrus documents found in a cave on the namesake sea in 1947?;;(the) Dead Sea Scrolls
Noncomputational Math;;Its developer was forced to flee to Derby after claiming to have "raised a devil" from a young girl. It has an error roughly equal to 1 over n to the fourth, and because of its construction, n is required to be even. If h represents the length of the n equal subintervals of the interval from a to b, then the formula for it reads 1/3 h times the sum of the values of the points of the partition with various coefficients, which with the exception of the first and last alternate between 4 and 2. FTP, what is this method for approximating definite integrals using parabolas, named for its British inventor?;;Simpson(')s (rule|method)
Pop Culture;;To crush the freedom fighters before the rainy season, he once offered a shiny new donkey for the head of General Montoya. Also known under the alias "Snrub", he owns the only known nude photo of Mark Twain and the only copy of the Constitution with the word "suckers" in it. Much valuable information about him can be found in his autobiography, "Will There Ever Be a Rainbow"?, including his desire to be reunited with his stuffed bear Bobo and his nefarious slant oil drilling operation. FTP, who is this ruthless autocrat, the richest man in Springfield?;;(C(.)(harles)) (Montgomery) (Mr(.)) Burns
World History;;During this dynasty, painting and sculpture flourished, as seen in the production of its famous eponymous horses. Buddhism was suppressed and monasteries dissolved during the Hu-chiang period, while its greatest territorial expansions occurred under Hsuan Tsung, whose ambitions were finally checked by the Arabs at the Talas River. Great decline occurred after the An Lu-Shan rebellion, which served as subject material for its great poets, including Tu Fu and Li Po. FTP, what was this 618-907 Chinese dynasty whose name is now associated with astronauts?;;Tang (dynasty)
Literature;;The protagonist of this story is inspired to become an artist in part by his encounter with an anonymous girl wading in the sea known only as the "birdlike girl". As a child, he is sent to Clongowes Wood College, while at age 10 he spends his time with his Uncle Charles and pours over his beloved copy of "The Count of Monte Cristo". In Chapter 4 the Director of Belvedere urges him to join the Jesuit priesthood, while in the fifth and final chapter his discussion of artistic theories with the Dean of Studies cements his determination to become a truly Irish writer. FTP, what is this novel about the development of Stephen Dedalus, written by James Joyce?;;(A) Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man
Geography;;Much of this island's terrain is impassable, but access is provided by rivers such as the Barito and Kapuas. Highly mountainous, it reaches its highest point at Mt. Kinabalu. The interior is populated by the indigenous Dyaks, found mainly in the region known as Kalimantan. In the north are the states of Sabah and Sarawak and the sultanate of Brunei. FTP, what is this third largest island in the world, divided between Brunei, Indonesia, and Malaysia?;;Borneo
Biology;;Many of this scientist's publications were narrow in focus, including "On the Various Contrivances By Which British and Foreign Orchids are Fertilized by Insects" and a detailed treatise on barnacles, the latter of which was intended to pass the time until he felt his most important work would be accepted. He attempted to address difficulties in his work in the late publication "The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals", while earlier he had expanded on his groundbreaking work in 1871's "The Descent of Man", which elaborated on an idea developed independently by Alfred Wallace. FTP, who was this British scientist who described his ideas on natural selection in "On the Origin of Species"?;;(Charles) (Wallace) Darwin
Philosophy;;During the late 20th century, this philosophical position was the subject of several important critiques, including one by Helmut Thielicke subtitled, "Its Origin and Nature, with a Christian Answer", as well as one by Eugene Rose subtitled "The Root of the Revolution of the Modern Age". "The Ego and Its Own" established Max Stirner as an early advocate of this position, whose name was used for the first time by Friedrich Jacobi to negatively characterize transcendental idealism. N.A. Dobrolyubov was the model for the famous fictional practitioner created by Turgenev, whose advocated reliance on science and materialism and sought to bring about a revolution that would destroy the institutions of society. Greatly associated with Nietzsche, FTP, what is this philosophical position, the belief in nothing?;;nihilism
World History;;Shortly after the ouster of its most famous leader in favor of Etienne Flandin, it incorporated a policy of "attentisme", which translates as "wait and see". Incorporating a slogan of "Work, Family, and Fatherland," it survived for four years by never passing a constitution, being led by a series of politicians, including Marcel Deat and Jean Darlan, although its greatest security and independence was attained due to the cleverness of Pierre Laval. Nominally led by Marshall Petain, FTP, what was this German puppet state in southeastern France during WWII?;;Vichy (France)
Literature;;In the first section of this work the narrator describes his obsession with bumping an officer who had once moved him out of the way in a tavern. Later the narrator describes the time he imposed himself on a going away party given by Trudoliubov, Ferfitchkin, and Simonov for Zvierkov in the second section, entitled "Apropos of the Falling Snow", which goes on to recount two encounters with a prostitute names Lisa. This follows an opening section in which the narrator attempts to explain his buffoonery and opposition to the rule that "twice two is four". FTP, what is this short work composed of the letters of a recluse, written by Fyodor Dostoyevsky?;;Notes from (the) Underground|Letters from the Underworld
Music;;The time when this composer heard a flute player repeat a four note theme for two and a half hours inspired his orchestral suite "Beni Mora", while the works of Keats were the basis for his "First Choral Symphony". A symphony trombonist, he developed an austere style in works like "Egdon Heath" and the opera "At the Boar's Head", and gained acclaim for the "St Paul's Suite" and the operas "The Perfect Fool" and "Savitri", the latter of which stemmed from an interest in Hindu themes that prompted him to learn Sanskrit. FTP, who is this British composer probably best known for a seven-part orchestral suite entitled "The Planets"?;;(Gustav) Holst
Physics;;Nevill Mott won a share of the 1977 Nobel Prize in Physics for his research on the amorphous type of these materials. The properties exhibited by the intrinsic type are generally poor and temperature-dependent. The more useful kind is the extrinsic type, which are classified as p or n types and which often possess "holes" after impurities are added, a process known as "doping". Important examples include gallium arsenide and silicon. FTP, what are these materials, which exhibit levels of conductivity between those of conductors and insulators?;;semiconductor(s)
Psychology;;Read, Fordham, and Adler compiled the collected works of this man, whose first important work was a book on the psychology of dementia praecox. Drawn to psychology after attending the lectures of the pioneer Pierre Janet, he extended the definition of libido to apply to the totality of life' processes, and in 1923's "Psychological Types" introduced the concepts of introvert and extrovert. FTP, who was this Swiss psychologist, developer of the concepts of the collective unconscious and archetypes?;;(Carl) (Gustav) Jung
Religion/Mythology;;One story about this god tells of the trouble caused when he impaled the eagle of Thiazi when angered over the amount of his food Thiazi ate, while another tells of his theft of cursed gold from the dwarf Andvari. The son of the giants Farbauti and Laufey, at one point his wife Sigyn is forced to catch poison dropped on him while he is chained to three boulders. FTP, who is this Norse trickster god?;;Loki
Art;;The "aerial" type utilizes paleness and blue colors, the "parallel" type is often seen in Chinese art, while medieval painting often incorporated the "inverted" type. Vasari reports that Paolo Uccello loved it so much that he neglected his wife to put in into paintings like "The Hunt in the Forest". Described in Alberti's treatise "De Pictura" after its invention by Brunelleschi, it was first used on a large scale in the paintings of Masaccio, often implemented using convergence of parallel lines and apparent diminution in the size of objects. FTP, what is this method of representing spatial extension into depth on a flat or shallow surface?;;perspective
Literature;;Parkinson's disease caused this author to give up work on his "America" series after writing only two plays, "A Touch of the Poet" and "More Stately Mansions". Getting his start with the plays in "Thirst and Other One Act Plays", written while in a tuberculosis sanitarium, his middle period is marked by the use of masks and symbolism, seen in plays like "Marco Millions", "Lazarus Laughed", and "The Great God Brown", but he is better known for his early sea plays like "Beyond the Horizon" and "Anna Christie". FTP, who is this playwright, author of "The Hairy Ape" and "The Iceman Cometh"?;;(Eugene) O'Neill
United States History;;Early skirmishing in this battle occurred between Union forces and the Confederate cavalry on the Springfield Pike before sustained action began around Peter's Hill. Although the Union failed to reinforce General McCook's beseiged forces due to the presence of an "acoustic shadow" which prevented knowledge of the fighting, the Union forces under Buell were eventually victorious, forcing Braxton Bragg to retreat into Tenessee. FTP, what was this October 8, 1862 battle, which left Kentucky under Union control?;;Perryville
Religion/Mythology;;One figure with this name was the brother of Cadmus and Cilix who failed in his attempt to recover his kidnapped sister Europa from Zeus, while another succeeded Chiron as tutor to Achilles. More famously, this name is attached to a creature who lives near a cool well in which it bathes every dawn, singing so sweetly that the sun-god stops every day to listen. When born, it embalms the remains of its ancestor in an egg and flies it to the altar of the sun-god in Heliopolis, only to have the same happen to it centuries later. FTP, what is mythical bird that is periodically killed and reborn in flame?;;Phoenix
Psychology;;The developer of this concept held that it was governed by two fundamental forces, one of which is the repetition compulsion. Designated by a term originally used by Groddeck, it is present at birth and conforms to the primary processes, thus leading it to ignore contradictions, as well as space and time. Designating the unorganized parts of the psychic apparatus, it observes the pleasure principle. FTP, what is this part of Freud's theory of the mind, the counterpart of the ego and superego?;;Id|Das Es
Astronomy;;It is home to the globular clusters M92 and  M13, the later of which is rated as the finest globular cluster in the northern sky. Its brightest stars are its beta and zeta stars, both with magnitude 2.8. Known to the Arabs as "the Kneeler", it is the fifth largest constellation, and its alpha star is one of the largest known, and is known as Ras algethi. FTP, what is this constellation representing a legendary strongman of Greek myth?;;Hercules
Literature;;Insight into this character's personality can be seen in an exchange of bawdy jests given in Act II, Scene I, and her first speech, which begins "My noble father, I do perceive here a divided duty". Loved by Roderigo, a foreshadowing of her fate is her singing of the "Willow Song", sung during the confusion and depression caused by her husband's mistaken belief in her affair with Cassio. The daughter of Duke Brabantio, her maid Emilia reveals the truth as she is dying after being smothered with a pillow. FTP, who is this wife of Othello?;;Desdemona
Miscellaneous;;In 1960 this man began a search for the abominable snowman, two years after having led a South Pole expedition using tractors as part of the first mechanized journey to the pole, an adventure described in his book " No Latitude for Error". A beekeeper by profession, his book "From the Ocean to the Sky" described his 1977 expedition up the Ganges to the Himalayas, the site of his greatest achievement. FTP, who was this man who with the aid of Tenzing Norgay reached the summit of Mount Everest?;;(Edmund) Hillary
Philosophy;;Its author argues that its subject can be enhanced by intelligent use of "peripeteia", or reversal, and "anagnorisis", or recognition. Defining his subject as a form of "mimesis", or imitation, to which we are naturally drawn due to our imitative nature, the author then divides his subject into six parts: spectacle, thought, character, plot, melody, and diction, and holds that the best tragedies tells of a hero's fall from happiness to misery due to some hamartia on his part. FTP, what is this philosophical work discussing literature by Aristotle?;;Poetics
Biology;;The cancer treatment hydroxyurea has recently been found to aid in treatment of this disease, increasing life expectance to approximately 45 years. Children with the disease often suffer from "crises" linked with closing of the blood vessels. The gene which causes it specifies the abnormal Hb S hemoglobin, which cause damage to tissues by becoming clogged in capillaries. Resulting from a recessive gene which makes the carrier resistant to malaria, FTP, what is this disease seen mainly in people of sub-Saharan ancestry, which distorts erythrocytes into the namesake shape?;;(sickle cell|sickle-cell){1}? anemia
Geography;;Telpos-Iz is one of the major peaks in this mountain range, whose southern section is known as the Mugodzhar Hills. The central section is known as the Ore, and is home to Mount Yamantau and one of the largest industrial regions in the world, while its highest peaks are found in the north, reaching a height of 6,217 feet at Mount Nayodnaya. FTP, what is this mountain range, the traditional dividing-line between Europe and Asia?;;Ural(s) (Mountains)
Literature;;At one point a magistrate who opposes the protagonist has pots of water poured on his head, while others claim fear of snakes and owls to excuse their desertion. The protagonist's plan is seen in action through the antics of Cinesias and Myrrhine, while Lampito effectively enacts the plan in Sparta, and when delegates from Sparta arrive in Athens a nude maiden is used to entice both sides into a peace agreement. FTP, what is this Aristophanes play in which women withhold sex in order to end a war?;;Lysistrata
World History;;Much valuable information on this group comes from the writings of Priscus, who spent time at the court of their most famous leader, after whose death they were decisively defeated at the River Nedao, ending their historical significance. A nomadic people, they used their formidable cavalry to defeat the Ukrainian Ostrogoths during the 370s, beginning their advance into Europe. On the death of Rua they were ruled by two brothers, but Bleda was soon put to death by his brother, whose advance on Rome was stopped at Lake Garda just a year after his defeat by Aetius at Catalaunian Fields. FTP, who were these people most famously led by Attila?;;Hun(s)
Chemistry;;Their dilution is governed by Ostwald's Law, and they form the most notable exceptions to Henry's Law. Gases may act as them under conditions of high temperature of low pressure. Acetic acid is a weak one, while potassium chloride is an example of a strong one. They include all inorganic acids, bases, and salts. FTP, what are these electrical conductors in which current is carried by ions rather than free electrons.;;electrolyte(s)
Music;;This composer first won fame with the publication of his opus 3 "L'estro armonico", a collection of concertos for one, two or four violins, while in the realm of sacred music he composed the celebrated orotorio "Juditha triumphans". Composer of an opera based on "Orlando furioso", he offered musical training at the Pio Ospedale della Pieta, a orphanage for girls in Venice, while gaining the moniker "the red priest" due to his red hair. FTP, who was this Italian composer now best-known for the concertos in "The Four Seasons"?;;(Antonio) Vivaldi
Religion/Mythology;;The so-called Southern school of this religion emphasized sudden enlightenment, but had died out by the 8th century. Introduced to the west largely through the writings of D.T. Suzuki, it was originally introduced by the legendary Bodhidharma. Its varied practices include the continual invocation of Amida in the Obaku school, while the Soto school uses the practice of zazen, or sitting in meditation without expectation, but most famous is the Renzai sect's use of paradoxical koans. FTP, what is this major branch of Buddhism?;;Zen (Buddhism)
Literature;;In lines 5 and 6 of this poem the author explains that he has derived much pleasure from rest and sleep. Having earlier observed that the poem's subject has been called "mighty and dreadful", the poet then explains that it is "slave to fate, chance, kings, and desperate men., and dost with poison, war, and sickness dwell", finally concluding that after "one short sleep past, we wake eternally", and thus the poem's subject shall die. FTP, what is this sonnet by John Donne?;;Death(,) Be Not Proud|Holy Sonnet (72|Seventy(-)two){1}?
United States History;;It was repudiated by the Clark memorandum of 1928, while an earlier proposal to amend it by Calvo was modified by the Drago Doctrine and Porter Amendment to apply it to foreign debt. First given its current name in 1852, Olney modified it to assert US sovereignty on the continent, while Lodge used it to discourage sale of strategic land. Prompted by both a minor clash with Russia in the northwest and the desire to oppose the Holy Alliance, it was most famously altered by the Roosevelt Corollary. FTP, what was this 1823 doctrine calling for an end to European intervention in the Americas?;;Monroe (Doctrine)
Physics;;In the 1940s barium titanate was discovered to exhibit this effect strongly when exposed to high temperatures. Originally a laboratory curiosity, it was first exploited in WWI when its converse version was used in an early form of sonar. Seen in crystals lacking a center of structural symmetry, such as tourmaline, it has come to be used in phonograph pickups and microphones after its 1880 discovery by Paul-Jacques and Pierre Curie. Seen especially in Rochelle salts and quartz, FTP, what is this effect in which certain non-conducting crystals exhibit a potential difference across opposite faces when exposed to mechanical stress?;;piezoelectricity|piezoelectric (effect)
Art;;Originally erected above a pool, it is now placed at the top of the main staircase of the Louvre, appropriate, as it was intended to be viewed obliquely and from below. Known for the intricate depiction of the drapes billowing in the wind, it depicts a figure alighting on the prow of a ship, still partly airborne due to a powerful head-wind. Created around 200 BCE, FTP, what is this great monument rediscovered in 1863 on the island of Samothrace?;;(Winged) (Victory|Nike){1}? (of Samothrace)
Literature;;It ends with the narrator pointing out a bronze sculpture by Claus of Innsbruck depicting Neptune taming a sea horse. Earlier the narrator reveals that he chooses "never to stoop" while complaining that "the dropping of the daylight in the West"., or a "bough of cherries some officious fool broke in the orchard" brought a "spot of joy" to the face of his wife., who in his eyes was "too soon made glad", prompting him to "give commands" until "all smiles stopped". This discourse is prompted by a viewing by an agent of the count of Tyrol of a painting by Fra Pandolf depicting the former wife of the Duke of Ferrara. FTP, what is this dramatic monologue by Robert Browning?;;My Last Duchess
Religion/Mythology;;One figure of this name was the daughter of King Nisus of Megara. Promising to deliver Megara into the hands of her lover Minos, she cut off a golden hair from her father's head, incurring her father's hatred, prompting her to throw herself into the sea. The other was transformed into a monster with barking dogs for legs, twelve arms, and six heads due to Circe's jealousy of Glaucus' love for her. FTP, who is this monster located across the Strait of Messina from Charybdis?;;Scylla
Physics;;In his famous 1903 Silliman Lectures at Yale, this physicist foreshadowed Einstein's theory of photons with his proposal of a discontinuous theory of light. His elucidation of positive rays and application to neon led to his discovery of neon-22, the first known isotope. This work was continued by his student Francis Aston, one of seven students to also receive a Nobel Prize. Developing the Cavendish Labs into the world's leader center for subatomic physics, his most famous discovery came from his investigation of cathode rays. FTP, who was this British recipient of the 1906 Nobel Prize for his discovery of the electron?;;(J)(oseph) (J)(ohn) Thomson
Literature;;He returned to the writing of dramas late in life, publishing "Eight Comedies and Eight New Interludes", and achieved success with his last published work, "The Labors of Persiles and Sigismunda: A Northern Story". His first published work, the pastoral romance "La galatea", was followed by a series of failed plays, of which only "Numantia" and "The Traffic of Algiers" survive. Known for his various adventures, including jail time for irregularities in his accounting practices, a stint in Algiers as a slave, and his actions in the battle of Lepanto, where his left hand was crippled, his best known work describes the picaresque adventures of an elderly knight. FTP, who is this author of "Don Quixote"?;;(Miguel) (de) Cervantes
Economics;;The fourth section of chapter one concerns the "fetishism of commodities and the secret thereof", while chapter four provides a "general formula" for the titular subject while analyzing what the author designates as the C-M-C and M-C-M forms of circulation, the latter representing the desire to accumulate money for its own sake. Putting forth a controversial theory of commodity value in which a commodity is said to be worth the labor that went into it, the author then uses this theory to claim that employers can pay laborers less than the value of their labor since the employers control the "means of production". FTP, what is this work of economics by Karl Marx?;;Das Kapital|The Capital
United States History;;The early leader Matthew Davis guided the shift of this group's activities away from its early emphasis on parade marches and drinking parties in Martling's Tavern. Later, Richard Croker sought to reverse the reforms which had made it an efficient, autocratic organization. Originally founded in 1789 by William Mooney as a patriotic organization with an elaborate Indian ritual, it gained great power with the election of Fernando Wood as mayor of New York, but soon experienced a reversal in fortunes due to an expose of its graft by the New York Times and Harper's Weekly. FTP, what was this group that has frequently controlled New York politics, most famously headed by Wiliam Tweed?;;Tammany (Hall)|Society of St. Tammany
Religion/Mythology;;The concluding chapter of this book, number 52, is a historical appendix derived mainly from second Kings, chapters 24 and 25. Composed of four main parts, the third contains prophecies against other nations like Moab, the Ammonites, and Egypt, while the opening section includes descriptions of the visions of the almond rod and baskets of figs. Chapter 20 is notable for the series of confessions of the title prophet, while chapters 30-33 contain prophecies of restoration known as the "Little Book of Comfort". FTP, what is this book of the Old Testament, some of which was recorded by the namesake's scribe Baruch?;;(The) (Book of) Jeremiah
Chemistry;;Nitric acid and water form an example of the "maximum" type, while ethanol and water form a "minimum" type. Although they cannot be separated by fractional distillation, a third component can be added to form a new one of these with one of the original components, giving rise to the namesake type of distillation. They arise due to deviations in Raoult's Law, leading to maximums or minimums in the boiling-point composition diagram. FTP, what are these mixtures of liquids that boil at constant composition?;;azeotrope(s)
Literature;;She collaborated in writing the portrait "Ada" and "A Novel of Thank You", but her later work "Aromas and Flavors of Past and Present" was unsuccessful. Important information about the Paris "lost generation" is found in her memoir "What is Remembered", but more indicative of her life is her famous namesake cookbook, containing both her famous recipe for hashish brownies and her witty reminiscences of the circle who gathered around her famous partner. FTP, who is this woman immortalized in an "autobiography" written by her companion Gertrude Stein?;;(Alice) (B(.)) Toklas
Geography;;In the north of this country is the vast tropical forest known as the Peten, as well as the Lake Izabal-Rio Dulce river system, to the south of which is the largest river, the Motagua. The population is concentrated in a highland region which cuts across the country from east to west, and is home to Lake Atitlan and the inactive volcano Tajumulco, the highest point in Central America. Major cities include Quetzaltenango, San Jose, and Puerto Barrios. Bordered by El Salvador, Honduras, Belize, and Mexico, FTP, what is this country which chares its name with the capital city?;;(Republic of) Guatemala
World History;;A merchant in the service of the Medici, this man helped outfit the ships for Columbus' 2nd and 3rd voyages, and devised a system for determining nearly exact longitude, while his acceptance of South America as a separate continent altered European understanding of the New World. In 1499 he served as navigator of the expedition of Ojeda that discovered the mainland of the New World, while on his own he discovered Baia de Guanabara and the mouth of the Amazon, but is best-known for the accounts of his voyages published by the mapmaker Martin Waldseemuller. FTP, who was this explorer often considered the source of the name America?;;(Amerigo) Vespucci
Music;;He wrote a work for 23 solo strings entitled "Metamorphosen", while in the field of vocal music he produced works like "Allerseelen", "Traum durch die Dammerung", and the "Four Last Songs". A master of tonality, his most important works came in the genres of opera and tone poems, as seen in tone poems like "Don Quixote" and "Till Eulenspiegel's Merry Pranks" and operas like "Elektra", "Der Rosenkavalier", and "Salome". FTP, who is this German composer of "Thus Spake Zarathustra"?;;(Richard) Strauss
Literature;;Tension arises in this novel when the understanding Mr. Brown is replaced by the uncompromising Reverend James Smith, who encourages the fanaticism of the young Christian convert Enoch, who provokes the climax of the novel by ripping the mask off of an egwugwu during a religious ceremony. The protagonist is forced into exile for seven years after his gun misfires, killing a village boy. After his return to Ufuomia, his fears of appearing weak like his father Unoka prompt him to beat his son Nwoye and to kill a government messenger with his machete, after which he hangs himself. Centering on the character Okonkwo, FTP, what is this novel, the masterpiece of Chinua Achebe?;;Things Fall Apart
Biology;;This body's postlateral fissure provides a convenient means of dividing it into three lobes, the anterior, posterior, and flocculonodular. Containing several masses of grey matter, the largest of which is known as the dentate nucleus, it is located above the fourth ventricle. Covered by regular, nearly parallel grooves called folia, it is connected to the rest of the brain by three fiber bundles called peduncles. Divided in two by a wormlike structure called the vermis, it is the motor feedback center for the body responsible for the coordination of muscular activity. FTP, what is this area in the back of the brain whose name appropriately means "little brain"?;;cerebellum
Art;;He painted his mistress, Madeleine Knobloch, in "Woman Powdering Herself", just before his death by meningitis at age 31. In "Les Chahut" he displayed his theories that certain types of lines could invoke specific emotions, but he is better-known for a technique first expressed in his first major painting, "Bathers, Asnieres", and whose popular name was coined by Felix Feneon, despite the artist's own preference for the term "divisionism". FTP, who was this French painter, who in his masterpiece "A Sunday Afternoon on the Island of La Grande Jatte" utilized the technique of "pointillism"?;;(George) Seurat
Pop Culture;;It was eventually shown to be vulnerable to the influence of peach schnapps. It was supposed to have been used when Mike Moffett said that Jerry was a phony, while Susan's use of it was evidence that worlds were colliding. Notoriously ineffective, FTP, what was this place where secrets were kept by the characters on "Seinfeld"?;;(the) vault
World History;;The turning point in this battle came with Hasbrouck's defense of St. Vith and McAuliffe's holding of the vital communications center at Bastogne. It began when German forces broke through a portion of the Allied line with a surprise attack on the "Ghost Front", and was intended to take Antwerp. Despite bad weather that kept Allied air forces grounded early in the fighting, the German forces were soon repulsed. Also known as the  Ardennes Campaign, FTP, what was this last major German offensive of WWII?;;(Battle of) (the) Bulge
Earth Science;;A major event during this period was the Glossopteris flora population explosion, but its last years saw a number of mysterious mass extinctions, including the fusulinids and trilobites. Rocks from this period are characterized by an abundance of red land-laid sediments and evaporites. Geologically, it saw the formation of Pangaea, and it is named for a region of the Russian Urals by Roderick Murchison. FTP, what is this period of geologic time from 286 to 245 million years ago, which follows the Carboniferous Period in ending the Paleozoic Era?;;Permian (Period)
Literature;;The action of this work is set in motion due to the theories of the well-known Philadelphia neurologist S. Weir Mitchell, and it ends with the narrator repeated crawling over her unconscious husband John, having just seen what she describes as "strangled heads and bulbous eyes and waddling fungus growths shrieking with derision". She had spent the previous three months in the nursery of an ancestral hall undergoing an extended rest to treat bouts of hysteria, but soon became obsessed with the title object, in which she saw an imprisoned woman. FTP, what is this famous story by Charlotte Perkins Gilman?;;(The) Yellow Wallpaper
Philosophy;;This school of philosophy was carried on by Posidonius and Panaetius during its so-called "middle" period, whose beginning is often identified with the death of the thinker Antipater. Defining the active principle of the universe as a God who can only act upon matter through something they called the "intelligent pneuma", major expositors like Cleanthes, Chrysippus, and Epictetus argued for freedom from passions and desires. Famously practiced by Marcus Aurelius, FTP, what is this school of philosophy founded by Zeno of Citium?;;Stoic(ism|s)
World History;;In his most famous work this man used a flashback technique known as "ring-composition" to maintain the forward flow of the narrative. Involved in an uprising against the tyrant Lygdamis early in his life, he died as part of an Athenian colony sent to Thurii. A native of Halicarnassus, he spent much of his life traveling widely, providing much of the material for his masterpiece, a nine-volume historical work often criticized for its acceptance of eyewitness accounts but nonetheless revolutionary for its scope. FTP, who is this man known as the "Father of History" for detailing the Greek-Persian Wars in his "Histories"?;;Herodotus
Geography;;Many important public buildings can be found in Cathays Park, while nearby is the medieval cathedral of Llandaff. Its growth was stimulated by the building of docks like Penarth and Barry, and until the early 20th century it was one of the world's leading coal-shipping ports. Located on the Taff River, it grew from a namesake castle built on the site of a Roman fort in 1090 into a city of 320,000. FTP, what is this city, the capital and largest city in Wales?;;Cardiff
Geography;;Its dome features a corona of 40 arched windows which flood the interior with light, and is the first major example of a dome built on pendentives. The east and west arches are extended by half-domes which create its characteristic oblong nave. Built by Anthemius of Tralles and Isidorus of Miletus, some of its decorative mosaics have been recently uncovered by removing the whitewash that covered them during its alterations by the Turks, who also added four minarets. FTP, what is this great church in Istanbul?;;Hagia Sophia|Church of Holy Wisdom
Literature;;Lesser known contributors include Thomas Tickell and Ambrose Phillips. Installment 113 contains Roger de Coverley's views on marriage, while numbers 267, 273, and others contain one author's critical papers on Paradise Lost. Utilizing a fictional framework describing the views of characters like Will Honeycomb, Captain Sentry, and Sir Andrew Freeport, its issues were united by the purported author, a shy, quiet "observor" of the London scene. Published from 1711 until 1714, FTP, what is this periodical featuring the essays of Steele and Addison, the successor to "The Tatler"?;;(The) Spectator
Biology;;It is differentiated from a closely related hormone by the fact that it dilates the blood vessels of skeletal muscles and the liver and by its secretion at a ratio of 1 to 4 with its partner hormone by the ends of sympathetic nerve fibers. It is used as an aid to asthma sufferers since it dilates the bronchioles. It inhibits digestion and excretion, increases heart activity, increases the rate of breathing, and increases the power and stamina of muscles. Often injected into the hearts of cardiac arrest victims, FTP, what is this hormone whose release during times of stress has led it to be called the "emergency hormone"?;;adrenaline|epinephrine
World History;;He initiated the assizes of Northampton in order to combat the anarchy rampant during the reign of his predecessor, who he had earlier forced to sign the Treaty of Wellingford or Winchester making him the sole heir to the throne. Known by such monikers as Fitzempress and Curtmantle, he is best known today for conflict instigated by his Constitutions of Clerendon, in which he sought to curb the power of the church. The last years of his reign were marred by the revolts of his sons, who were encouraged by his wife, Elinor of Aquitaine. FTP, who was this first of the Angevin kings, known for his feud with Thomas a Becket?;;Henry (II|(the) second|(the) 2nd){1}?;;Henry
Religion/Mythology;;At one point this mythological figure was taken to Delos by the goddess Eos, whom he served sexually. Originally intended to marry Merope, he grew impatient over delays in the wedding and raped her, prompting her father Oenopion to blind him. After the rays of the rising sun restored his sight, he became a follower of Artemis, and according to one legend was killed after an angry Artemis sent a scorpion to attack him. FTP, who was this great hunter of Greek myth, immortalized as a constellation?;;Orion
Literature;;Other stories in the namesake collection include "A Temporary Matter" and "The Third and Final Continent". The story itself is set during a tour of the temple of Konarak and hills of Udayagiri and Khandagiri by a family visiting India, during which the tour guide, Mr. Kapasi, sees a potential cure for his loneliness in the person of Mrs. Das, who in a moment alone confides in him that her second child was born of an affair of which her husband is unaware. FTP, what is this title story of a recent Pulitzer Prize winning collection by Jhumpa Lahiri?;;Interpreter of Maladies
World History;;Fascinated in his youth by the sea and ships, he spent two years of his reign traveling throughout Europe learning the techniques of shipbuilding, but upon his return was forced to put down a revolt of the streltsy. Originally joint emperor with his retarded brother Ivan under the regency of his half-sister Sophia, he soon seized power, and later had his son Alexei tortured to death to maintain his rule. His seizure and eventual loss of Azov was his first notable attempt to gain greater maritime access, which was completed with his gain of a section of the Baltic coast, where he founded his new capital, modeled on the Western ideas he forced upon his country. FTP, who was this victor in the Great Northern War who from 1682-1725 ruled Russia?;;Peter (the Great|I|the First){1}?;;Peter
Physics;;Due to symmetry considerations, one of the nine possible transformations involving this concept is not allowed. First proposed by  Moo-Young Han and Yoichiro Nambu and independently by Oscar Greenberg, incidences of this concept are always confined within hadrons. Named for the way in which certain combinations give neutral particles, transformations involving it are mediated by the gluons. FTP, what is this property of quarks, the positive type of which comes in red, green, and blue types?;;color (charge)|strong force
Psychology;;With Margaret Vaughan he wrote the book "Enjoy Old Age", while autobiographical information can be found in works like "Particulars of My Life" and "A Matter of Consequences". He delivered the famous William James Lectures at Harvard in 1947 mainly on the strength of his 1938 work "The Behavior of Organisms", which presented his theories on operant conditioning, further addressed in his controversial books "Beyond Freedom and Dignity" and "Walden Two". FTP, who was this behaviorist psychologist famous for his namesake "box"?;;(B)(urrhus) (F)(rederick) Skinner
Religion/Mythology;;The first major medieval reference to this figure is found in the "Flores historiarum" of Roger of Wendover, who reports his name as Cartiphilus, while an Italian variant of the story uses the name Giovanni Buttadeo. John, Chapter 18, Verses 20-22 are often cited as the basis of the story, which was famously revived in a 1602 German pamphlet in which he is named Ahasuerus, and which tells of his taunting of Christ while on the way to the crucifixion, prompting Jesus to respond "I stand and rest, but you will go on". FTP, who is this character of Christian legend doomed to live until the end of the world?;;(the) Wandering Jew
Literature;;Near the end of his life this author penned two short series of novels entitled "The Three Cities" and "The Four Gospels" before his mysterious death from inhaling carbon monoxide fumes in his sleep. While working in a publishing house his employer encouraged him to publish his first works, the short story collection "Contes a Ninon" and the novels "La Confession de Claude" and "Therese Raquin", marked by the scientific determinism which he would explore in all of his works. He became the most famous author in France for his novel "Drunkard", found in his epic 20-novel "Rougon-Macquart" cycle, along with "Nana" and "Germinal". FTP, who was this novelist and critic perhaps best-known for his defense of Alfred Dreyfus in an open letter entitled "J'Accuse"?;;(Emile) Zola
Music;;This musical work features a number of noteworthy dances, including "Trepak", the "Arab Dance", the "Chinese Dance", and the "Dance of the Flutes", and concludes with the "Waltz of the Flowers". Featuring the first-ever orchestral use of the celesta, this  ballet opens with the "Miniature Overture", then goes on to tells of the title figure's battle with an army of mice, after which he takes a girl to Jam Mountain, leading to the famous "Dance of the Sugarplum Fairy". FTP, what is this ballet by Tchaikovsky?;;(The) Nutcracker
Chemistry;;It can be produced by the cuprammonium process, in which the raw material used to make it is dissolved in copper oxide and ammonia. It is more resistant to stains and creasing when made by the acetate process, but the most common commercial type is made by the viscose process. First produced by Hilaire de Chardonnet in 1884, it is made using natural cellulose derived from wood pulp. FTP, what is this fiber once known as "artificial silk", the first synthetic fiber?;;rayon
United States History;;Samuel Liebowitz led the defense, which was aided by two successful Supreme Court appeals by Ozie Powell and Clarence Norris, the latter of which eventually fled to Michigan, which refused to extradite him. Roy Wright was the only one not sentenced to death, despite the retracted testimony of Ruby Bates. Led by Haywood Patterson, FTP, who were these nine African-Americans accused of raping two Alabama girls, whose unfair trials became a symbol for American racism?;;Scottsboro (boys)
Geography;;This river falls 72 feet at the rapids of the Khone Falls, and its floodwaters often reverse the flow of the Tonle Sap River, which flows into it during the dry season. From its marshy source in the Rup-sa Pass of Tibet it rises as the Za Qu River, flowing generally south through Yunnan Province before reaching the major port Phnom Penh and forming much of Laos' border with Myanmar and Thailand. Known for its great delta, FTP, what is this major river of southeast Asia?;;(Mekong|Lancang){1}? (River)
Literature;;To fulfill her need for excitement, the protagonist of this novel frequents the racetrack, where she develops a physical attraction to Alcee Arobin. She develops dissatisfaction with her life in part due to the piano recitals of Mademoiselle Reisz and her long conversations with Madame Ratignolle while vacationing at Grand Isle, where she soon falls in love with Robert Lebrun, but when Lebrun refuses to explore their love due to her marriage, she drowns herself in the sea. FTP, what is this novel about Edna Pontellier, written by Kate Chopin?;;(The) Awakening
World History;;After early studies under Hegius of Deventer, this thinker was saved from a life spent at the monastery of Emmaus when the Bishop of Cambrai chose him as his personal secretary, and he soon published a collection of proverbs known as the "Adagia". Despite his opposition to the leaders of the Reformation, he greatly aided its cause with his "Colloquia" and with his best-known work, a vicious satire attacking the abuses and follishness of the various classes of society, especially the Church. FTP, who was this Dutch humanist, author of "The Praise of Folly"?;;(Desiderius) Erasmus
United States History;;His 1904 book "Presidental Problems" was a defense of his second term in office, during which he gained the nickname "the Great Obstructionist". Getting his start as sheriff and public executioner of Oneida County, New York, he went on to become the so-called "veto mayor" of Buffalo, and he famously feuded with John Kelly of Tammany Hall and allied himself with a young Teddy Roosevelt as governor of New York. Defeating Blaine for the presidency, he first term saw him marry his former ward Francis Folsom and repeatedly veto pork-barrel legislation, while in his second term he opposed the Sherman Silver Purchase Act and threatened war with Britain over the Venezuelan border dispute. FTP, who was this president whose two terms were interrupted by the presidency of Benjamin Harrison?;;(Grover) Cleveland
Chemistry;;In its natural state, it exists as a 2 to 1 mixture of its ortho and para forms. Predicted due to differences in the chemical and physical weights of its related element, its discovery was assisted by Brickwedde and Murphy, and it was first prepared in its pure for by G.N. Lewis. It is extensively used as an isotopic tracer since it reacts much more slowly than its related element, and the large amount of energy released during nuclear fusion of its atoms or in its lithium compounds has led to its use in thermonuclear weapons. Discovered by Harold Urey, FTP, what is this isotope of hydrogen found in heavy water?;;deuterium
Art;;In the bottom right of this painting is an open book on a stand, while another book is seen in the hands of the man in the top center, above and to the left of which is a signature dating the work to 1632. In all, seven men are seen in the top left watching a man using a metal instrument on the arm of the cadaver before him. FTP, what is this great group portrait by Rembrandt?;;(The) Anatomy Lesson of (Dr.|Doctor|Dr){1}? (Nicolaes) Tulp
Geography;;The second largest island in this group is home to the former capital, Atuona, and a major harbor known as the Bay of Traitors, while its largest island was claimed for the United States by David Porter and named Madison Island. The northwest group of islands is sometimes called the Washington Islands, and includes Hatatu, Motu Iti, and Ua Pou, while the southeastern group, sometimes called the Mendana Islands, includes Hiva Oa, the burial place of Paul Gaugain. FTP, what is this part of French Polynesia whose largest island, Nuku Hiva, was the site of the fourth installment of Survivor?;;Marquesas (Islands)
Literature;;This poet's first published poem was a reminiscence about an elderly black man entitled "Negro Harry", while his first short-story, "Death in the School-Room", was based on his Long Island teaching experience. His only novel, Franklin Evans, is a temperance tract, while his Civil War poems are collected in Specimen Days and Collect and Drum Taps. He is most famous for poems like "Crossing Brooklyn Ferry",  "Out of the Cradle Endlessly Rocking" and "When Lilacs Last in the Dooryard Bloom'd". FTP, identify this great American poet, the author of Leaves of Grass and "Song of Myself".;;(Walt) Whitman
Chemistry;;The erroneous idea that the reaction which forms this class of compounds was analogous to neutralization led to their strange naming convention, in which these compounds are named as if they were alkyl salts of carboxylic acids.  IR peaks for these compounds appear at both 1750 and 1200 inverse centimeters, and reaction of them with a base to form an alcohol and a salt is known as saponification and is used in making soap. They are of the form RCOOR' (R C O O R prime) where R and R' are alkyl or aryl groups. FTP name these compounds which form from the reaction of an acid and an alcohol, well known for their unique smells.;;ester(s)
Art;;Early works like the recently discovered Dormition of the Virgin show the influence of Byzantine icon painting. Kicked out of Titian's workshop in less than 10 days because he was too talented for Titian's comfort, he excelled as a portraitist, as seen in his painting Felix Paravicino. Known for a characteristic style representing figures as elongated, flame-like forms utilizing eerie bluish colors, he created a series of famed altarpieces, including El Espolio and The Burial of Count Orgaz. FTP, who was this artist who painted his adopted home in View of Toledo, known by a name indicating his Cretan origins.;;El Greco|(Domenikos) (Theotocopoulos) Cretan
World History;;This man's main follower was Louis de Saint-Just. Known for practicing a simple Spartan lifestyle, he wished to establish a religion of the Supreme Being and denounced the atheistic Religion of Reason espoused by a rival group, the Hebertists.  Made public accuser in 1791, he soon became the leader of the Mountain, and after defeating the Indulgents he assumed complete power, hoping to establish a Republic of Virtue.  FTP, identify this short-lived leader of the Committee of Public Safety who orchestrated the Reign of Terror.;;(Maximilien) Robespierre
Philosophy;;Among the first agnostics, this philosopher is said to have drafted the legal code for the colony of Thurii. His work "Refutations" is lost, and his only surviving work is the first sentence of his "On the Gods". Among the first Sophists, he is known to have been the first Greek to teach for a fee. His namesake Platonic dialogue concerns whether virtue can be taught, but he is better known for a statement recorded in Theaetetus. FTP, who was this native of Abdera who declared "Man is the measure of all things"?;;Protagoras (of Abdera)
Biology;;The most common form of this disease is caused in part by choline deficiency, while the biliary type is caused by disruption of bile flow and is more common in women. Gastrointestinal bleeding is one of the most lethal complications of this disease, whose portal type is the most common, and is frequently found in middle-aged males with a history of chronic alcoholism. FTP, what is this degeneration of the tissue of the liver?;;cirrhosis (of the liver)
Literature;;At one point in this novel, the protagonist receives an X-ray of the skeletal structure of his paramour as a gift from Behrens, while the theorist Georg Lukacs is the inspiration for the lapsed Jew Leo Naphta. The main character is in love with Claudia Chauchat, a married Slavic woman, but he is rebuffed and angered when she ends up with a Dutch coffee planter named Peeperkorn. Later, the hero participates in a s¨¦ance with Dr. Krokowski which ends with him trying to speak to his dead cousin Joachim Ziemssen, who died in World War I. FTP, identify this novel concerning Hans Castorp's seven year stay at Haus Berghof, the most famed novel of Thomas Mann.;;(The) Magic Mountain
World History;;Fighting in this war was briefly ended by the Peace of Nicias, but three years later the battle of Mantinea sparked another 15 years of fighting. Cynossema and Cyzicus were naval victories for Athens, which relied throughout on the power of its navy to protect its trade routes. The disastrous Athenian campaign against Syracuse cost it much of its fleet, and despite the efforts of Alcibiades, Lysander's victory at Aegospotami led to Sparta's victory. Recorded in detail by Xenophon and Thucydides, FTP, what was this war named for the isthmus in the south of Greece?;;Peloponnesian (War(s))
Religion/Mythology;;The only temple dedicated to him is at Pushkar. In the 7th century C.E. the sect known as the Smartas chose five deities to worship and omitted this one, and currently there are no sects or cults which worship him. He was usually pictured as standing on a lotus throne or riding his swan, the hamsa, and is often accompanied by his consorts Savitri and Sarasvati. He originated either from a primordial golden egg or from a lotus which sprouted from Vishnu's navel. Formerly an important god, his name now denotes a divine essence. FTP, name this Creator god of Hinduism.;;Brahma
Literature;;The first stanza of this poem describes the title object as a "venturous bark that flings on the sweet summer wind its purpled wings", while the fourth stanza expresses thanks for the "heavenly message" brought by it. Describing the title object as a "ship of pearl", the poet describes how its "irised ceiling (is) rent" after the death of its "frail tenant", who had added to it throughout its life to make room for its growth, leading the author to conclude in the fifth stanza that his soul should do the same. FTP, what is this famous poem by Oliver Wendell Holmes?;;(The) Chambered Nautilus
Religion/Mythology;;According to one legend Gondoforus, king of the Indies, provided this man with money to build a palace, but he gave it to the poor. According to the apocryphal Acts of his name, he worked as a missionary in India and was finally martyred at Meliapore. Earlier, he alone suggested that the disciples join Jesus in his dangerous journey to heal Lazarus. Also known as Didymus, FTP, who was this disciple whose failure to believe in the Resurrection gave him the moniker "doubting"?;;(St.|st|Saint) Thomas
Physics;;The meter type of this device incorporates a one meter long wire with a sliding contact which can run along it, while other popular versions utilize one or more rheostats to vary the quantity involved. One major advantage is that no calibration is required of the measuring device, which is usually a galvanometer placed between two opposite junctions. When the galvanometer registers no deflection, the device is balanced, and can be used to calculate an unknown resistance based on the known values of three other resistances. FTP, what is this famous "bridge" named for the man who popularized it?;;Wheatstone (Bridge)
Music;;He composed the scores for the ballets Dybbuk and Facsimile, while his controversial Mass was composed specifically for the opening of the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts. Initially studying under Walter Piston and Fritz Reiner, he was soon mentored by Serge Koussevitsky. Making a spectacular debut as conductor with the New York Philharmonic as a last-minute substitute for Bruno Walter, he went on to success both as a conductor and composer of musicals like Candide and Fancy Free. FTP, who was this composer of West Side Story?;;(Leonard) Bernstein
World History;;Quashed when John Lister's men were defeated by Henry Le Despenser, it ultimately proved unsuccessful due to forgotten promises at Miles End and Smithfield.  It was allegedly caused by an unpopular poll tax, but was largely the result of discontent over the Statute of Laborers.  It began in Essex in May 1381, and a month later men from Kent had entered London and destroyed the palace of John of Gaunt. FTP, identify this revolt led by Wat Tyler and named for the portion of the populace involved.;;Peasants(') Re(volt|bellion){1}?|Wat Tyler's (Rebellion|War){1}?
Literature;;At the outset of this novel, Heloise Dubuc dies of shock after a lawyer steals all her property. Another character, Binet, spends his free time making napkin rings on his lathe in his attic.  Financial troubles for the title character begin with a failed operation on Hippolyte, and are further precipitated after borrowing money from Lheureux. Also causing problems are her love affairs with the landowner Boulanger and the student Leon. FTP, identify this novel chronicling the downfall of the wife of the doctor Charles, the best known work of Gustave Flaubert.;;Madame Bovary
Astronomy;;This man's namesake Variable Nebula is a reflection nebula in Monoceros, while with Sandage he is the namesake of a type of extremely massive, luminous hypergiant variable star. In 1925 he devised a widely used system for classifying galaxies using his famous "tuning-fork" diagram, and by 1929 his work at the Mount Wilson observatory produced good distance measurements for over twenty galaxies, which he compared to their velocities to determine that they were receding with speeds that increased with their distance. FTP, who was this astronomer whose undetermined namesake constant governs this recession?;;(Edwin) Hubble
Geography;;The western region of this country is a vast desert split into three regions, the mountainous Kaokeveld region in the north, which includes the Otavi mountains, the sandy Arandis region in the center, and the rocky Oranjemund area in the south, located west of the Basotho Highlands. The official language is English and the major ethnic groups include the Ovambo and Kavango. The agricultural central plateau region borders the Kunene and Okavango river valleys on the north and the Orange River on the south. Formerly known as Southwest Africa, FTP name this African nation which contains the Caprivi Strip, whose capital is Windhoek.;;Namibia
United States History;;This politician's early and unexpected death was partly due to his acceptance of Lincoln's request that he travel to the south and northwest to rouse Union sentiments in the face of the Civil War. Known as the "Little Giant", as chairman of the Committee on Territories in the U.S. Senate he was at the forefront of the slavery question, addressing it with his concept of "popular sovereignty", which he was able to implement in the Kansas-Nebraska Act. To address the Dred Scot decision, he developed his controversial Freeport Doctrine during his famed series of debates with Abraham Lincoln in 1858. FTP, who was this Democrat who went on to lose the 1860 presidential election?;;(Stephen) Douglas
Miscellaneous;;Until the 1930s this woman wrote poetry under the pseudonym Anne Singleton. Heavily influenced by Elsie Clews Parson and Alexander Goldenweiser, she produced her first book, Tales of the Cochiti Indians, in 1931, having earlier gained her Ph.D. with The Concept of the Guardian Spirit in North America. She held that the overall "personality" of a society defines its members, explaining her ideas in works like Zuni Mythology and The Chrysanthemum and the Sword. FTP, who was this anthropologist, author of Patterns of Culture?;;(Ruth) Benedict
Literature;;Before he began authoring original work, he doctored The Spanish Tragedy for Henslowe, and adapted two Roman comedies in The Case is Altered. He was satirically portrayed in Marston's Histriomastix, though he later collaborated with Marston and Chapman on Eastward Ho!. He later wrote masques such as Epicene, and satires like Bartholomew Fair, Cynthia's Revels and the Poetaster. FTP, who was this 17th century dramatist responsible for Volpone, The Alchemist, and Every Man in His Humour?;;(Ben) Jonson
Religion/Mythology;;As a child he was given the four winds to play with by the wind god Anu. Originally a god of thunderstorms, a text which surfaced during the reign of Nebuchadnezzar I bestowed 50 honorable names upon him, and told how with a bow and arrow and some magic given to him by his father, Enki, he slayed the dragon Tiamat and her consort Kingu, and created mankind from Kingu's blood. FTP name this god whose story is told in the Enuma Elish, the chief deity of ancient Babylonia.;;Marduk
Literature;;The main character of this novel is encouraged to "watch out fer ol' number one" by The Tattered Man, and is called a "wild cat" by Lieutenant Hasbrouck, who gets shot in the hand and drives a fleeing soldier back into the ranks.  Wilson's courage falters after his first battle and he gives the main character letters to hold in case he dies.  The veteran soldier Jim Conklin comforts the main character, who picks up the flag after the color-bearer falls in battle.  FTP, identify this novel about Henry Fleming, a Civil War novel by Stephen Crane.;;(The) Red Badge of Courage
Philosophy;;His relentless attacks on Christianity can be seen in his essay Of National Characters, which was later added to his two volume Essays, Moral and Political. Criticized for defending Charles I in his 1754 History of England, this philosopher established a system of morality based on utility and human sentiments alone in his Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals, but is more famous for a work containing the essay Of Miracles.  FTP, identify this Scottish empiricist philosopher, the author of Treatise of Human Nature and Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding.;;(David) Hume
Biology;;A drug known as brefeldin A blocks the transfer of proteins to this organelle, while vesicles bound for it tend to be coated with either COP I or COP II.  The current paradigm for its sorting abilities is explained by the "maturational model", which states that proteins from the endoplasmic reticulum enter its cis face and are packaged in its cisternae, after which they are transported out of the trans face.  Composed of a stack of flattened sacks, FTP, identify this cellular organelle, an apparatus named after an Italian anatomist.;;Golgi (complex|apparatus|bod(y|ies){1}?)
World History;;The Satsuma Rebellion occurred during this period. Most political power during this period was held by Choshu and Tosa clan leaders, in spite of an authoritarian constitution drafted by Ito Hirobumi. Founded under the slogan "Enrich the country and strengthen the military," this period's philosophy was espoused in the Charter Oath and propagated the return of imperial rule.  Occurring after the overthrow of the Tokugawa shogunate in 1868, FTP, identify this period of modernization in Japanese history known as the "restoration" of its namesake emperor.;;Meiji (Restoration)
Art;;This school's second generation of artists included such figures as Worthington Whittredge, Fitz Hugh Lane, and Sanford Gifford, who pioneered the movement known as Luminism.  Its first generation of artists included Thomas Doughty, Jasper Cropsey, and John Casilear.  This movement was discovered by John Trumball and art critic William Dunlap, who critiqued such works as Cotopaxi, Niagara, and Rocky Mountain-Lender's Peak.  Consisting of such artists as Albert Bierstadt, Frederic Church, and Thomas Cole, FTP, identify this art movement based on American landscapes and named for a waterway.;;Hudson River (School)
Literature;;The author of this work wrote in 1925's A Vision that its subject represented how "religious, aesthetic, and practical life were one".  The third stanza implores "sages standing in God's holy fire" to "be the singing-masters" of the speaker's soul.  The last stanza describes how the speaker wishes to take "such a form as Grecian goldsmiths make / Of hammered gold and gold enameling," while the first stanza describes how the title location "is no country for old men".  FTP, identify this 1928 poem about traveling to the titular city by William Butler Yeats.;;Sailing to Byzantium
United States History;;They frequently met at Catamount Tavern, and included such leaders as Seth Warner and John Stark, who led them to victory at Bennington. Originally gaining prominence in a skirmish with militia which ended with them whipping the militia with birch rods, they sought to preserve the New Hampshire Grants by opposing speculators from New York, but later took an active role in the American Revolution, taking Fort Ticonderoga. FTP, what was this Vermont group led by Ethan Allen?;;Green Mountain (Boys)
Chemistry;;Due to the failure of its developer to write in anything but his native language, the work behind this concept went largely unnoticed until 1889, and some of the behavior predicted by it wasn't fully explained until the work of Morris Selig Kharasch in 1933.  Its discovery was the result of research done on the prediction of regioselective addition reactions of hydrogen halides.  Stating that reactions occur via protonation to give the more stable carbocation, FTP, identify this rule of organic chemistry that states hydrogen adds to carbons with more hydrogens, originally stated by its eponymous Russian discoverer.;;Markovnikov(')(s) (rule)
Literature;;Getting his start in writing with the poetry collection "Babbling April", he went on to write the plays "The Living Room" and "The Complaisant Lover", but is better known for his novels. He found his voice with his fourth novel, "Stamboul Train", the first of the works he dubbed "entertainments" due to their similarity to thrillers. His wide travels provided the settings for works like "The Comedians", "A Burnt Out Case", and "Our Man in Havana". FTP, who is this English author best known for "The End of the Affair", "The Heart of the Matter" and "The Power and the Glory"?;;(Henry) (Graham) Greene
Psychology;;This work took over eight years to sell 600 copies.  It contains a famous section relating a scene in a large hall with numerous guests, including the widow Irma and the author's friend Otto.  It divides the title concept into its actual, or "manifest content," and its hidden meaning, or "latent content".  This work contains chapters that attempt to identify the title concept's "Stimuli and Sources," its role as "Wish-Fulfillment," and to explain why they are forgotten upon waking.  FTP, identify this work of Sigmund Freud that first analyzed the importance of understanding dreams.;;(The) Interpretation of Dreams
Geography;;This city was founded under the name Sunda Kelapa and took its present name in 1527 during the reign of Fatahillah.  Famous attractions include the Textile Museum and the Rangunan Zoo, and its native inhabitants are called Betawi.  Divided into Central, North, South, East, and West districts, this capital city lies on the Ciliwung river.  Formerly controlled by the Dutch and called Batavia, FTP, what is this city on the island of Java, the capital of Indonesia?;;Jakarta
World History;;Despite a royal order ordering it to end on August 25, it continued unabated in the countryside, leading to 70,000 deaths. Prompted both by a failed assassination plot against Admiral Coligny and the gathering of many prominent leaders for the wedding of Margaret of Valois to Henry of Navarre, it was a Guise plot reluctantly joined by King Charles IX and organized by Catherine de'Medici. FTP, what was this 1572 massacre of French Huguenots?;;(St.|Saint|St){1}? Bartholomew(')(s) (Day) (Massacre)
Physics;;When one accounts for the mass distribution, it can be found by using the parallel and perpendicular axis theorems.  It is the common factor in rotational kinetic energy and angular momentum, and when multiplied by the angular acceleration, this quantity yields the net torque in a system.  Important in determining a system's rotational motion, FTP, identify this physics quantity that is considered the rotational analog of mass and is generally designated I.;;moment of inertia|angular mass|rotational inertia
Literature;;He gained fame as a translator with his Acts of King Arthur and His Noble Knights, while works of nonfiction include 1942's Bombs Away and the Robert Capa collaboration A Russian Journal.  He is better known for his novels, lesser-known examples of which are The Short Reign of Pippen IV, and The Wayward Bus. His first work, Cup of Gold, was followed by works like In Dubious Battle and The Red Pony, many of which were based on his experiences in Salinas, California. FTP, identify this American writer of such works as East of Eden and The Grapes of Wrath.;;(John) Steinbeck
Noncomputational Math;;This man's namesake tetrahedra are two tetrahedra that mutually circumscribe and inscribe each other, and his namesake "mu function" gives a measure of the number of distinct primes in square-free integers. A variation of this man's most famous mathematical contribution provides an example of a non-trivial vector bundle over the circle. In 1818 he introduced his barycentric calculus, and later influenced projective geometry with his namesake net. Formulator of the "four-color" problem, FTP, who was this German mathematician best known for his one-sided strip?;;(August) Mo(e)bius
Religion/Mythology;;The author of this book is often contrasted with those "of the circumcision," particularly in Colossians 4:10-14, indicating that he was a gentile.  Dedicated to Theophilus, this book is referred to as the source material for Acts, and it is thought that the author is the same.  The author of this book implies that he was not an eyewitness to the events described, but does state that he researched them fully.  It begins with the infancy and childhood of Jesus and ends with the resurrection.  FTP, identify this synoptic Gospel, the third book of the New Testament.;;(Book of) Luke
Religion/Mythology;;As an infant he was saved from death by his mother Polymede, who pretended that he had been stillborn to spare him from his usurping uncle.  Raised in a wilderness cave by the centaur Chiron, he became the pawn of Hera, who held a grudge against his uncle Pelias.  After bearing Hera in the guise of a mysterious woman across a river, he undertook his most famous task, which was to journey to Colchis to retrieve a possession of King Aeetes.  FTP, name this hero who searched for the Golden Fleece as captain of the Argonauts.;;Jason
United States History;;He joined the 23rd Ohio Regiment at the outset of the Civil War and emerged a major general of a respected volunteer group.  He came into his most famous office after serving as governor of Ohio from 1868-72.  He firmly supported his Secretary of the Treasury John Sherman in his efforts to give Civil War greenback dollars backing in gold, and the Bland-Allison Act had to be passed over his veto.  Embroiled in the election controversy of 1876, FTP, identify this 19th president of the U.S. who won after a Congressional commission picked him over Samuel Tilden.;;(Rutherford) (B.) Hayes
Literature;;After the title character is exiled, his brother is made regent, after which Bharat places the title character's sandals upon the throne.  Jatayu, the king of the birds, unsuccessfully attempts to prevent the abduction of the title character's wife, who he married after bending a bow of Shiva at the behest of King Janaka. Aided by Lakshmana and the monkey-king Hanuman, the title hero defeats the demon king Ravana. Attributed to Valmiki, FTP, identify this Indian epic of India about the legendary figure Rama.;;(The) Ramayana
Music;;Francois-Antoine Habeneck first conducted the premier of this musical work, for which the composer recycled his Marche des Gardes from his ill-fated opera Les Francs Juges and placed it in the penultimate movement.  The solo cornet is the highlight of the second movement, entitled A Ball, while the final movement portrays an orgiastic festival and is called Dream of a Witches' Sabbath.  The first movement is Reveries and Passions, though it is the fourth movement, March to the Scaffold, that best develops this symphony's id¨¦e fixe.  Dedicated to Harriet Smithson, FTP, identify this most famous work of Hector Berlioz.;;Symphon(ie|y){1}? Fantastique
World History;;He served under Pompey's father during the Social War and killed his own brother-in-law during the proscriptions of Sulla.  Charges of extortion and fornication with a Vestal Virgin failed to keep him out of office, though he and his forces were finally defeated in 62 BCE by Gaius Antonius Hybrida at Pistoria.  After losing the consulship in 64 BCE, he assumed command of the army at Faesulae and attempted to hold an insurrection.  FTP, identify this famous Roman conspirator who was the subject of a famous oration by Cicero.;;Catiline|(Lucius) (Sergius) Catilina
Art;;Alexandre Dumas wrote that this painting's creator worked out of sentimentality rather than any sense of patriotism.  Towards the right of the canvas a city can be seen in the foggy background.  The soldier on the left wears his hat askew and bears a sabre, while the boy on the far right charges forward bearing two pistols.  The man in the top hat with the musket is supposedly the artist himself and stands to the left of the central figure, who stands bare-breasted and holds a musket in one hand and the French tri-color in the other.  FTP, identify this 1830 painting, the most famous work of Eugene Delacroix.;;Liberty Leading the People|La Liberte¦guidant le peuple
Religion/Mytholgoy;;This Greek god's sons, who are presumably by his wife, the Charity Pasithea, travel from the west of Ocean through gates made of either horn or ivory, depending on whether they intend to tell the truth or to deceive. Those sons are known as the Oneiroi and include Icelus, Phobetor, and Pnathasos. Often seen naked with wings growing from his head, this son of Erebus and Nyx allowed Endymion to watch Selene for the entire day and night, and is the twin brother of the death-god Thanatos. For 10 points, name this father of Morpheus and god of sleep.;;Hypnos
United States History;;He was expelled from a Georgia seat in the House of Representatives in 1792; earlier in that state, he killed the Creek chief Emistesigo during a successful campaign to capture Savannah. He also took Stony Point in the Revolution and later commanded troops which repelled an attack on Fort Recovery. In a clash with the Northwest Confederation near the Maumee River, his forces killed Bluejacket to reverse the defeat of Arthur St. Clair, thus acquiring land extending to the Cuyahoga and Lake Erie in an agreement with Little Turtle. For 10 points, name this general whose victory at Fallen Timbers secured the Treaty of Greenville.;;("Mad") (Anthony) Wayne
Literature;;Minor characters in this work include the protagonist ex-teacher and amputee whose gift of boots eventually leads to the death of another character and the 40 year-old Stanislaus Katczinsky.  A game of cards is combined with putting a number of wooden portable latrines in a circle in this work, in which the protagonist and his friends also gang up and beat their ex-teacher Corporal Himmelstoss.  The protagonist passes the time killing lice and roasting geese with older draftees like Tjaden and Detering, while younger colleagues include Kropp and Kemmerich.  The stabbing of a French soldier eventually breaks down Paul Baümer in, FTP, what novel by Erich Maria Remarque?;;All Quiet on the Western Front|Im Westen nichts Neues
Biology;;A collection of them is called an androecium, and most flowers have six of them whorled around the carpel (which in orchids they are fused with) inside a structure known as the perianth, composed of the petals and sepals. Individually, they consist of long, thin stalks known as filaments, and bulbous, bi-lobed heads known as anthers.  Each anther contains structures called microsporangia which produce haploid spores, more commonly known as pollen, which it can release either all along its length or through pores.  For ten points, name this reproductive organ of the flower, the male counterpart of the pistil.;;Stamen
Literature;;Verse one of Psalm 2 lends itself to the title of this author's only unfinished work, Why Do the Heathen Rage?  A woman's Docetism thwarts her husband's attempt to please her by getting a tattoo of a Byzantine cross in one of this author's stories, while a novel concerns a 14 year old would-be prophet who is raped after baptizing Bishop Rayber.  Better known works include a novel about Hazel Motes and a story in which a psychotic killer, the Misfit, murders Bailey's family, "A Good Man Is Hard to Find".  FTP name this author of "Everything that Rises Must Converge," and a story in which a charlatan bible salesman steals Hulga Hopewell's wooden leg, "Good Country People".;;(Flannery) O'Connor
Religion/Mythology;;Important texts for this group include the Record of Talks on the Law and the Poisonous Stamens and Pistils of Thorns, written by Hakuin. Its members created chinzo portraits and bokuseki calligraphy, and it included a late denomination that believed in the chanting called nembutsu. The goal in this sect is to achieve satori, whether through sitting, as in the Soto group, or verbal methods, as in Rinzai. Brought to China by Bodhidharma and Japan by Dogen, it makes use of statements which may equate the Buddha with three pounds of flax, known as koans. For 10 points, name this anti-rational form of Buddhism.;;Zen (Buddhism)
Pop Culture;;Directive B10.81is known as the eponymous law of this man, who is unable to pronounce the words "bravo," "champagne," or "guacamole". As described in his "Big Book of War," his achievements include carpet bombing Eden 7 and defeating the pacifists of the Gandhi nebula. He was disgraced after destroying the headquarters of the Democratic Order of Planets due to his distrust of the Neutral Planet, via his ship, the Nimbus, which he commands through first officer Kif Kroker. For 10 points, name this sufferer of a sexy learning disability and onetime lover of Leela, an incompetent twenty-five star general on Futurama.;;(General) (Major) (Webelo) Zapp (Brannigan)|Brannigan
Literature;;Toward the end of this work the protagonist finds his wife's orphan cousin working as a starving prostitute.  He attacks a bartender after the bartender tries to cheat him out of 100 dollars, and in jail he meets Jack Duane, a safe-cracker.  The protagonist's father dies from consumption developed due to the cold, moist room in which he worked, and his son of the same name, Antanas, drowns in the street.  His wife's stepmother Elzbieta lies about the age of her son Stanislovas at the stockyards, and Ona sells herself to Connor to make ends meet.  Socialism eventually provides salvation for Jurgus Rudkis in, FTP, what muckraking novel by Upton Sinclair?;;The Jungle
Noncomputational Math;;Its area is three times that of its generating shape, and its length is four times that of the aforementioned shape's diameter. Christiaan Huygens used its isochronous properties, namely that a particle on it will descend it constant time regardless of its starting point) to fashion guides for the first pendulum clock that guaranteed a regular swing for any pendulum height, and these properties led to its proposal by Bernoulli of its inverse being the brachistochrone or curve of fastest descent. The solution to the differential equation (y')^2 = (2r-y)/y, its parametrization is x= r(t-sint) and y= r(1-cos t). For ten points, name this curve generated by a point on a rolling circle.;;cycloid(s)
Music;;Operas by this man include The Uncle from Boston and The Marriage of Camacho, and most of the librettos for his operas are by Dr. Johann Ludwig Casper.  His first royal commission was to create incidental music to the choruses from Sophocles' Antigone.  He wrote overtures to The Pretty Melusine and Ruy Blas, while his Religious works include the oratorios Elijah and St. Paul.  The second movement of his third symphony evokes folk music from the titular place, while a saltarello and a tarantella appear in the final movement of his Italian Symphony.  FTP name this composer, also known for his Hebrides Overture and incidental music to A Midsummer Night's Dream.;;(Felix) Mendelssohn
Literature;;The word "serendipity" originated from a short work by this man based on King Bahram V about three unusually fortunate Sri Lankan princes.  His poetic achievements include an epilogue to Nicholas Rowe's Tamerlane and an epistle in verse for Lady Caroline Fox entitled The Beauties.  Adeliza falls in love with her estranged birth father, Edmund, who had her unknowingly with his mother, the Countess of Narbonne, in his only drama, The Mysterious Mother, but he is better known for a novel in which Theodore is imprisoned after Conrad is crushed by a giant helmet, leaving Isabella to be courted by Manfred in an Italian city.  FTP name this author of The Castle of Otranto.;;(Horace) Walpole
Noncomputational Math;;Contrary to common perception, it did not require all local variables to be statically allocated, although variables are implicitly assigned to either INTEGER OR REAL status, and the IMPLICIT NONE keyword is commonly used to force the programmer to explicitly type them. Pointers in the 1990 standard are designed specifically for matrix targets, and are always dereferenced, and arrays are famously handled directly without the need for loop control structures. Before 1977, it extensively used preprecessors in order to make the language more programmer-friendly. Aging but still popular for numerically intensive computing, for ten points, name this imperative programming language, whose name comes from a shortening of Formula Translating System.;;FORTRAN
Geography;;Premier Robert Bond solved the "French shore problem" afflicting this entity in the 1880s. It was the only dominion prohibited by the Statute of Westminister from joining the League of Nations, and had come under British control due to the 1580s expedition of Humphrey Gilbert. Its political groups included the People's Party and Fishermen's Protective Union, both of which were opposed by Joseph Smallwood, who became its first provincial governor after a long battle for union with Canada. For 10 points, name this formerly politically distinct province, comprised of a large island and the mainland of Labrador.;;Newfoundland (and Labrador)
Art;;The right side of this work features an image of a woman clad in black and gold playing the harp before other female musicians.  A man clad only in a red toga-robe walks toward a cottage in the foreground of the bottom right, which features more lavish foliage than the other images.  A company of flag-bearing men ride from the bottom left toward the central scene, which features the sun shining down on a red bed being worshipped by four women clad in white.  Alternately called Adoration of the Mystic Lamb, it features the annunciation on the outer panels.  Residing in St. Bavo cathedral in its namesake city, this is, FTP, what altarpiece by Hubert and Jan van Eyck?;;Ghent (Altarpiece)
Physics;;The Daya Bay experiment in Hong Kong due to start in 2007 is intended to investigate the theta-1-3 ‘mixing angle' of their oscillation, by indirectly measuring the disappearance of the antimatter counterpart. Evidence of ‘sterile' ones predicted by the seesaw mechanism which only interact via gravity has caused controversy, and the seeming gap of those coming from the sun was explained when their oscillation between different flavor states was detected. For ten points, name these subatomic particles coming in electron, tau, and muon flavors, and thought to not have mass until recently.;;neutrino(s)
Literature;;A set of possessions in this work is bought by the pastor Tribulation Wholesome and his partner, who believe that they are helping to care for a group of orphans.  Another character tries to see the Queen of Fairy while blindfolded, gagged, and stuffed in a water closet, having lost most of his money gambling.  Pertinax Surly, posing as a Spanish Don, encounters Dame Pliant, who along with her brother Kastril has come to see the title character.  Surly is a friend of Sir Epicure Mammon, who thinks Dol Common is a mad aristocrat thanks to the machinations of Face.  Lovewit's house is used by Subtle to con the local citizenry in, FTP, what play by Ben Jonson?;;(The) Alchemist
World History;;Throughout their existence, a debate raged over the consequences of employing the "link system" on them. Politically favored ones had first use of MTS loans, and their output was the subject of the article "Dizzy from Success," which slowed the pace of their formation. Divided based on size and the source of managers into kolkhoz and sovkhoz, the process of forming them led to the Ukrainian genocide and the "liquidation of the kulaks". For 10 points, name these organizations, the basic structure of agricultural production in the Soviet Union.;;collective farm(s)
Music;;This work was composed after its composer abandoned an opera based on Hans Christian Andersen's The Emperor and the Nightingale.  Early moments in this work include an appearance of thirteen maidens who play a game with golden apples and dance a "round dance".  The first tableau ends with "profound darkness," while the second, far shorter tableau includes the revival of the Petrified Knights.  The title character was a breakout role for Tamara Karsavina, and that character meets Ivan in the garden of Kaschei the Immortal, whose lackeys later participate in the "infernal dance".  FTP name this ballet about a mythical flaming creature by Igor Stravinsky.;;(The) Firebird|Zar-ptica|L'Oiseau de feu
Philosophy;;He created the NF system of set theory and, with Hilary Putnam, made an "indispensability argument" for the reality of mathematical entities. He advocated looking to the limits of a formal language in order to determine the "ontological commitments" of any statement in that language in his The Ways of Paradox and Ontological Relativity, and he identified logical reductionism and the analytic/synthetic distinction as the titular fallacies of another work. For 10 points, name this American analytic philosopher, the author of Word and Object and "Two Dogmas of Empiricism".;;(Willard) (Van) (Orman) Quine
Geography;;Native groups here include the YotaYota, Kurnai, and Kulin , and one area of this place, bounded on the north by the Avoca river, features the Den of Nargun and Ninety-Mile Beach, accessible from Bairnsdale.  It is divided by Port Phillip Bay into a basalt plain and the plains of Gippsland, and minor urban destinations here include Melton and Mildura, while brown coal is mined in the Latrobe Valley here. Its current incarnation was begun when John Pascoe Fawkner landed on the banks of the Yarra River.  FTP, name this state in southeastern Australia with capital at Melbourne, named for a 19th century Empress of India.;;Victoria
Miscellaneous;;This practice was at issue in the abortive 1955 case of Naim v. Naim, in which a state ignored a Supreme Court order to gather more evidence. The California case of Perez v. Sharp found Fourteenth Amendment protection for this practice in 1948, drawing on a broader federal precedent in Meyer v. Nebraska. Bans on it were upheld in 1883's Pace v. Alabama if the two people involved received the same penalty, but after a Virginia judge upheld a ban on this practice by appealing to the geographic intent of God, the Supreme Court finally protected it in 1967. For 10 points, name this practice protected in Loving v. Virginia.;;interracial marriage(s)|miscegenation
Biology;;Due to its propensity to clear the renal system in three to four hours, patients' urine was often collected in early treatment protocols to reuse and recover it. Dorothy Crowfoot Hodgkin famously elucidated its structure in the early 1940s, enabling its mass production. The name refers to a group of Beta-lactam antibiotics that share the basic Penam skeleton, with the formula R-C9H11N2O4S, such as amoxicillin, ampicillin, flucloxacillin, dicloxacillin, and methicillin. It also refers to a specific member in its namesake group that is used to treat Gram-positive bacterial infections. For ten points, name this compound whose discovery was attributed to Alexander Fleming.;;Penicillin
World History;;The books The Forged Classics and The Great Commonwealth opposed the rule of this person, who was accused of squandering  the naval budget on the construction of a useless marble ship. That occurred around the time that this ruler's government was turning a skeptical eye to the Hundred Days of Reform and the Self-Strengthening Movement. One of the two other people who came to power in a coup by Prince Gong, this former consort of the Xianfeng emperor lost power after deciding to back the Boxers. For 10 points, name this mother of the Tongzhi emperor and effective ruler near the end of the Qing dynasty.;;Ci xi|Tzuhsi|Xiaoqin|Xianhuanghou|Empress Dowager|Dowager Empress
Architechture;;The inverted right triangle design of the Dallas City Hall is characteristic of this man, who adapted the colonnade of St. Peter's Basilica for Christopher Newport Univerity's Ferguson Center for the Arts. He first gained widespread notice in Boulder, Colorado where he designed the National Center for Atmospheric Research, and he would later be recognized by the Japanese government for his Miho Museum. His design for the JFK memorial library presages the structure of both the East Wing of the National Gallery of Art and the Rock n' Roll Hall of Fame. FTP, identify architect, most famous for designing the Louvre Pyramid and the Bank of China in his country of birth.;;((Ieoh) (Ming)|I(.) M(.)) Pei
Geography;;The monarchial rivalry with this country's National Peasant Party laid the foundations for the "National Legionary State," a fascist government whose contributing movements included Everything for the Fatherland and the Legion of the Archangel Michael, also known as the Iron Guard. Its postwar politics were dominated by Petru Groza and Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej, who secured the abdication of King Michael. Gheorghiu-Dej's successor issued the July These and hammered out an independent communist approach, denouncing Soviet interventionism and investing much power in his wife Elena. For 10 points, name this country which executed dictator Nicolae Ceausescu in 1989.;;R(o|u){1}?mania
Economics;;The "welfare triangle" region found when graphically representing monopolies is a specific form of this phenomenon. Joel Waldfogel argued that because a receiver of a gift usually makes a better decision when buying a gift than a giver, this quantity is present in Christmas shopping, while another example is a production shortfalls caused by erroneously small predictions of the amount of labor needed. Commoly caused by an externality affecting the price of a good, such as a subsidy or tax, it exists when the equilibrium point is not optimal. For 10 points, identify this economic phenomenon, a social cost caused by market inefficiency.;;deadweight loss
Chemistry;;Research at Columbia University by Thomas Katz with tungsten systems was key to discovering the role of metal carbenes in initiating this reaction, and was later followed up by the development of tantalum and tungsten carbene systems with high-metal oxidation states, distinct from the low-oxidation Fischer carbenes created before. These Schrock carbenes led to more viable molybdenum complexes for this operation which worked under less exacting conditions, which inspired the ruthenium catalyst systems popularized by Grubbs. For ten points, name this reaction that involves exchanging of carbon-carbon double bonds between alkenes.;;(olefin) metathesis
Literature;;At the end of this novel, Russell's grandmother gives him a dime to buy an ice cream cone after thinking about her son's death. In its third section, reverend Duncan McMillan fails to pardon another character from Death Row when Orville Mason exploits that character's sensational trial to further his political career. In its second section, the protagonist moves to Lycurgus and impregnates his mistress before leaving her for the rich, exciting socialite Sondra Finchley. The drowning of Roberta Alden in Big Bittern Lake results in the execution of Clyde Griffiths in, for 10 points, what 1925 novel by Theodore Dreiser?;;(An) American Tragedy
Physics;;Four remarkable aspects of it were noticed after its discovery: there was no time lag for the phenomenon; increasing the intensity of the source increased the number of reactions but not their maximum kinetic energy. red light was unable to cause it; and weak violet light resulted in higher energies than intense light with greater wavelengths. Such results fit well with Plank's hypothesis of the particle nature of light, as almost every phenomenon involving light could be explained by waves. For 10 points, name this effect explained by Albert Einstein in a 1905 paper which won him the 1921 Nobel Prize in Physics.;;Photoelectric Effect
Literature;;One of this author's stories consists of a woman's letter to her abusive husband relating a dream about the titular blemish on her back. One of his novels finds a man recalling his life as he sleeps next to six titular virgins, and in another novel a young war veteran beats up his mistress in an attempt to force an abortion. Uragami reports on a match between Shusai and Otake in The Master of Go, but better-known is a novel about an affair between the businessman Shimamura and the geisha Komako at a hot springs in western Japan, Snow Country. FTP name this author, also known for a work centering around the tea ceremony, A Thousand Cranes.;;Kawabata (Yasunari)
Miscellaneous;;One person known by this nickname was Mark Luckhurst, the bassist for Thunder. Another defeated Rick Martel in a "blindfold" match, used the DDT finisher, and was the owner of Damien and Lucifer. A song laments that you could "fill the Great Lakes" with the millions of these attacking the Aquabats, while another person by this name defeats Cuervo Jones after rescuing Donald Pleasance from a prison island in two John Carpenter movies. The appearance of one of these creatures interrupts the chanting of "badger badger mushroom" in a Flash cartoon. For 10 points, name these reptiles which also provide the nickname of quarterbacks Ken Stabler and Jake Plummer.;;snake(s)
United States History;;Before this battle, Major General Johann de Kalb joined up with the main forces at Deep River with a force of mostly Marylanders, and one side's commander had to rush to the site upon the attack, having left Lord Rawdon in charge. It occurred at a supply depot which was earlier secured by Banastre Tarleton's defeat of Colonel Burford, and which was eventually evacuated and burned as a result of Nathanael Greene's attack on Hobkirk's Hill a year after this battle. This battle resulted in the casualties of over 2000 Americans under Horatio Gates at the hands of a Cornwallis-led British force. For 10 points, name this major defeat for the Revolutionary Army in South Carolina.;;(Battle of) Camden
Biology;;A recent study by Yixian Zheng revealed that RanGTP causes the protein Lamin B to assemble this. Partly created by MTOCs, this structure develops its characteristic form after attaching to kinetochores once the nuclear envelope breaks down. It disappears after being constricted by the cleavage furrow, where it helps to establish a new system of microtubules in each daughter cell. Attaching to the centromeres during metaphase, for 10 points, name this group of fibers that plays a central role in Mitosis.;;(the) (mitotic) spindle
Philosophy;;He posited a "law of conservation of difficulty," saying that simpler fields develop more obscurantist vocabularies, in his essay "Postmodernism Disrobed". His latest book denounces "tremulous Martin Luther King impersonations" and describes one subject as "comparable to the smallpox virus but harder to eradicate". One of his earliest forays into metaphysics was titled in reference to a William Paley argument, and he later argued that children should not be taught metaphysical beliefs and advocated the term "Bright" to describe those who reject all superstition. For 10 points, name this author of The Blind Watchmaker and The God Delusion, a biologist and evangelizing atheist.;;(Richard) Dawkins
Music;;This work, never performed during the composer's lifetime, was readapted by its composer in 1874 to serve as part of his never completed opera The Sorochintsy Fair as an intermezzo, earlier having been borrowed heavily in the "Festival of Chernobog" in his opera-ballet Mlada. Originally intended as incidental music to the play Ved'ma, Its composer finished it on the eve of the day of St. John, a figure who is mentioned in its full title. Re-orchestrated by Rimsky-Korsakov, this is, FTP, what piece by Modest Mussorgsky about the gathering of witches for the Sabbath, adapted by Stokowski to be part of the final segment of Fantasia.;;(St(.)|Saint) (John's) Night on Bald Mountain
Noncomputational Math;;These quantities must be real when all of the complex entries equal their conjugate transpose, as is the case in a Hermitian matrix. They can be obtained by solving the determinant of the matrix minus these variables times the identity matrix and solving for zero, a process that yields the characteristic equation of the matrix. For 10 points, identify this scalar value, usually symbolized by lambda, that indicates that a matrix times some vector x is equal to this integer quantity times the vector x.;;Eigenvalue(s)|Characteristic Root(s)|Characteristic Value(s)|Proper Value(s)|Latent Root(s)
United States History;;John Rankin's opposition to this piece of legislation caused John Gibson's "midnight ride" from Georgia to Washington to cast the tiebreaking vote in favor of it. It established the "52-20 club," paying unemployment benefits of twenty dollars for one year. Drafted by the American Legion, it gave out over two million home loans, and paid up to 500 dollars of the college tuitions of its recipients, dramatically increasing the enrollment of universities across the country. For 10 points, name this law signed in 1944 and overhauled in 1984 by Sonny Montgomery, which provided generous benefits for returning veterans of World War II.;;(The) G(.)I(.) Bill (of Rights)|(The) Servicemembers(') Readjustment Act of 1944
Religion/Mythology;;The wise men known as the Abgal were created from the body of this god, and Damkina became pregnant while living on this god's corpse. He was killed after a failed attempt to eliminate his children by creating Mummu. He original offspring were the soils Lahmu and Lahamu and the earth and sky, Anshar and Kishar, and his later descendant Ea kills him. In the epic of Gilgamesh, Gilgamesh goes into the body represented as this deity to pick the plant of eternal life. For 10 points, name this husband of the deep salt water Tiamat, the Mesopotamian embodiment of the primordial fresh-water ocean.;;Apsu
Geography;;It only has one National Park, but some of the lesser-known federally-protected areas in this state include the John Day Fossil Beds National Monument and part of the Nez Perce National Historical Park. The Klamath Mountains, which are formally a part of the Siskiyou Mountains, form one of the major geographical areas of this state, as do the Coast Range and Cascade Mountains. Claiming to have the shortest river in the world in the D River, its more important waterways include the Deschute and Willamette Rivers. For 10 points, identify this state in the Pacific Northwest that is home to Mount Hood and Crater Lake.;;Oregon
Religion/Mythology;;In the Jewish liturgical year, it encompasses the parshas of Shemini, Tzav, and Vayikra. This book explains that the showbread is to be laid out in two rows of six loaves and contains instructions on the ritual of killing a scapegoat for Azazel. Chapter 25, verse 10 of it is inscribed on the Liberty Bell, and this book also includes the episode in which Nadab and Abihu bring "strange fire" to the Tabernacle. It explains the ritual for purifying a leper, lists clean and unclean animals, and includes the Priestly Code, which is why it is named for the priestly tribe. For 10 points, identify this third book of the Old Testament, found between Exodus and Numbers.;;Leviticus|Wayiqra
Literature;;At one point in this work, after criticizing another character's positive reaction to "the dropping of the daylight in the West" and "the white mule she rode with round the terrace," the speaker calls attention to a bronze sculpture of Neptune taming a seahorse. The speaker remarks that he chooses "never to stoop" before coldly stating that he "gave commands;/ Then all smiles stopped together". Those reflections are recalled by a "spot of joy" on the now-dead title character's portrait, which was "painted on the wall" by Fra Pandolf. Spoken by the duke of Ferrara, for 10 points, name this poetic monologue about a noble figure by Robert Browning.;;My Last Duchess
Literature;;At one point in this play, Sulla advises one of the central characters to wait for the Pennsylvania rather than board the Amelia. One character is described as a "fat, bald, short-sighted Jew" and tells the representative of the League of Humanity about how prices on staple goods have dropped. In Act 3, Damon is found screaming on an autopsy table, while in act 2 Drs. Gall and Hallemeier along with Domin vainly board the gunship Ultimus for protection against the revolution begun by Radius. Ultimately, the love between Helena and Primus brings hope to Alquist after all the humans have been killed. FTP name this play about a group of automata by Karel Capek.;;R(.)U(.)R(.)|Rossum's Universal Robots
Art;;In the lower left corner of this painting, the artist's son stands next to a somber man wearing a hooded gray robe. At the top, the figure of Jesus forms a triangle with Mary and St. John the Baptist, who sit on enormous ethereal clouds. At the bottom, St. Stephen and St. Augustine wear elaborately decorated gold robes and carry the title armor-clad figure. Divided into a celestial and a terrestrial region by a row of faces belonging to many of the eminent men of Toledo, for 10 points, name this Mannerist painting by El Greco depicting the title person's entombment.;;(The) Burial of (the) Count (of) Orgaz|El Entierro del Conde de Orgaz
World History;;He had a tumultuous relationship with the papacy, marching on Rome after John XIII, the pope he installed in the office, was expelled by the cardinals. His family life was little better, as his brother Henry joined with Louis IV of France to revolt against him. His wife Matilda, obtained the dowry of the town of Magdeburg after their marriage, and six years later this man ascended to king at Aachen after the 936 death of his father, Henry the Fowler. For 10 points, name this man duke of Saxony who became the first Holy Roman Emperor.;;Otto (I|the First|the Great|Der Grosse){1}?;;Otto
Literature;;The narrator of one of this author's short works travels with John Bailey and Aharon Applefeld after abandoning a biography of Wittgenstein. Antonio Rojaz Martens tells of Enrique Salinas' unjust imprisonment and execution in one of his novels, while he evokes Sisyphus in a novel that fictionalizes his own compulsion to write his most famous work. The narrator has actually killed himself before the beginning of his latest work, Liquidation, but he is better-known for a novella about his refusal to bring a child into a world capable of allowing the Holocaust, Kaddish for a Child Not Born. FTP name this author, best-known for his autobiographical novel Fatelessness.;;(Imre) Kertesz
Chemistry;;When heated with nitric acid, its produces a thick red vapor that hovers over the liquid while its oxide precipitate formed bright red crystals. At room temperature, it is shiny, somewhat volatile and is resistant to alkalis, while at very low temperatures, it exhibits superconductivity. This element was sometimes represented by a stylized snake, or even an astrological symbol. Its +1 oxidation state of often found in a diatomic ion, and it was at one time known as hydrargyrum, from which its modern chemical symbol is derived. For 10 points, name this atomic element obtained from cinnabar ore whose atomic number is 80, a liquid metal with symbol Hg.;;mercury
World History;;One advocate of this war slyly dropped figs on the floor of the Senate to demonstrate the wealth of the opponent. It was preceded by the surrender of Utica, which became the base for one side, and formally ended many centuries later in 1985, when mayors Ugo Vitere and Chedly Klibi signed a treaty. It had begun when another treaty was violated in order to repulse Massinisa, and it ended after a three-year siege when Scipio Aemilianus broke into the city, razed the buildings, and enslaved the population, fulfilling Cato the Elder's demand that "Carthage must be destroyed". For 10 points, name this last in a series of wars between Carthage and Rome.;;Third Punic (War)|Third (Roman) -Carthaginian (War)
Literature;;In one of this author's stories, a dandy's seduction of a sixteen-year-old seamstress leads to the titular pretzel-makers calling her a whore. The title character of one of his novels, a river-trader, is taken in by Mayakin's daughter Liuboff after he is released from an insane asylum, while in another novel, Pavel is exiled to Siberia after inciting his titular parent to champion the socialist cause. A cholera epidemic provides the background for his play about Lisa and Professor Protassof, Children of the Sun, but he is better-known for a play set in a tenement inhabited by Vastya, Natasha, and Kostilyoff. For 10 points, name this author of The Lower Depths.;;(Maxim) Gorky
Art;;One of its members published "visual poems" under the pseudonym I.K. Bonset and created the journal Mecano. Art Concret was founded toward the end of the prominence of this group, which in its early years included Vilmos Huszar and J.J.P. Oud. "Word painting" was the subject of its second manifesto, while the first discussed its goal of finding a "new imagery". Works by its members include Oud's Café de Unie and the Schröder house, which leans more toward its later Elementarism than its original Neo-Plasticism. FTP name this art movement and journal founded by Theo van Doesburg and exemplified by Piet Mondrian.;;(De) Stijl|Neoplasticism|(The) Style
Music;;Vocal works by this man include Gigantic Waves and Your Little Black Eyes, and he left his opera Will-o'-the-Wisp unperformed upon his death. Artur Rubinstein commissioned a Fantasia by this man, who wrote incidental music to the dramas The Passion and Daybreak. One of his better-known works contains a famous ritornello in the section "Jota," Stage works include the puppet opera The Tale of Master Pedro and his first opera, The Brief Life, but better-known are a set of symphonic impressions, known as Nights in the Garden of his home nation, and a "gypsy revel," El Amor Brujo. FTP name this Spanish composer, best-known for the ballet The Three-Cornered Hat.;;(Manuel) (de) Falla
Geography;;This nation is the site of a doomsday seed bank, which by 2007 will hold seeds in case of nuclear war or gene pollution from genetically modified foods. Coal mining operations in one of its protectorates began to decline after German attacks on the Longyearbyen mining town during World War II and were further halted after a 1963 explosion. Famous cultural figures from this country include the composer of the Holberg suite and the author of Brand along with the author of Brand and The Master Builder, and during WWII its government under Vidkun Quisling was under Nazi control. FTP name this Scandinavian country with capital at Oslo.;;(The) (Kingdom of) Norway|(Kongeriket) Norge
World History;;He was present at the death of Monet and wrote a biography of the painter, while Toulouse-Lautrec illustrated his history of the Jews, At the Foot of Mount Sinai. As a Radical deputy, he was accused of being in league with Panama intriguer Cornélius Herz and fought a duel with Paul Déroulède. He later shifted right and urged readiness for war in his newspapers The Free Man and Man in Chains, which led Poincare to name him premier. Another paper he edited was L'Aurore, which published Emile Zola's J'Accuse during the Dreyfus affair. For 10 points, name this man known as "the Tiger," who led France through the end of World War I and at Versailles.;;(Georges) Clemenceau
Literature;;This poem's images include a woman wailing for her demon lover and a "deep romantic chasm". "Forests ancient as the hills" enfold the "sunny spots of greenery" in this poem, while a figure in a vision sings of "Mount Abora". The poet was Inspired to write this poem by an anodyne-induced dream that was interrupted by a visitor from Porlock. The structure at the center of the poem, as a result of "A miracle of rare device" possesses "caves of ice". The "sunless sea" receives the sacred river Alph in the land in which the title figure lives, Xanadu. FTP name this poem ostensibly about a Mongol warlord by Samuel Taylor Coleridge.;;Kubla Khan
United States History;;It followed a disastrous attempt to address the same topic by "Pitchfork Ben" Tillman and inspired the passage of the "anarchy plank" condemning intervention in the Pullman strike. It dismisses claims that "protection has slain its thousands," invokes the "zeal of Peter the Hermit" and compares Andrew Jackson to Cicero. After asking who was thinking of the debtors in 1873, it advises against following England's example, pledging instead to take the lead in reintroducing bimetallism. For 10 points, name this speech which won the 1896 Democratic presidential nomination for William Jennings Bryan by promising not to let labor be crucified on the namesake object.;;(the) Cross of Gold (Speech)
Religion/Mythology;;This minister of St. Ann church in Dahlem led the Pastors' Emergency League, in which role he appeared at the Synod of Barmen, where he turned against the group that he had praised in the autobiography From U-Boat to Pulpit. He also atoned for his early beliefs in the Stuttgart Confession of Guilt, issued eleven years after he helped organize the Confessing Church with Karl Barth and Dietrich Bonhoffer. He was taken to Dachau for his anti-Nazi activities, where he wrote a poem about communists, trade unionists, and Jews being taken away. For 10 points, name this pastor who lamented that "there was no one left to speak out" because he had remained silent.;;(Martin) (Friedrich) (Gustav) (Emil) Niem(ö|o){1}?ller
Miscellaneous;;In the Cypria, the wound of Telephus was cured with shavings from one of these. The "song" named for it is found in the Njals saga and is a description of the Valkyries. Sarutahiko Ohkami owns a jewel-covered one, and Libertas holds one on Roman coins. The first olive tree and the Acropolis were formed when Athena and Poseidon threw them into the ground, while Izanami and Izanagi dripped water from one to form the Japanese islands. Another was made from the bone of a sea monster by Aiofe and used to kill Ferdiad and Connla. Known as Gae Bulg, that one was wielded by Cuchulainn. For 10 points, Odin's Gungnir is another mythical example of what weapon?;;(spear|pike|lance){1}?(s)
Psychology;;In 2007, the person behind this event will publish a book about it entitled The Lucifer Effect. That man's wife, Christina Maslach, first noticed the fake Southern accent adopted by a participant called "John Wayne" and the placing of paper bags on the heads of certain participants. Researchers also saw psychosomatic rashes and forced nudity after a riot on the second day. The team led by Philip Zimbardo decided to end the experiment early and concluded that "role assimilation" and "dehumanization" had occurred. For 10 points, name this study of students assigned to be "guards" or "inmates," which was conducted in the Jordan Hall basement on a Palo Alto campus.;;(The) Stanford Prison (Study|Experiment)
Literature;;This author calls universities "beaneries" in a nonfiction work about "Kulch," and he authored a memoir of the young artist Henri Gaudier-Brzeska. In one of his poems, the "Gods of the winged shoe" and the "leash-men" perform the title action, while Bertran de Born's castle is the setting of his Sestina: Altaforte. The title character attempts "to resuscitate the dead art/Of poetry in his Hugh Selwyn Mauberley, and this poet's improvisational translation of two elegies by a Roman poet comprises his Homage to Sextus Propertius. Also a translator of the poetry of Li Po, this is, FTP, what author of a "chryselephantine poem of immeasurable length," The Cantos?;;(Ezra) Pound
Chemistry;;This technique most commonly uses a large wavelength laser such as argon-ion in order to prevent competition from resonance fluorescence; due to the weakness of the resulting measurable signal, narrow rejection filters are commonly employed. Incident photons are absorbed by a molecule into a virtual state and the relaxation process may result in inelastic scattering if the corresponding vibrational mode involves a change in polarizability. The energy differences between elastic Rayleigh scattering and inelastic scattering correspond to vibrational energy transitions in, for 10 points, this spectroscopic complement to infrared spectroscopy.;;Raman (Spectroscopy)
Religion/Mythology;;It occurs within a week of the Shabbat Hazon and marks the end of a three-week period where no marriages or haircuts occur, which begins on the Fast of Tammuz and is called the Bein Hametzarim. The Haredis use this day instead of Yom Ha'Shoah to honor Holocaust victims, and it is marked by reading Lamentations and covering the ark in black cloth. The outbreak of World War I, the 1290 expulsion from England, and the opening of Treblinka in 1942 all occurred on this day. For 10 points, identify this holiday named for the Jewish calendar date on which it takes place, which is the day of such disasters in Jewish history as the destruction of the both Jerusalem Temples.;;(Tisha b(')|Ninth of){1}? Av
Physics;;Projects such as ATLAS and CMS seek to find it, which based on electroweak observables, is expected to have an upper boundary mass of 219 GeV. This energy is within the range of energies generated by CERN's Large Hadron Collider when it becomes operational in 2007. The standard model, however, predicts its mass to lie between 130 and 190 GeV, which allows it to function on energy scales up to the Planck scale. As a scalar boson, it obeys Bose-Einstein statistics and has zero spin. This is, for 10 points, which particle first postulated in 1960s that is the quantum of the field that gives all particles mass.;;Higgs (Scalar) (Boson)
Literature;;This work's plot is based on events related in its author's travel memoir The Lawless Roads. Minor characters in this work include an English dentist, Mr. Tench, who witnesses an execution, and a young man whose virtuous life and death are told to the boy. The protagonist encounters the atheist girl Coral Fellows while hiding in a barn, and he is given sanctuary by the Lehrs in the neighboring state. He finds his illegitimate child Brigida and her mother Maria before meeting the Mestizo, who tracks him throughout the novel until he is caught by the Lieutenant and executed for his religious practices. FTP name this novel about an unnamed Mexican priest by Graham Greene.;;(The) Power and the Glory
Biology;;Naturally-occuring hormones in this class are functional derivatives of isopentenyl adenine and include zeatin and benzyl adenine. Promoting morphogensis in tissue, chlorophyll production, and leaf expansion, they are most commonly found in meristemic regions but are synthesized in roots and transported via the xylem. Found in almost all plants as well as certain mosses and many fungi and bacteria, are, for 10 points, this class of plant hormones that are most active in promoting cell division and differentiation.;;Cytokinin(s)
Art;;Giovanni Rost and Nicholas Karcher executed this man's tapestry designs for his patron's palace. His studies in chalk for his Young Man Seen from the Back and St. Michael survive, and his pen and wash drawings include a modello for the vault of the Cappella di Eleonora. He finished a series of frescoes for the choir of San Lorenzo upon the death of Pontormo, while he painted "in armor" and "as Orpheus" portraits of Cosimo di Medici. His best-known painting, however, shows a bearded man holding up a blue sheet behind the other three title characters. FTP name this mannerist painter, best known for Venus, Cupid, Folly and Time.;;(Agnolo) Bronzino
Philosophy;;This book advises that boredom is the cause of evil and suggests leaving new mail unopened for three days. Several examples refer to Mozart's Don Giovanni, and it also includes a discussion of Cornelia's relationship with Johannes Climacus in the "Seducer's Diary". The music-drama relationship, along with religious versus ethical life and ethical marriage verus aesthetic bachelorship, are possible meanings of the title. For 10 points, name this Søren Kierkegaard work, published under the name of Victor Eremita, which sets forth various choices.;;Either(/) Or|Enten-Eller]
Physics;;The operator value representation of the Lorentz group function over this space is equivalent to the operator valued function of the Poincaré group. When considered as a real vector, not affine, space, it is defined by a symmetric bilinear form and an indefinite and nondegenerate inner product. With a (-,+,+,+) signature, the use of this space is only valid in the Newtonian limit of gravitation where the set of null vectors for an event define its light cone. Events may be classified as spacelike, timelike or lightlike in, for 10 points, this four-dimensional vector space used in special relativity operations.;;Minkowski (Space)
World History;;Their support came from anger over incompetent adminstrators who succeeded Toghto during the reign of Toghon Temur, from Maitreya Buddhists, and from the peasants conscripted to re-route the Yellow River. Formed by Peng Yingyu as an offshoot of the White Lotus, this group emerged as a military power on the coast of Zhejiang in 1333, and by 1351 was consolidated north of the Yangtze by Han Sahntong. Power over this faction was seized by Zhu Yuanzhang, who then became the Hongwu emperor as the founder of the Ming Dynasty. For 10 points, name this rebellion against Mongol rule in China, identified by its colorful headwear.;;Red Turban(s) (rebellion)
Literature;;This author served as Director of Censorship of the Arts, although his own work dealt with forbidden subjects such as homosexuality and religion. In contrast to his earlier period focusing on urban life, second period works like The Thief and Dogs and Autumn Quail began to focus on religion via allegory. His public religious views led to a 1994 knifing by an Islamic electrician. Between the Places, Palace of Longing, and Sugarhouse comprise the Cairo Trilogy of, for 10 points, which Egyptian Nobel laureate and author of Children of the Alley.;;(Naguib) Mahfouz
Astronomy;;Among the few successes here were the discovery of solar coronal holes during its 176 days in orbit; however, severe damage during launch including broken solar panels and micrometeoroid shields required spacewalk repair during the first of three missions. 8 years after the last mission, in 1979, it re-entered the atmosphere, and pieces crashed into Western Australia whose government fined NASA $400 for littering. The other flight-quality prototype is now a walk-through exhibit at the Air and Space Museum. For 10 points, name this early NASA orbiting space laboratory.;;Skylab
World History;;His namesake "law" gave civil courts jurisdiction over churchmen. As head of the Supreme Court, he had a claim to the presidency when his predecessor, Ignacio Comonfort, was ousted. In office, his suspension of foreign debt prompted England, France, and Spain to invade, and he fled after Maximilian of Austria took the capital. He was captured at El Paso del Norte, which now bears his name, but later returned to office and was succeeded by Sebastián Lerdo de Tejada upon his death in 1872. For 10 points, name this longtime president of Mexico who oversaw the May 5 victory at Puebla.;;(Benito) Juarez
Literature;;A scene at a pond causes one character to mouth off to the title character, after which she is sent to London to join her uncle. The description of a man who "has no hat" shocks the narrator, who reports the incident to Mrs. Grose. One of the characters reveals that he has stolen the narrator's letter to her employer just before his death, which occurs in the presence of Peter Quint. The former governess at Bly, Miss Jessel, stalks the narrator, who begins to think that she and Peter Quint, both long deceased, are haunting her charges, Flora and Miles. Told by Douglas in an attempt to perform the title action, this is, for 10 points,, what ghost story by Henry James?;;(The) Turn of the Screw
Literature;;One character in this work, which takes place in rooms formerly owned by Jack Straw and Peter Ochello, tells a joke about a carnal elephant after hearing his wife yell "crap". Another character has broken his ankle running hurdles and declares that he's disgusted with the world's "mendacity". That character feels guilt after rejecting the homosexual advances of his friend Skipper, which led to his alcoholism. Maggie warns that character that Mae and Gooper plan to send him to a facility for alcoholics to cash in on the death of Big Daddy, who has recently been diagnosed with cancer. For 10 points, name this play about the family of Brick Pollitt by Tennessee Williams.;;Cat on a Hot Tin Roof
World History;;Its leader was killed by Mengli-Geray after a force moved from the Oka to confront Akhmat at the Ugra River in 1480. An earlier defeat came at the Battle of Kulikovo at the hands of Donskoi, but Mamai's sucessor, Tokhtamysh, regained supremacy by allying with Lithuania. Tamerlane eventually betrayed this kingdom by winning the battle of Vorskla and sacking the capital, Sarai Berke, which had replaced Sarai Batu. Seeing its apex under Oz Beg, it was originally the inheritance Genghis set aside for his son Juchi. For 10 points, name this Mongol state of the steppes of central Asia, named for the color of Batu's tents.;;(The) Golden Horde|Kipchak (Khanate)|Ulus Juchi|Altin Ordu
Miscellaneous;;He created the songs "Don't Be Shy" and "If You Want To Sing Out, Sing Out" for the movie Harold and Maude and has continued to release material up to the 2006 album An Other Cup. He was the original writer of "The First Cut is the Deepest" and penned "The Way to Find God Out" after contracting tuberculosis. In 2004, this creator of the album Tea for the Tillerman caused a plane bound for Washington to be diverted due to his appearance on a no-fly list. For 10 points, name this singer of such songs as "Wild World" and "Peace Train," who supported the fatwa on Salman Rushdie after converting to Islam in 1977.;;(Cat) Stevens|(Yusuf) Islam|(Steven) (Demetre) Georgiou
Noncomputational Math;;In 1974, Fagin showed that it is equivalent to languages representing structures definable by sigma-1-1 sentences, and Blum showed that the circuit size of a member of it is lower bounded by 3n. Razoborov showed that a a problem in its deterministic counterpart, PERFECT-MATCHING, and a problem in it, CLIQUE, both require exponential monotone circuits. In 1972, Edmond Karp showed that many problems like KNAPSACK and CHROMATIC NUMBER are complete for it, extending Cook and Levin's demonstration of SATISFIABILITY's completeness for it. For 10 points, name this complexity class of problems that may or may not be equal to P.;;N(ondeterministic) P(olynomial)
Literature;;In one of this author's works, the story of the incest between the children of Duke Grimald is told by Brother Clemens, and in one of his stories the titular waiter shoots Cipolla on stage. The hotel employee Armand and the Marquis de Venosta are among the aliases of the titular confidence man in Felix Krull, while Serenus Zeitblom tells of the rise and fall of the composer Adrian Leverkuhn in Dr. Faustus. Better-known are a novel about a Lübeck family of merchants, Buddenbrooks, and another featuring a trip to the Berghof Sanatorium by Hans Castorp. For 10 points, name this author, the creator of Gustav von Aschenbach in Death in Venice, best-known for The Magic Mountain.;;(Thomas) Mann
Physics;;In 1878 Henry Rowland showed that this could be produced by spinning a vulcanite plate sandwiched between two glass plates. Zeeman showed that it could split spectral lines, useful in electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy, and a voltage difference is created by it applied perpendicularly to an electron flow in a conductor in what as known as the Hall effect. Purcell pedagogically described it as the relativistic side effect of electrons moving near one another, and the force on a moving charged particle is calculated by taking the cross product of the velocity and it. For 10 points, identify this field produced by a moving charge or a changing electric field measured in Tesla.;;magnetic (field|force)
Geography;;One of the communities on this body of water was founded when Icelandic settlers landed at Willow Point, which eventually became known as Gimli. Gridstone point and Little Punk Island are in Hecla Provincial Park which lies south of the narrows and Bloodvein River. It is drained to the north by the Nelson river and fed from the south by the Red river and its namesake river, which derives its name from the Cree words for "muddy water". Like the Lake of the Woods and Lake Manitoba, it was once part of glacial Lake Agassiz. For 10 points, name this lake of Canada that shares its name with the capital of Manitoba.;;(Lake) Winnipeg
Biology;;In 1938, Wooley extracted pork liver with ether to create a pale yellow crystalline deposit that was determined to be this substance. When fluorine reacts with its fifth carbon, it creates an antimetabolite inhibits the division of cancer cells. Because cytosine deaminates into it, a glycosylase homologous to AlkA hydrolyzes its glycosidic bond. Methylation can turn it into thymine, which, like it, pairs with adenine. For 10 points, name this base pair present in RNA but not in DNA, where it is symbolized by "U".;;uracil
Philosophy;;A 1997 paper by Thomas Pfizenmaier disputes the long-held assertion that Isaac Newton subscribed to William Whiston's revival of this belief. One orthodox group advocated the defrocking of any priest who had endorsed it and was led by a Bishop Lucifer, and it was also attacked in "four orations" by Athanasius. The use of the term "homoousios" to dispute it caused friction between emperors Constans and Constantius. First put forth by a presbyter of Alexandria, it held that Christ was a specially created human, not divine. For 10 points, name this doctrine which lost out at the Councils of Constantinople and Nicaea.;;Arianism|Arian (heresy|doctrine)
Art;;He used a death mask as a cast for his bronze tomb cover of Leonardo Dati, and he created a bronze shrine featuring The Miracle of the Ox-cart and The Miracle of the Strozzi boy for the Chapel of Zenobius. Cosimo and Lorenzo Medici commissioned him to create the shrine of SS Protus, Hyacinth and Nemesius for the Santa Maria degli Angeli. He created oversized sculptures of St John the Baptist and St. Matthew for the Orsanmichele, but he is better-known for a commission gained as the result of a competition with Brunelleschi. For 10 points,, name this artist responsible for the bronze reliefs on the doors of the Florence Baptistry, also known as the Gates of Paradise.;;(Lorenzo) Ghiberti
United States History;;Jean Sainteny was enlisted as an intermediate in this city, even though official talks under the direction of Harriman and Vance had already started at the Majestic Hotel, but arrangements were soon made instead by interpreter Vernon Walters. Spurred when the fall of Quangti showed that the ARVN could not hold, the conferences here included Bunker and Haig trying to persuade Thieu to accept tripartite elections and not push for a withdrawal of the North's forces. For 10 points, Le Duc Tho and Henry Kissinger negotiated agreements named for what city, ending U.S. involvement in Vietnam?;;Paris (Peace Accords)|(Accords de Paix de|Hiep dinh) Paris
Philosophy;;This philosopher attacked Leibniz's categorization of logical operations in The False Subtlety of the Four Syllogistic Figures. This person's idea of the "inner being" was the subject of Michael Foucalt's doctoral dissertation. Following Grotius, he called for a ban on assassination, an end to standing armies, and the clarification of treaties to accomplish the title goal of Perpetual Peace, and he also divided representation between intuitions and concepts, and judgments between analytic and synthetic. For 10 points, name this author of The Metaphysics of Morals and Critique of Pure Reason, which explains the categorical imperative.;;(Immanuel) Kant
Miscellaneous;;This work coins the term "phatic communication" to describe speech "in which ties of unions are created by a mere exchange of words". It describes a journey past the mythological capital of Tewara, and other sections explain the building of waga and the "story of shipwreck". This book finds a symmetry between the clockwise and countercloskwise movement of soulva and mwali, which are armshells and necklaces, in a ritual intended to build social ties, called the Kula. It has a foreword by James Frazer and is an ethnographic study of the Trobriand Islanders. For 10 points, name this work by Bronislaw Malinowski.;;Argonauts of the Western Pacific(:) (An Account of Native Enterprise and Adventure in the Archipelagoes of Melanesian New Guinea)
World History;;During the thirteenth century, a mawla, or freed slave, siezed its throne. After the death of Sakura Qu, the son of Uli restored the family line. It became a regional power when a revolt against the Susu chief Sumanguru brought its namesake tribe into control of Kanagaba. Under its height during the fourteenth century, it controlled the lands around the Niger river including the trading cities of Gao and Timbuktu, succeeding Ghana in control of the gold trade and maintaining the balance between Muslim and pagan populations established by its founder, Sundiata. For 10 points, name this empire ruled by Mansa Musa.;;Mali(nke)
Literature;;In this novel, a small cottage temporarily inhabited by a man with "a large Newfoundland puppy and two or three terriers," was pronounced as having "the most comfortable room in the world" in the mind of the narrator. Minor characters include Eleanor, who marries a rich viscount, and Isabella, who spurns the protagonist's brother John for Frederick. The protagonist, a resident of Fullerton obsessed with The Mysteries of Udolpho, suspects General Tilney of killing his wife, and he throws her out of the titular estate when he finds out she's poor, despite the objections of his son Henry. For 10 points, name this novel about Cathrene Morland by Jane Austen.;;Northanger Abbey
Art;;On the left of this painting stands a group of hat-wearing figures holding bunched up white cloth while carrying an object obscured by a sheet with red trim and a large black X on it. A young child on the far right stares inquisitively at a white dog with a black collar standing near a man with neon green socks. Two large men wearing red and black robes stand at the center of the painting above a man with green pants and a black vest, and two boys in red skullcaps stand in front of a man carrying a staff topped by a crucifix while the black-robed man at the center speaks over an open grave. For 10 points, name this painting of a funeral by Gustave Courbet.;;Burial at Ornans
Chemistry;;Because they possess pKa's ranging from 16-19, they can lose a hydrogen to form salts useful in ether synthesis. Formation of one kind sometimes requires treatment with a tosylate or mesylate in order to force formation via a SN2 mechanism and avoid rearrangement. Common laboratory methods for synthesizing these include the reaction of ketones with lithium aluminum hydride or the reaction of organolithium reagents with water. Mixing these with carboxylic acids will produce fruity smelling esters. For 10 points, name this class of organic compounds, with functional group OH, whose simplest example is methanol.;;Alcohol(s)
Religion/Mythology;;His father mistook the sound of a filling water-jug for a tiger's growl and accidentally killed the son of a hermit while hunting. This man's sandals were put on the throne after an observation by the servant Manthara led to his taking up residence in Dandak. Like Odysseus, he is challenged to bend a bow, which he does at the court of King Janak, but he later runs afoul of Queen Kaikeyi. The king of Ayodha, he ultimately is found by his sons Luva and Kusha after this seventh incarnation of Vishnu invades Lanka with an army of monkeys to rescue Sita from Ravana. For 10 points, name this hero of a namesake Indian epic.;;Ram(a)
United States History;;With funds secured from a settlement arranged by Henry Phipps and Francis Lovejoy, he hired Daniel Burnham to create a twenty story tall building to overshadow his rival's structure. He took over a prominent position from William R. Jones and convinced Robert Pattison to send in the national guard, after striking Amalgamated Association works overwhelmed the Pinkertons he hired at Homestead. Stabbed by Alexander Berkman and forced out of Carnegie Steel, he went on to form U.S. Steel. For 10 points, name this industrialist and namesake of a private museum at his Fifth Avenue home in New York.;;(Henry) (Clay) Frick
Literature;;In one of this man's poems, the "wine of Torpor" swells up in the poem's subject while the titular women caress his head. He states that he had as his "inn the Sign of the Great Bear" in "My Bohemia," while he declares that "Weeping, I saw gold—and could not drink!" in "Teardrop". He assigns color values to the titular letters in his sonnet "Vowels," while in a better known poem the title entity has "seen archipelagos of stars" and islands with delirious skies on its inebriated journey. He ends his best known work by asserting that he "will be able now to possess the truth within one body and one soul after the titular period of time. For 10 points, name this author of A Season in Hell.;;(Arthur) Rimbaud
Music;;His first operatic success came with his completion of C.F. Pollarolo's L'Irene, and he wrote the operas Tolomeo et Alessandro and Tetide in Sciro while serving as musical director to the queen of Poland, and his passion for the classics led to operas on Tiberius Gracchus, Arminius, and Mithridates. He completed over 50 chamber cantatas and while organist at Santa Maria Maggiore he wrote a Salve Regina, the antiphon Cibivat nos Dominus, and the mass La Stella, but he is better-known for pieces collected in his "Thirteen Books" and "Exercises". For 10 points, name this son of Alessandro best known for his many harpsichord sonatas.;;(Giuseppe) D(omenico) Scarlatti;;Scarlatti
United States History;;In 1974, he shouted "Why do you perform abortions on demand and how many have you done"? as time expired on a debate, leaving his physician opponent, Bill Roy, unable to respond and narrowly securing re-election. He was attacked in that campaign for his role as chairman of the Republican National Committee during Watergate. Despite winning the 1988 Iowa caucus, this former running mate of Gerald Ford was not nominated for president until he invited Jack Kemp onto his losing ticket in 1996. For 10 points, name this Kansas Senator with a paralyzed right arm and habit of describing himself in the third person.;;(Robert|Bob) (Joseph) Dole
Physics;;Both Kirchhoff's voltage law and Kirchhoff's current law can be derived from it, and it can be derived from the Lorentz force if certain assumptions are made. A more complicated version of the equation was used to explain the results of experiments by this law's namesake, using circuits containing different lengths of wire, in which the applied voltage and current passing through the circuits were measured. For 10 points, identify this law from physics, expressed mathematically by setting current equal to the potential difference over the resistance.;;Ohm's (law)
Literature;;The title character of this work resides in a place where "Willows whiten, aspens quiver,/Little breezes dusk and shiver" and whose only occupants are reapers "among the bearded barley" whispering "'Tis the fairy". She spends her days creating "a magic web with colors gay," until she meets a figure with "coal-black curls" who trode his war-horse "On burnish'd hooves" Upon hearing the figure singing, "Tirra lira" she looks toward the figure's home, causing her mirror to crack. Painted repeatedly by the PRB, this is, for 10 points, what woman who dies as her boat goes down the river toward Launcelot and Camelot, the title character of a Tennyson poem.;;(The) Lady of Shalott
World History;;Found between the massif of Kallídhromon and the Maliakós Gulf, it was the site of a 279 BCE defeat of the Celts and a 191 BCE battle between Acilius Glabrio and Antiochus III. The forces of Locri Opuntii switched sides after the results of another clash here, which occurred simultaneously with the naval battle at Cape Artemesium and was affected by the treason of Ephialtes. Dianekes's promise to fight in the shade came true as 1100 Boeotian hoplites fell in addition to troops of Leonidas. For 10 points, name this pass, whose name means "hot gates," where 300 Spartan warriors held off the Persian army for several hours.;;Thermopylae
Music;;These individual's first collaboration came with a work concerning a wedding party interrupted by a cyclist and an ostrich hunter.  Receiving their name from an article in the journal Comoedia, they first officially congregated at a song recital by Jane Bathori.  James Harding's The Ox on the Roof concerns them and takes its name from a ballet by the composer of the operas Bolivar and Christopher Columbus.  Another member composed incidental music to a play about King David along with a proto-minimalist work imitating the motion of a train, Pacific 231.  Led by Eric Satie, this is, FTP, what 1920s group of composers, the French counterpart to the Mighty Five?;;(Les|The) Six
Chemistry;;Mikhail Tsvet coined the term when he discovered this technique while doing research on plant pigments. He did this by making a solution of his samples with ether and alcohol, then running this solution over powdered sugar or calcium carbonate columns to extract pigments. Other varieties of this technique use paper or finely ground silica or alumina on top of a glass plate or film as the stationary phase, while gases and liquids are common mobile phases. For 10 points, name this laboratory technique that makes use of each component of a mixture's differing affinities for the stationary phase in order to separate out these components.;;chromatography
Miscellaneous;;Dr David Thorpe suggests liking this band "if you want to sound a little bit cool to the average person and yet you have no fucking hope ever in your life of understanding music even a little bit". Their recent singles say "The more I see the less I know," and describe "a lover, baby and a fighter". In addition to "Desecration Smile" and "Snow (Hey Oh)" off Stadium Arcadium, their songs include a cover of Stevie Wonder's "Higher Ground" as well as"Soul to Squeeze". For 10 points, name this band which stole a Tom Petty guitar part for "Dani California" and also recorded "Scar Tissue" and "Under the Bridge".;;(the) (Red Hot) Chili Peppers|RHCP
Literature;;One of this work's characters  falls in love with the waiter Gabriel, who turns out to be married, while another gives his passport to Dr. Americo after falling in love with Lidia, for whom he spurned Marta.  In one of the stories told in this novel a woman finds out that her husband's first wife is a zombie, and in another, Leni reveals Michelle's love for a German soldier to the French resistance only to later be corrupted by the Nazis herself.  These stories, actually the plots of films, are told by an accused gay child molester to a revolutionary who shares his cell in an Argentinean prison.  FTP name this novel about Valentin and Molina by Manuel Puig.;;Kiss of the Spider Woman|(El) beso de la mujer ara(ñ|n){1}?a
World History;;One man by this name wrote the first constitution for New Zealand, while a different person by this name served the longest consecutive stint as British foreign secretary, which included the start of World War I. Another succeeded the Duke of Wellington as prime minister and won the alliance of William IV during his campaign to pass the Great Reform Bill. Another was the daughter of the Duke of Suffolk who married Guildford Dudley and was named heir by Edward VI, but was executed by the government of Mary. For 10 points, give the common family name of these figures, including the "nine days queen," Lady Jane.;;(de) Grey
Philosophy;;This thinker defined modernity as the loss of the private world due to a two-stage process of "world-alienation" and "earth-alienation" in Between Past and Future. This philosopher's threefold classifications include labor, work, and action, in The Human Condition and thinking, willing, and judging in The Life of the Mind. She defined the title form of government as "the inversion of politics" in On Totalitarianism, and argued that conscience should be a byproduct of thinking and one should consider human consequences in Eichmann in Jerusalem. For 10 points, name this philosopher who discussed the "banality of evil".;;(Hannah) Arendt
Earth Science;;During this epoch, most of the world's landmasses reached their current locations, and the climate became significantly cooler and drier, allowing more grasses to grow and contributing to increased grasslands. Grazing mammals diversified, and increased migrations were possible because of the appearance of a land bridge connecting North and South America. The changing climate also led to increased ice at the poles, which would prove significant for the following epoch. For 10 points, name this geological epoch of the Cenozoic Era preceded by the Miocene, during the late portion of which glaciers began to advance, setting up the ice ages that would follow during the Pleistocene.;;Pl(e)iocene (Epoch)
Literature;;One of this man's poems identifies "an old man in a lodge within a park" with the titular author of The Legend of Good Women.  The lines "She sleeps!/My lady sleeps!/Sleeps!" end each stanza of the serenade from his only drama, The Spanish Student, and he remarks that "Alvares and Rivera interchange/With Abraham and Jacob of old times" in a poem about the oldest Jewish resting place in America.  The title character roams throughout America searching for Gabriel Lajeunesse in his long poem about Acadia, Evangeline.  Also known for a poem that begins "by the shore of Gitchie Gumee," this is, FTP, what poet of Tales of a Wayside Inn and The Song of Hiawatha.;;(Henry) (Wadsworth) Longfellow
World History;;An uprising here by generals Salan and Challe led to the formation of the Secret Army Organization. The war in this present-day country was presaged when troops shot on men for waving flags at Sétif, leading to the formation of the Movement for the Triumph of Democratic Liberties. Conflict here caused the Revolutionary Committee of Unity and Action to become the FLN, and a 1956 battle with the paratroopers of Jacques Massu led to the rise of Houari Boumedienne and the fall of Guy Mollet's government. For 10 points, name this country where leaders such as Ahmed Ben Bella gained independence from France.;;(People's Democratic Republic of) Algeria|(Al Jumhuriyah) al Jaza'iri(yah) (ad Dimuqratiyah ash Sha'biyah)
Art;;Among the paintings that remain from this artist's student days are Birth and The Dead Man. His portfolio Mein Leben followed Les Ames Mortes, illustrations for an edition of Gogol in his native language. His wife Virginia Haggard posed for A Red and Black World, and a man dressed in brown floats with a woman in white in The Betrothed.  The titular green-faced musician stands in front of a house and a church in The Fiddler, but better-known is a self-portrait in which he paints a horse with his seven-fingered hand.  Also known for his stained glass windos, this is, FTP, what artist of a work featuring a cow's head and the tree of life, I and the Village.;;(Marc) Chagall
Biology;;Joshua Lederberg was the first to give these molecules their name while working on the way genetic information is transferred. Resistance ones contain genes capable of fighting antibiotics or poisons, while the fertility-F variety are able to undergo conjugation. They are known as vectors when used in genetic engineering, and all of them must contain an origin of replication so that their DNA can be replicated on its own. For 10 points, identify these DNA molecules that exist separately from an organism's genome, typically circular and found in bacteria.;;plasmid(s)
World History;;During one of them, the "dogs gone mad speech" was delivered. They were preceeded by similar actions regarding accusations of "wrecking" and targeted at the employees of the Metropolitan Vickers Electric Company. The last one finished off the "right opposition," while the first one charged sixteen people with conspiring to murder Kirov. NKVD agents used torture to secure confessions, leading to the death sentences for Kamenev, Zinovyev, Bukharin at the hands of prosecutor Andrey Vyshinsky. For 10 points, name these events which gave a public veneer of legitimacy to Stalin's campaign against political rivals.;;(show|purge){1}? trials
Religion/Mythology;;His female assistant, who is prayed to when aligning new buildings with the stars and dresses in panther skins, is called Seshat. He wrote forty-two books himself, while one named for him tells the story of Setna, the son of Ramses II. He was cured of a scorpion sting by Horus and became the protector of that god, and he also joined with Shu to reconcile Tefnut with Ra. His cult, centered at Hermopolis, worshipped him as the patron of magic, astronomy, and wisdom. For 10 points, name this baboon- or ibis-headed Egyptian deity who served as the messenger and scribe of the gods.;;Thoth|Tehut(y|i){1}?|Djehuty|Aah(tehuti)|Djehuti|Thout(i)|Zehuti
Psychology;;Perrin and Spencer's repeat of this experiment in 1980 found only 1 positive result in 396 trials and attributed the 33% success rate in the original to cultural factors. This experiment found a change in outcome when "true partners" and "compromise partners" were introduced. First presented as a chapter of the 1951 book Groups, Leadership, and Men, it was performed on groups of eight, seven of which were the researcher's plants purposely misidentifying which line was the same length as a sample. For 10 points, name this experiment in which subjects often gave wrong answers to conform to the "erroneous majority".;;Asch (conformity) (experiment)
Music;;The only silent role in this opera is the child Dolore, although "the aunt" and "the cousin" have fairly minimal parts in the work.  Inspired indirectly by a short story by John Luther Long, it begins with Goro leading the main male character out of his house.  That character outlines his roving philosophy in "dovunque al mondo" and, in Part 2 of Act 2, expresses his remorse and regrets in the romanza "Addio, fiorito asil".  The title character sings about her planned conversion to that character's religion "in Io seguo il mio destino," but more famously pictures his return in the aria "Un bel di, vedremo".  Pinkerton jilts Cio Cio San in, FTP, what opera by Giacomo Puccini?;;Madam(a|e){1}? Butterfly
Literature;;In his only drama, Edgar ties up a high-ranking government official and holds a gun to his head after the titular beverages have been consumed.  One of his novels centers around the estate of the criminal F.W. Bennett and his aviatrix wife, who meet the narrator, a drifter named Joe of Paterson.  He tells the story of Julius and Ethel Rosenberg, fictionalized as the Isaacsons, from the point of view of their titular son in The Book of Daniel, while a 15 year old boy narrates the downfall and death of Dutch Schultz in Billy Bathgate, but better known is a narrative of three diverse families told through the eyes of Little Boy.  FTP name this author, best known for Ragtime.;;(E(.)L(.)) Doctorow
Biology;;Proteins associated with these structures include kinesins and dynein, which move along them in order to transport other molecules throughout the cell. Many of these structures in a given cell will be in a state of dynamic instability, in which the protein subunits that make them up can be either added to or removed from the plus end of the structure at any given time. The ability of the structures to shorten is useful during mitosis, when they attach to the kinetochores of chromosomes and pull them toward the spindle poles. For 10 points, name these components of the cytoskeleton, which also make up cilia and are composed of tubulin subunits.;;microtubules
Geography;;This peak was originally known as Mount Townsend, but it was given the name of its neighbor so that the peak by this name would be its country's highest; while it holds this title, it is relatively round and not very difficult to climb. It is located in the Snowy Mountains in its namesake national park, which can be found in the state of New South Wales. For 10 points, name this peak, first ascended in 1840 by Paul Strzelecki and named for a Polish patriot, the highest mountain in mainland Australia.;;(Mount) Kosciuszko
Literature;;One scene in this novel finds the protagonist witnessing a fight at Masson's place between a pimp and the brother of his Moorish whore.  Among the people who live in the protagonist's apartment building are an old man who often loses his dog and the aforementioned pimp, Raymond Sintes, who gets the protagonist to help him write a letter to lure his abused mistress back to him. It begins with the protagonist's visit to The Home for Aged Persons in Marengo, an action which will play into his conviction of murdering an arab on the beach.  For 10 points, name this Existentialist novel about the office worker Meursault, a work by Albert Camus.;;(The) Stranger|(L')(é|e){1}?tranger
Religion/Mythology;;A dispute over this process in the tenth century saw Paschasius Radbertus win out over Ratramnus and Berengar. The Orthodox believe that it occurrs only when requested by the epiclesis and more commonly refer to it as "metabole". It was re-affirmed in 1965 by the Mysterium Fidei encyclical of Paul VI, four centuries after it was replaced by the "in, with and under" formulation sometimes called the "doctrine of the real presence" by Lutherans. For 10 points, identify this church doctrine holding that the underlying substances of the Eucharistic bread and wine are actually transformed into the body and blood of Christ.;;transubstantiation
Biology;;Transgenic sheep have been engineered to produce this amino acid, necessary for the production of wool. Along with glycine and glutamate, it forms glutathione, a common antioxidant. A variant of it exists containing the element selenium, and its use in dietary supplements raises questions of cannibalism, as a primary source of this amino acid is human hair, where it strengthens the secondary structure of the protein keratin. For 10 points, name this amino acid, whose thiol group when oxidized can bond with another to form a dimer connected by a disulfide bridge.;;Cysteine
Literature;;The narrator of this work takes pleasure in his toothaches and liver pains. A footnote states that the narrator continued writing after the end of the book, which is presented as an excerpt from his memoirs. His alienation from society manifests itself as he obsesses over whether or not to bump a soldier on the street, then as he invites himself to a farewell party for Zverkov. The second section of the book, titled "Apropos of the Wet Snow," ends with the narrator's inability to interact with the prostitute Liza. For 10 points, name this 1864 novel detailing its unnamed narrator's hatred for causality and society, written by Fyodor Dostoevsky.;;Notes from (the) Underground|Letters from the Underworld
Noncomputational Math;;The first volume of Knuth's The Art of Computer Programming brought about the modern age of its analysis. Aho, Hopcroft, and Ullman popularized the use of recurrence relations in analysis of recursive ones. This term is derived from the name of a 9th-century Persian mathematician. More commonly, asymptotic and running time analyses determine their effectiveness. It is unknown whether an efficient one exists for NP-complete problems, so approximation ones are normally used. For 10 points, name this computational procedure that produces the solution to a problem in a finite number of steps.;;algorithm(s)
Art;;He wrote a novel, Hebdomeros, the Metaphysician, which was published alongside the story "Monsieur Dudron's Adventure". He depicted as Orpheus the poet of "The Mirabeau Bridge" and "The Bestiary," while another work features an exaggerated bust of David juxtaposed with an orange glove.  Similarly, a bust of Moses is depicted next to pineapples and bananas in Le Reve Transforme, which also features a train and his characteristic line of curved archways. A flagged tower is the subject of his Nostalgia of the Infinite, but better-known is a work depicting a girl with a hoop going up the titular roadway.  FTP name this artist of Mystery and Melancholy of a Street.;;(Giorgio) (de) Chirico|N(é|e){1}?po
United States History;;Shortly after he denied sending the Cipher Dispatches, this man willed his estate to establish the original New York Public Library. Earlier, William Eaton Chandler and the Wormley Conference conspired to screw him, undoing the good will he had earned as governor of New York, when he helped suppress the Canal Ring and the Tweed machine. In his next race, a 51% popular vote tally did him no good, as an 8-7 vote of the corrupt Electoral Commission awarded the electoral votes of Florida to his Republican opponent. For 10 points, name this Democrat who probably won the election against Rutherford B. Hayes.;;(Samuel) (Jones) Tilden
Miscellaneous;;One song often associated with this activity says to use Listerine strips, features Keak da Sneak's claim to be "off that 18 purple juice," and suggests that one put on stunna shades before doing it. Another song, by Mistah Fab, suggests that it should be done when you are "looking like a star" and that Patrick Swayze enjoys it. Sheldon Porochnavy and Davender Gulley have died doing this activity, usually accompanied by E-40's "Tell Me When to Go". For 10 points, San Francisco's hyphy culture is the origin of what practice, in which one can "pull up, hop out, all in one motion" and dance "on the hood while the car still rollin"?;;ghost rid(ing|e){1}? (the whip)
Physics;;Induction coils with spark gaps were the first devices to suggest its existence. When the receiving coil in an 1887 experiment was enclosed in a dark case, the observed spark was always smaller. The aforementioned work by Hertz was followed by contributions in the area from Thomson and Lenard. Lenard found that it was independent of the ultraviolet light's intensity, but it took until the article On a Heuristic Point of View about the Creation and Conversion of Light for the concept to be widely diffused. For 10 points, the work function is associated with this effect, whose discovery won the 1905 Nobel Prize for Physics for Albert Einstein.;;photoelectric (effect)
Literature;;The title character, working at the McGurk Institute, discovers "The X Principle," but finds that it had previously been described by Félix D'Herelle. At its end, the protagonist and Terry Wickett retreat to the woods, where they plan to build a laboratory. After graduation, the titular figure explores different aspects of the scientist's and doctor's life in places like Wheatsylvania and Nautilis. His devotion to the lessons of his professor at the University of Winnemac, Max Gottleib, is tested in a plague on the island of St. Hubert, where his wife Laura dies. For 10 points, name this novel which merited the 1926 Pulitzer Prize, famously rejected by its author Sinclair Lewis.;;Arrowsmith
World History;;The opening phase of this battle, called "the Run to the South," was a rematch between Hipper and Beatty, who had fought the year before at Dogger Bank. Hipper lured Beatty within the range of his commander Scheer's forces, but Beatty escaped to the north, though he lost the Queen Mary and the Princess Royal. Scheer followed and met the Grand Fleet. Scheer's High Seas Fleet escaped home to Germany due to the efforts of Admiral Jellicoe. The British lost more naval tonnage but the Germans failed to establish a naval presence on the North Sea in, for 10 points, this largest naval battle of World War I?;;(Battle of) (Jutland|(the) Skagerrak){1}?
Religion/Mythology;;This religious group is based on a set of sutras telling of the vows the monk Dharmakara made prior to his ascension to buddhahood, especially his 18th vow. It was transmitted from China to Japan by Honen, whose disciple Shinran expressed this school's final conclusion that enlightenment could only be achieved by faith in the grace of Dharmakara under his new name as a Buddha. Along with Chan or Zen, it is the most popular variant of Mahayana Buddhism in East Asia. For 10 points, name this school that focuses on the recitation of the Amitabha, or Amida Buddha's name, to achieve entry into its namesake heavenly realm.;;Pure Land (Buddhism);;Amida (Buddhism)
Biology;;This biological process can be triggered through TFN-induced signaling or suppressed through the hedgehog signaling pathway. Other triggers include increased secretion of cytochrome c from mitochondria within the cell, which begins a cascade resulting in the activation of caspase-3, the effecter molecule for this action. The anti-cancer protein p53 induces this process as a last resort, and it is used in embryological and lymphocyte development as an effective way of removing excess cells. For 10 points, identify this orderly alternative to necrosis, the most common form of programmed cell death.;;Apoptosis
World History;;This ruler held power as regent of the infant Vaballathus, son of Odaenathus, who had led a certain city-state against the Parthians in the service of Emperor Gallienus. After an attempt to pacify Emperor Aurelian by proclaiming Vaballathus as Augustus failed, this ruler seized Antioch and Egypt in the late 260's CE, claimed descent from Cleopatra, and became Queen. Along with the Gallic Empire of the west, her Empire posed a grave threat to the Roman Empire in the middle of the third century. For 10 points, name this Queen of Palmyra.;;Zenobia
Miscellaneous;;He collaborated with Daniel Dennett to write The Mind's I. His more technical works include a book on artificial intelligence, Fluid Concepts and Creative Analogies, while among his flightier efforts is Le Ton Beau De Marot, about the "music of language". His magnum opus is nominally about recent advances in the mathematics of recursion, though it is titled after a man who wrote a treatise on formally undecidable propositions, a Dutch optical-illusion artist, and the composer of the Goldberg Variations. For 10 points, name this author who described an "eternal golden braid" in Godel, Escher, Bach.;;(Douglas) Hofstadter
World History;;This battle was fought on a site of General Navarre's choosing, a crossroads town whose name means "Seat of the Border County Prefecture". The battle began as paratroopers led by General de Castries took the town in "Operation Castor" and created eight strongpoints around it. The attackers amassed artillery before initiating the battle, which, combined with human wave tactics, allowed them to overwhelm the outlying Beatrice and Gabrielle strongpoints in early March. By April 22, the airstrip was overrun and on May 7, 1954, General Giap and the Viet Minh destroyed the last hope for French victory in Vietnam. For 10 points, name this decisive battle of the First Indochina War.;;(Battle of) Dien Bien Phu
Literature;;The main character of this work often conflicts with his boss in the Scholarship Board, the arrogant, paternalistic Mr. Green.  The protagonist's four years of study in England lead to his decision to marry Clara, but the engagement is called off when her class is revealed. Though he must pay off his student loans to the Umuofian Progressive Union, the main character falls deeper into debt as he buys a car and finances Clara's abortion. After his mother's death and his estrangement from Clara, Obi Okonkwo begins to take bribes, for which he is put on trial.  For 10 points, name this Nigerian novel, a sequel to Things Fall Apart, written by Chinua Achebe.;;No Longer at Ease
Art;;One of this artist's works depicts a group of people contemplating a poem featuring the line "The paths of glory lead but to the grave".  He imitated the painter Claude's Landscape with Hagar and the Angel in a painting of a creek winding toward a distant tower, while his only prominent religious work to speak of is the Risen Christ for the altarpiece at Manningtree.  He painted a series on his father's flower and vegetable gardens, but better-known is a landscape featuring dark clouds and a rainbow over the titular structure, which is seen "from the Meadows".  FTP name this artist of Salisbury Cathedral and a painting of a scene on the River Stour, The Hay Wain.;;(John) Constable
Literature;;In one of this author's stories a boy in Surbiton is chastised by Mr. Bons for not having read any of the works of Percy  Shelley.  In one of his novels, Stephen Wonham is revealed to be the half-brother of Rickie Elliot, while another concerns the failing marriage of Gino Carella and Lilia Herriton.  Lady Anne Wood marries Clive Durham after he renounces his affair with the titular Cambridge undergrad in Maurice, while his better-known characters the unlikely heiress Margaret Schlegel in Howards End and the westernized Dr. Aziz in A Passage to India.  FTP name this author, also known for a novel about George Emerson and Lucy Honechurch, A Room with a View.;;(E(.)M(.)) Forster
Geography;;Smaller ranges within this mountain range include the Apuseni Mountains and the Tatra Mountains, whose Mount Gerlach is the tallest of the chain.  Bordered on one side by the Pannonian plain, they contain a relatively high concentration of the sandstone-shale compound flysch.  Runoff from them has been stemmed by basins in the Bistrita and San valleys, and their foothills around Ploiesti contain oil deposits.  They run from the southeast, where the Danube cuts through it at the Iron Gate, to the northwest around Bratislava, arcing around the Transylvanian Plateau and forming the northern and eastern boundaries of the Great Hungarian Plain. For 10 points, name this mountain chain of Romania and Slovakia.;;Carpathian(s) (Mountains|Range)
Astronomy;;This law was developed by its eponymous scientist and his colleague Milton Humason, a former janitor at their Mount Wilson facility. It supported the ideas of Father Lemaître and helped resolve the Curtis-Shapley Debate. For decades the value of its constant, originally estimated at 500 kilometers per second per megaparsec, was uncertain, until complications like peculiar velocities were dealt with. Scientists like Vesto Slipher had previously noted the Doppler effects in question, but this law utilized new observations of Cepheid variable stars. For 10 points, name this law, a strong support for the expanding universe theory, which states that the redshift of faraway galaxies is linearly proportional to distance.;;Hubble('s) (Law)
Music;;Literature-inspired works by this man include a ballet score based on Nosferatu, Grohg, and a piano trio after Ansky's The Dybbuk, Vitebsk.  He wrote the "play opera for high-school performance" The Second Hurricane and a "Scherzo Humoristique," The Cat and the Mouse, while his biblical works include 4 Motets and In the Beginning.  Known for orchestral works such as An Outdoor Overture and his "Short Symphony," he created a musical and spoken word "portrait" of Abraham Lincoln along with a ballet containing a famous "Hoe-down," Rodeo.  Also known for Appalachian Spring, this is, FTP, what composer of a Fanfare for the Common Man?;;(Aaron) Copland
United States History;;The statute in question in this Supreme Court case was designed after the "Model Law" of Harry Laughlin. The prosecution was incompetently carried out by Irving Whitehead, who is usually considered to have colluded with the defendant for the purpose of upholding the law. His client had been committed to the Virginia Colony after she was raped by a member of her adopted family, but in 1924 she was deemed "promiscuous" and "feeble-minded". Only one Justice dissented, and Oliver Wendell Holmes wrote the majority opinion, in which he famously stated that "three generations of imbeciles are enough". For 10 points, name this case in which the legality of eugenic sterilization was upheld.;;Buck (v(.|ersus)) (Bell)|Bell (v(.|ersus)) (Buck)
Literature;;This man's non-fiction works include a History and Adventures of an Atom, and he wrote the dramas The Regicide and the farce The Reprisal.  The snooty Jew Joshua and the Count de Melvil are characters in his novel about a "shrewd villain of monstrous inhumanity," while the Gobbles and Samuel Crowe befriend the titular knight-errant of another work.  One of his better-known characters  is thrown into prison for writing satires but ultimately settles down with Emelia Gauntlet, while Hugh Strap and Tom Bowling are respectively the companion and godfather of his Roderick Random.  FTP name this author, best-known for The Expedition of Humphry Clinker.;;(Tobias) (George) Smollett
Religion/Mythology;;In his original mythological setting, he is the son of Nyame and Asase Ya. In some areas his wife is known as Shi Maria, a possibly Christian-inspired adaptation. Although separate from the hare myths which gave rise to Br'er Rabbit, he shares stories with that figure, especially the "tar-baby" tale. His most famous exploit is his successful attempt to become King of All Stories, a story which features in most cultures in which he appears, from the Caribbean to his origin in West Africa among the Ashanti. For 10 points, name this trickster god, usually seen in the shape of a spider.;;(A)nan(s|z){1}?i
World History;;Based at Thistle Mountain, its leaders included Shi Dakai. Dakai wanted to preserve this movement's ideological base, a mixture of traditional myths like the Jade Emperor and the tracts of Issachar Roberts, as well as the identity of the Hakka people from whom the movement's leader sprung. After its capture of Nanjing, the segregation of the city's population by sex and the reform of society along nominally Christian lines began, but slowed as endemic warfare limited the regime's actions for the rest of the 1850s. For 10 points, name this most potent rebellion against the Qing Dynasty, led by Hong Xiuquan, which killed tens of millions in the name of the Heavenly Kingdom of Great Peace.;;Taiping (Rebellion)
Geography;;This present-day country includes the last capital of Sayyid Said's empire and the place where John Okello's Marxists overthrew Mohammed Shamte and installed Abeid Karume. The location of the Groundnuts Scheme, it emerged from German and British colonization and was governed by the principles of the Arusha Declaration, which included one-party rule by the Chama Cha Mapinduzi. The site, along with Kenya, of a 1998 Al Qaeda attack on US embassies, this country was long led by the "Ujamaa" principle of Julius Nyere. For 10 points, name this state formed by the merger of Zanzibar and Tanganyika.;;(United Republic of|Jamhuri ya Muungano wa) Tanzania
Art;;The "Bacchanal with a Guitar Player" and "The Massacre of the Innocents" are among the better-known works from this man's poesie period, while two men carry the titular corpse down a winding road in the foreground of his The Funeral of Phocion. In response to criticism by Pietra da Cortona he created "Crossing of the Red Sea" and its companion piece, "Adoration of the Golden Calf," along with a better-known work featuring a large figure in red robes on the left, presiding over the titular crime. Also known for a painting based on a line from Virgil's fifth Eclogue, "Et in Arcadia Ego," FOR 10 POINTS, name this artist, best-known for his "Rape of the Sabine Women".;;(Nicholas) Poussin
Literature;;In the final section of this poem the poet claims that neither "greetings where no kindness is, nor all/The dreary intercourse of daily life,/Shall e'er prevail against us". Before imagining a "hermit's cave" at the end of the first stanza, he begins by describing "these waters, rolling from their mountain-springs /With a soft inland murmur". after noting that "five summers with the lengths of five long winters" have passed since he has last visited the titular location, the first Cistercian home in Wales. For 10 points, name this poem whose title ends with "On Revisiting The Banks Of The Wye During A Tour July 13, 1798", by William Wordsworth.;;(Lines Composed A Few Miles Above) Tintern Abbey
Miscellaneous;;The history of the McKittrick hotel is divulged by Pop Leibel in this film, and another character promotes a bra based on a cantilevered bridge and helps the protagonist with Mozart-based music therapy following an incident at the San Juan Batista mission. The central scheme involves a faked haunting by Carlotta Valdez and paying Judy Barton to impersonate Madeleine, which lets Gavin Elster get away with murder. That plot is adorned by a Bernard Hermann score and a "zoom-out, track-in" camera movement now named for this film. For 10 points, name this Hitchock film starring Jimmy Stewart as a detective afraid of heights.;;Vertigo
Religion/Mythology;;Their color was changed after several of them told Apollo about the infidelity of Coronis, and Apollo's priest Aristeas travelled in the guise of one. Another of these creatures turned himself into a cedar leaf and impregnated a Tsimshian chief's daughter in order to steal the sun. In addition to the brother of Logobola, these appear in Celtic myth as the army of Owain, as Badb during battles, and as the meaning of the name "Bran". Two others represent "thought" and "memory" and spy for Odin under the names of Hugin and Munin. For 10 points, name this creature which complements the coyote as the Native American trickster.;;raven(s)
Religion/Mythology;;Its fourth book deals with the loss of a friend and studies of Aristotle as the author leaves Thagaste, while the third describes an encounter with Cicero's Hortensius and the author's theft of pears for the pleasure of stealing. The author of this work becomes disillusioned by the ignorance of Faustus after spending much of his youth as a Manichee, and recounts sending away a mysterious concubine after being influenced by his mother Monica and by Ambrose of Milan to finally convert to Christianity at the age of thirty-two. For 10 points, name this autobiography of the bishop of Hippo who also wrote The City of God.;;Confessions (of (St(.)|Saint) Augustine)
Physics;;One modification of the apparatus used for this experiment, which was designed by I. I. Rabi, is the basis of MRI while a further modification is used in atomic clocks. With the addition of a beam stopper, this experiment's apparatus can act as a filter. Three such filters placed at successive 90 degree angles will allow a beam to pass, while removing the middle filter will stop the beam, demonstrating that the filter redefines "up". Originally, a beam of silver atoms was used, and the two peaks observed conflicted with the classical expectation. For 10 points, name this 1922 experiment demonstrating that atoms and electrons have quantized spin.;;(the) Stern-Gerlach (Experiment )
Literature;;One of his works sees the crippled narrator describe the deaths of family members after reading The Story of the Western Wing. A girl eschews the teachings of Shakyamuni for belief in "Zesus" in one story, while Anatole France's Penguin Island served as the primary inspiration for "Kappa". A Buddhist priest agonizes over the titular overlong appendage in "The Nose," but better known are a story in which a man kills an old woman looting corpses on the title structure and another that provides different perspectives on a crime committed by Tajomaru, "In a Bamboo Grove". For 10 points, name this author of "Rashomon".;;(Ryunosuke) Akutagawa
Music;;Sting shouts the Miranda Rights in French in the background of this man's album You're Under Arrest, which included covers of "Human Nature" and "Time After Time". He recorded "My Old Flame" with Art Blakey and Sonny Rollins, while Wayne Shorter and Herbie Hancock were members of his hard-bop quintet that recorded In a Silent Way. His best-selling 1970 album opens with the twenty-minute "Pharaoh's Dance" and yielded the single "Spanish Key," though he more famously worked with John Coltrane on an album that includes "Blue in Green" and "So What". For 10 points, name this trumpeter of The Birth of the Cool, known for the album A? Kind of Blue.;;(Miles) Davis
World History;;A double agent sabotaged its attempt to kill the Military Council by firing on the Town Theatre, and the denial of supplies at Theodosia then led to its surrender at Constanta to Romanian authorities, after which it was renamed the Panteleymon. Events here were sparked by an agent of the Social Revolutionary Party, who garnered support againt Captain Golikov when a surgeon performed a smell test. Its actions mostly took place near Odessa, during th 1905 rebellion as part of the general Black Sea Fleet uprising. For 10 points, name this ship where rotten meat caused a mutiny against the Tsar's officers.;;(Battleship) Potemkin|(Knyaz) Potemkin (Tavrichesky)
Literature;;The central family in this novel lives next door to Levaque and Bouteloup, whose morning rituals they regularly hear. That family receives charity from the shopkeeper Maigrat, who trades food and money for a caress from the eldest daughter. The protagonist gains a new ideology from Pluchart, which he discusses with Souvarine at Rasseneur's. Having come from Marchienne to Montsou, he befriends "Bonnemort" and eventually kills Chaval, his rival for the affections of Catherine Maheu. An avowed socialist, he leads a strike against the local mine that results in a massacre. For 10 points, name this novel about Etienne Lantier, written by Emile Zola.;;Germinal
Geography;;In November 2004, the Athos I spilled a quarter-million gallons of oil into this river. The village of Hancock sees the confluence of its western and eastern branches, the latter of which feeds the Pepacton Reservoir. At Phillipsburg, the Morris Canal connects it to the Hudson River, and it passes through the Twelve-Mile Circle just before emptying into its namesake bay. Its largest tributary, the Schuykill [SKOO-kul], passes west of the Rodin Museum and east of University City in Philadelphia. For 10 points, name this river that forms Pennsylvania's eastern border, depicted in an Emmanuel Leutze painting illustrating the 1776 crossing of it by George Washington.;;(The) Delaware (River)
World History;;One person of this royal name and number was nicknamed "the Impotent" and ruled in Castile. Another defeated a Saxon rebellion at Langesalza to maintain Salian authority as Holy Roman Emperor. Sully's hoax "Royal Economies" claimed that another had a "grand design" to destroy the Hapsburgs after winning at Ivry during the wars of religion. That one declared that "Paris is worth a mass" to gain the French crown. For 10 points, give this name and number shared by the English Bolingbroke who was the first Lancastrian king, the Holy Roman Emperor who went to Canossa, and the issuer of the Edict of Nantes.;;Henry (IV|the Fourth){1}?;;Henry
Miscellaneous;;In astronomy, some researchers contend that galaxies and black holes have become subject to a version of this process, while on a molecular level it is invoked to explain similarities in the genomes of endosymbiontic mitochondria and eukaryotes, such as in the genes for their respective cytochrome c oxidases. More common examples involve flowers and bees adapting to each other to make pollination more favorable, and predator and prey continually evolving new ways to outwit each other; that is the so-called Red Queen hypothesis for this, in which sex is an advantage due to its resulting genetic diversity. For 10 points, name this process in which two entities change in a dependent manner on each other.;;co-evolution
Economics;;Its first volume uses the work of EG Wakefield to make a "modern interpretation of colonization," and other historical portions discuss "primitive accumulation" in Britain. The fourth chapter concludes that "MCM" is the current "general formula" for the title concept of this work, which was left unfinished midway through the fourth volume, Theories of Surplus Value. It begins by describing the "use-values" and values of commodities and moves on to such concepts as the major modes of production and the primacy of labor in creating value out of the title entity. For 10 points, name this magnum opus by Engels and Marx.;;(Das) (C|K){1}?apital
United States History;;A critical action in this conflict was the spiking of cannons at Castillo de San Joaquin. One side was led by "Stuttering Zeke" Merritt, who captured General Mariano Vallejo and also defeated Jose Castro. Many of its participants had arrived on the Brooklyn, and it served to prop up the government originally led by William Ide, which lasted less than a month until John Sloat suppressed both participants in this conflict and deposed John Fremont. First raised at Sonoma, the namesake item was destroyed in a 1906 fire and is now represented on the state emblem. For 10 points, name this revolt for California independence.;;(the) Bear Flag (revolt|republic)
Music;;A textual one by Douglas Hofstadter had characters join in a conversation about consciousness in an anthill. In his Le istitutioni harmoniche, Zarino divided them into sciolta and legata varieties, while Max Reger wrote them into his Hiller and Mozart Variations. One forms the beginning of the overture to The Bartered Bride, and another is featured in the famous middle of the overture to The Magic Flute. This heavily contrapuntal musical form that serves as the second half of a French overture and is paired with a prelude in each key in The Well-Tempered Clavier. For 10 points, name this music form also used by J. S. Bach in a series of organ works with a Toccata.;;fugue
Literature;;The protagonist of Haruki Murakami's Sputnik Sweetheart, Sumire, claims that this is her favorite book. One character moves in with Terri after abandoning the shack he shared with Lee Ann and Remi, having earlier left his best friend in the company of Carlo Marx. A planned trip to Italy is thwarted when another character gets a job as a parking attendant, and the protagonist Is later stranded in Gregoria, Mexico by that character, who then marries Inez, having already married Camille and Marylou. The protagonist eventually meets Laura in New York, and they both witness the final departure of Dean Moriarty. For 10 points, name this Beat novel about Sal Paradise by Jack Kerouac.;;On the Road
Biology;;Catechol-O-methyl transferase is prominently involved in the catabolysis of this substance, and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors are negatively affected when its D2 receptors, which are also thought to play a role in schizophrenia and psychosis, are blocked. Its interaction with and regulation of prolactin is thought to be a contributing factor to male impotence and sexual dysfunction. Synthesized in the body from tyrosine as starting material, an intermediate with an added carboxylate group and a similar name is often used to treat Parkinson's. For 10 points, name this neurotransmitter implicated in the brain's pleasure and reward system.;;dopamine
Philosophy;;One of his books had a frontispiece showing a ship sailing past the pillars of Hercules, while another describes the fictional Salomon's House. He attempted to explain why Egypt has deserts in his Sylva Sylvarum, while his unfinished essay "The Ladder of the Intellect" was to prove the validity of induction. He created the idea of universal progress in The Advancement of Learning, and he also identified the tribe, cave, marketplace, and theater as the "four idols" which inhibit inquiry. For 10 points, name this man who presented an ideal scientific society in The New Atlantis and took apart Aristotleanism in Novum Organum.;;(Sir) (F(rancis)) Bacon(,) (Lord Verulam) (,) (Viscount St. Albans)
Noncomputational Math;;The long line has this property but the long line's compactification doesn't. Neither does the Euclidean plane minus the origin, although the whole plane and 3-space minus the origin have it. It is preserved under homotopy equivalence but not under general continuous transformations. Any proper non-empty subset of the complex with this property can be conformally mapped to the unit disk. For 10 points, name this topological property that intuitively means a space lacks holes and is equivalent to having a trivial fundamental group and being path-connected.;;(simply|1){1}? connected
United States History;;Carlos Calvo's work was used by Luis María Drago to extend this concept to debt collection, and it was formalized as the Porter Convention at the 1907 Hague Peace Conference. Richard Olney vigorously asserted a modification of it during the Venezuela boundary dispute. Olney thus changed a claim first put forth to rebuff George Canning, forming the basis of a 1904 speech by Theodore Roosevelt which created a "corrolary" to it. For 10 points, Secretary of State John Quincy Adams formulated what principle, attributed to the then-president, under which the U.S. opposed any European interference in the Americas?;;(the) Monroe Doctrine
Literature;;In one optional scene, one character offers to defend God against abandonment charges filed by the title characters. That character had earlier gotten Martin Heller to rub his back at a restaurant meeting. One scene sees Mr. Lies, typically played by the actor who plays Belize, appearing in a dream about Antarctica, while another character dreams of two of the 33 ancestors who share his name, Prior Walter, before a title character arrives proclaiming "The Messenger has arrived". Dramatizing Roy Cohn's death of AIDS, for 10 points, name this two-part "Gay Fantasia on National Themes" comprising Millennium Approaches and Perestroika, by Tony Kushner.;;Angels in America
Chemistry;;It was only officially recognized in 1945, the largest change to the commonly accepted periodic table since its inception. Containing elements with 5f electrons, many of its elements have very short half-lives and have only been synthesized in laboratories. Its only elements occurring at appreciable levels are Thorium and Uranium, though a small amount of neptunium and plutonium can sometimes be found in some Uranium ores. For 10 points, name this series of the periodic table named for the 89th element.;;Actinoid (Series)|actinides
Literature;;One of this poet's works sourly concludes that even at their best, women are "but mummy possessed".  Another of his works concludes more optimistically that as princes get new taxes in times of action and don't remit them in peace, no winter shall abate the spring's increase of his love.  Then again, in a more pessimistic mood he concluded that a woman who is true when you write a letter will be false before the reader comes "to two, or three"; that poem begins by inviting anyone who searches for a "true" and "fair" woman to "get with child a mandrake root" or "go and catch a falling star".  FTP, name this author who expressed various opinions about women in his Songs and Sonnets, which also includes "The Good-Morrow" and "A Valediction Forbidding Mourning".;;(John) Donne
Geography;;A conflict known as the "Black War" took place here during the period when George Arthur served as lieutenant governor.  Its first territorial governor, David Collins, had to deal with problems at the Risdon settlement and was assisted by botanist Robert Brown.  Its most famous governor was Sir John Franklin, who was removed from office in 1843, four years before he died looking for the Northwest Passage.  Under the British it was home to convict settlements at Port Arthur and Macquarie Harbor, but it was originally named for the governor of the Dutch East Indies by the explorer whom it is now named for.  FTP, name this island once known as Van Diemen's Land, now an Australian state with capital at Hobart.;;Tasmania
Economics;;In the second part of one of his books, this author considered distributions occasioned by the "division of landed property," by "commerce," and by "personal services and unproductive consumers" as three means of "increasing the exchangeable value of the whole produce".  The first part of that book by this author discussed the "nature, causes, and measures of value" in the course of a consideration of the "principles of political economy".  In his best-known book, this man offered a "short review" of the "savage or hunter state" before noting that the "sorrows of life" are "necessary to soften and humanize the heart," which follows several chapters discussing conjectures of Condorcet and Godwin.  FTP, name this thinker whose 1798 Essay on the Principle of Population argues that the increase in population will exceed the increase in food supply, which just can't be good.;;(Thomas) Malthus
Art;;His brother was a furniture designer who also worked as his model, as seen in works like Bust of Diego.  He created what appears to be a rib cage with feelers attached in his Woman With Her Throat Cut, while a woman holds her hands over her breasts and has her ankles obscured by a rhombus of some sort in his Hands Holding the Void.  He worked with the Surrealists in Paris during the 1920s, when he produced works like Observing Head, before breaking with them and establishing his own distinctive style in works like The Forest.   FTP, name this Swiss sculptor best known for works like Chariot and Tall Figures which depict elongated people.;;(Alberto) Giacometti
Literature;;His play A Lost Child's Fireflies caused controversy when it was produced with an all-black cast.  A character in one of this man's novels ties Hubert Ackley III in a race which he almost misses after being subjected to a lecture by Miss Hicks.  Another character in this man's work goes for a car ride with Diana Steed, only to discover on his return that William Grogan has died.  That novel features a boy named Homer Macaulay, but this author of The Adventures of Wesley Jackson and My Name Is Aram had more success with plays like My Heart's in the Highlands and the Pulitzer-winning The Time of Your Life.  FTP, name this Armenian-born author of The Human Comedy.;;(William) Saroyan
Chemistry;;This term denotes a directed lower subset of a poset.  One approximation of this name sets the resistivity to zero, while another approximation of this name sets the thermal conductivity and viscosity to zero, so that the Navier-Stokes equation reduces to the Euler equation.  In the ring of integers, all of these sets generated by primes are maximal.  A field has no proper ones, and each one can be made the kernel of a ring homomorphism.  This term is also used to denote a solution that obeys Raoult's law, or a diffuse collection of elastically-colliding particles with no interaction forces and no volume.  FTP, give the term used to denote gases for which PV = nRT.;;ideal
United States History;;It was carried out by a group which had been stationed at Fort Lyon, and the leader was following orders given by the man who founded Northwestern University before becoming a territorial governor, John Evans.  It was the major episode in a war which was sparked by a dispute over the terms of the Treaty of Fort Laramie.  As many as 200 people were killed, even though a white flag was raised at the outset by the Cheyenne leader, Black Kettle. FTP, name this event which took place on November 28, 1864, a massacre of Native Americans by soldiers led by John Chivington which took place on a tributary of the Arkansas River.;;(the) Sand Creek (Massacre)
Miscellaneous;;Following the 2002 season, he was traded along with Ratko Varda and Brian Cardinal for a group of players which included Bobby Simmons and Hubert Davis.  In 2004, he was traded to his current team in a deal which also involved Christian Laettner and the draft rights to Devin Harris.  He was drafted after Antonio McDyess in 1995, one spot ahead of a college teammate who was taken fourth by the Bullets.  He started his career alongside Allen Iverson in Philadelphia, and played with Detroit before being traded for Rip Hamilton and with Washington before being traded to Dallas.  FTP, name this guard who played at North Carolina with Rasheed Wallace, a man who claims to have started the trend among NBA players of wearing tights.;;(Jerry) Stackhouse
Literature;;Its final section begins with an anecdote about a "solitary English gentleman" wandering Jerusalem to elucidate such questions as the "line of division between the tribes of Benjamin and Judah".  Its first section notes that a man who was offered the post of sub-almoner to the Queen drew up an elaborate table for and against accepting the post, and after finding ten "negative reasons" decided to decline the offer.  The third of its four sections deals with a man who in 1828 accepted the headmastership of Rugby school, Thomas Arnold.  Also depicting Cardinal Manning, General Gordon, and Florence Nightingale, this is, FTP, what 1918 work of biography by Lytton Strachey?;;Eminent Victorians
Religion/Mythology;;Vafthruthnir refers to this character as "Vingnir" in the Vafthruthnismol, and Grimnir claims that his home has 540 rooms in the Grimnismol.  He boasts of having thrown the eyes of the son of Alvaldi into the heavens, and of killing the stone-headed owner of Gullfaxi, in the Harbarthsljoth.  Grimnir states that the greatest home he has ever seen is this character's hall Bilskirnir, and Vafthruthnir mentions that both his sons will survive Ragnarok, and will share ownership of his most prized possession.  His chariot is drawn by Gap-Tooth and Tooth-Gnasher, a pair of magical goats.  FTP, name this husband of Sif, a son of Odin who wields the hammer Mjolnir.;;Thor
Biology;;In bacteria, it modifies O2 of cytidine in the wobble position of isoleucine tRNA.  The first step in its degradation in the liver involves the formation of an adduct with alpha-ketoglutarate known as saccharopine.  In collagen, crosslinks can be formed by this amino acid and its hydroxylated derivative.  It is the substrate for ubiquitin ligase and for histone acetyltransferases.  In class I aldolases, this amino acid's side chain reacts with the enzyme substrate to make a Schiff base.  With a side chain consisting of an episilon-amino group, FTP identify this amino acid that, like histidine and arginine, has a basic side chain.;;lys(ine)|K
Literature;;In the opening scene, one character gets up after being unable to sleep and begins figuring his debts to such people as Pasias and Ameinias.  In the next scene, we learn that one character was studying the moon when a lizard shitted on his face, after which that character served ash to his comrades for dinner.  Characters in this work include Chaerephon, who complains of being "prematurely cremated" in the final scene, and a creditor who threatens to take another character to court.  It centers on a farmer named Strepsiades who sends his son Pheidippides to The Thinkery, a school run by Socrates.  FTP, name this comic play by Aristophanes.;;(The) Clouds|Nephelai
World History;;This man won an important victory at the battle of Andernach, where his rival Eberhard of Franconia was killed.  That battle was part of one of the revolts led by this man's younger brother Henry, who was eventually made duke of Bavaria.  This man assumed the title "king of the Lombards" after he invaded Italy to take his future wife Adelaide from Berengar of Ivrea, and went on to depose Pope John XII in 963, a year after he had been crowned in Rome.  FTP, name this duke of Saxony who defeated the Magyars at Lechfeld and ruled as Holy Roman Emperor until 973.;;Otto (I|the (First|Great){1}?|II of Saxony){1}?;;Otto
Physics;;For a system coupled to a heat bath, its expectation value is related to the Helmholtz free energy in the Gibbs-Bogoliubov inequality.  Its mean value is stationary in neighborhoods of its discrete eigenvalues, according to the Ritz theorem.  In classical mechanics, the Routhian is defined so that it behaves like this function on all cyclic coordinates.  The Rayleigh-Ritz theorem forms the basis for the variational method, in which its expectation value for a trial wave function gives an upper bound on the ground state energy.  Defined in classical mechanics as a function of generalized coordinates and conjugate momenta, FTP name this quantum mechanical operator which corresponds to total energy.;;Hamiltonian
Music;;Four works of this kind, including the "Norse" and "Keltic," were written by Edward MacDowell.  Three of them were written by Johannes Brahms, including ones in C major and F-sharp minor which are his Opus 1 and 2.  Nine of them were written by Sergei Prokofiev, and ten of them, including ones known as the "White Mass" and "Black Mass," were written by Alexander Scriabin.  A more famous group of them includes ones nicknamed "Les Adieux," "Waldstein," and "Hammerklavier".  FTP, name this type of musical composition which includes the "Appassionata" and "Moonlight" by Beethoven.;;piano sonata(s);;sonata(s)
Literature;;He wrote about a young woman named Dreetta who wants to marry an Englishman but instead jumps to her death in his story "Puberty".  His better known stories include "The Man with the Flower in his Mouth" and "The Black Kid".  His second volume of poems, Pasqua di Gea, was dedicated to Jenny Schulz-Lander, whom he met while studying philology at Bonn.  He also wrote novels, such as 1904's The Late Mattia Pascal, but is better known for plays, such as Liola and Henry IV.  FTP, name this Italian author best known for Six Characters in Search of an Author.;;(Luigi) Pirandello
Biology;;In Drosophila, genes involved in this process include concertina and fog.  In amphibians, bottle cells form near the gray crescent during this process that is initiated by the Spemann-Mangold organizer.  Steps involved include convergence, extension, and epiboly, as well as cell movement to create the primitive streak or the blastopore.  It results in the formation of the archenteron, and the formation of mesoderm, ectoderm, and endoderm cell layers.  FTP, identify this process of invagination that initiates the embryonic stage following the blastula.;;gastrulation
Philosophy;;The first defense of this work was a pamphlet called Afterphilologie by the author's friend Ernst Rohde, which was a response to an attack on this work entitled Philology of the Future by Ulrich Wilamowitz-Moellendorff.  The foreword notes that this work's inspiration came as the "thunder of the battle of Wörth was rolling over Europe," and asks such questions as "Is there a pessimism of strength"? and "Was Epicurus an optimist precisely because he was afflicted"?  After that "attempt at a self-criticism," this work features 25 chapters, the last ten of which consider the work of a contemporary composer to whom the work's preface is addressed.  Positing a dialectic between the "Apollinian" and "Dionysian," FTP, name this work whose original subtitle referred to the "spirit of music" from which the titular artistic genre arose, the first book by Friedrich Nietzsche.;;(The) Birth of Tragedy|(Die) Geburt der Tragödie
Literature;;This man's brother captured the city of Calleva, and one of this man's sons completed the conquest of the Atrebates, prompting their leader Bericus to flee to a foreign court.  This man's son Adminius had earlier fled to that same court, but the army he was hoping would reinstate him devolved into a seashell-gathering expedition.  A battle with a force under Aulus Plautius saw the death of his son Togodumnus, after which another son, Caractacus, continued the fight against the invasion ordered by Claudius.  In Geoffrey of Monmouth's History of the Kings of Britain and Holinshed's Chronicles, Togodumnus and Caractacus are replaced by Guiderius and Arviragus.  FTP, name this king of the Catuvellauni, the title character of a Shakespeare play featuring Cloten and Imogen.;;Cymbeline|Cunobelin(us)
Literature;;The "aesthetic dignity" of this work is the subject of the final essay in Erich Auerbach's Scenes from the Drama of European Literature.  That essay refers to the "gray misery" of a poem in which the author speaks of his soul as a "hateful cloister" in which he paces for all eternity like a "miserable monk".  Its first edition ended with a poem that mentions accursed sculptors who only hope that death will make their creations blossom; that edition was divided into five sections, including "Wine," "Revolt," and "Spleen and Ideal".  First appearing in 1857, FTP, name this collection whose preface addresses a "hypocrite reader," the best-known work of Charles Baudelaire.;;(The) Flowers of Evil|(Les) Fleurs du Mal
Literature;;His short poems include the Ruins of Rome and Visions of the World's Vanity, which are collected among his Complaints. He instructed the "sweet Thames" to "run softly" until he ends his song in one of his major poems, while he concluded another poem by asking that it be "for short time an endless monument". He compared himself to the "culver on the bared bough" in the 89th and final sonnet of his sequence Amoretti, which is sometimes paired with his "Epithalamion". FTP, name this English poet better known for his epic featuring Britomart and the Red Cross Knight, The Fairie Queene.;;(Edmund) Spenser
United States History;;Two weeks after it took place, a group of rebels was forced to give up Navy Island. Five months after it took place, the steamship Sir Robert Peel was burned. It resulted in the death of Amos Durfee, for whose murder Alexander McLeod was arrested in late 1840. It was carried out by militia who were trying to prevent supplies from being brought to followers of William Mackenzie, who had led a rebellion in 1837. FTP, name this incident in which a group of Canadian troops crossed the Niagara river and burned an American steamboat, which almost set off a war with Great Britain.;;(the) Caroline (affair)
Chemistry;;Indirectly, it can provide a ratio of ionized to non-ionized molecules of lysine. Depending on the situation in which it is used, one can invert the quotient used in its more complicated term or merely subtract that term instead. An important application of this relation is its explanation of the effects of increased carbon dioxide levels on possible alkalosis in the plasma. Derivable from the definition of the equilibrium dissociation constant, it is useful for calculating the effect of buffers. FTP, name this simple equation indicating that the logarithm of the quotient of a base and its conjugate acid plus its pKa is equal to its pH.;;Henderson-Hasselbach (equation)
Literature;;The protagonist of this novel goes to work for the Harling family after her neighbors move to Black Hawk. After they disapprove of her fondness for dancing, she leaves them to work for Wick Cutter, but his sexual advances drive her back to the farm. She travels to Denver to marry a conductor, but returns pregnant and unmarried and goes back to farmwork, eventually marrying Anton Cuzak. FTP, name this 1918 novel about Jimmy Burden and the Shimerda family, a work by Willa Cather.;;My Antonia
Religion/Mythology;;To honor Melicertes, this man founded the Isthmian games, which were haunted by a ghost known as the Taraxippus. The Taraxippus was actually the shade of this man's son, who was devoured by his own horses. This man branded the hooves of his cows to prove that they were being stolen by Autolycus, and according to some accounts, he avenged himself by seducing Autolycus's daughter Anticleia, so that he, not Laertes, was the father of Odysseus. Hermes was eventually sent to bring him forcibly to the underworld, and Ares had earlier visited his palace to free Hades, whom this man had tricked into handcuffing himself. FTP name this King of Corinth who was condemned to roll a boulder up a hill.;;Sisyphus
Music;;He used a melody by the father of his one-time girlfriend, Ernestine von Fricken, as the theme for his Symphonic Etudes. His first composition was another set of "theme and variations" on the name of Countess Pauline Abegg, while his later works for piano include the Scenes from Childhood and Carnival. He wrote four symphonies, the third of which is a work in five movements meant to depict Rhenish life. FTP, name this German composer who also wrote the Spring Symphony.;;(Robert) Schumann
World History;;It gained power over Scania through the Peace of Stralsund, which was signed five years after the Peace of Wordingborg weakened its power in Denmark. That peace was the work of Waldemar IV, whose victories at Helsingborg and Wisby curtailed its dominance. Its last formal assembly was held in 1669, but it reached its apex much earlier, when its major kontors were at London, Bergen, and Bruges. FTP, name this association which centered at Lübeck, a union of North German towns which worked together to regulate trade.;;(the) Hanseatic (League)|Hansa
Physics;;One candidate for it is trinification, which predict magnetic monopoles, while some technicolor models, may also fall into this category. Other candidates include preon models, such as the Harari-Rishon model, while SO10 suffers from the doublet-triplet splitting problem. The flipped SU5 and SU10 models get their name from the flipping of the left-handed fermions relative to the Georgi-Glashow model, which predicts proton decay. The Pati-Salam one predicts spontaneous symmetry breaking, but the most famous might be string theory. For ten points, identify these extensions of the Standard Model which seek to incorporate electroweak and strong interactions into a single force.;;grand unified theory|GUT
Religion/Mythology;;In its 36th and final chapter, we learn that the daughters of Zelophehad did as the Lord commanded and married sons of their father's brothers. In the beginning of the book, a divinely-commanded census is taken, while later chapters feature a woman who becomes leprous and a mission in which twelve spies are sent from Paran to Canaan. It also describes the revolt of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, and features Barak's summons of Balaam, whose ass is notoriously recalcitrant. FTP, name this book of the Old Testament which comes between Leviticus and Deuteronomy.;;(the) (book of) Numbers
Literature;;At the opening of this work, Richard Enfield and Mr. Utterson encounter an empty building while taking their usual Sunday walk, which reminds Enfield that he saw a man trample a child in its doorway. The man who trampled that child is suspected of being an extortionist by Utterson, and is later accused of the murder of Sir Danvers Carew, but after Poole summons Utterson to a laboratory they discover the man drinking poison. The confession written by the first title character describes how he used drugs to turn into the second title character. FTP, name this 1886 work about a London physician who leads a double life, a work by Robert Louis Stevenson.;;(The) (Strange Case of) (Dr(.)|Doctor){1}? Jekyll and (Mr(.)|Mister){1}? Hyde
Biology;;One serious drawback to this method is its high sensitivity, as it tends to produce many false positives in an unclean lab. Used diagnostically in some introductory lab courses for the purposes of determining the orientation of an inserted gene, it is also used in site-directed mutagenesis and in quantitative measurement of a specific mRNA in tissue. Cooling is necessary for rehybridization and for attachment of the primers to the original or newly synthesized DNA strands, but near-boiling temperatures will still not denature a certain enzyme of Thermus aquaticus, commonly known as Taq [TACK]. FTP, name this technique developed for large scale amplification of DNA, first proposed by Kary Mullis in 1983.;;p(olymerase) c(hain) r(eaction)
World History;;He was succeeded by his brother Smenkhkare, who was co-regent with him during the final years of his reign. Like his father, who married a non-royal woman named Tiy, he married a woman who was not of royal blood, the daughter of a vizier named Ay. After changing his name in the fifth year of his reign, he moved the capital in the following year to a site in Middle Egypt which is now known as el-Amarna. FTP, name this pharoah of the 18th dynasty who was married to Nefertiti and introduced the cult of a son god named Aten.;;Akhenaten|Amenhotep (IV|the Fourth){1}?;;Amenhotep
Literature;;After a hastily-called meeting is held in this work, the manager of a hospital is told to give his patients clean nightcaps, and he decides to place Latin signs describing the patients' illnesses over their sickbeds. Later, the title character is loaned money by such characters as Ammos the judge, Luka the schoolmaster, and Bobchinsky and Dobchinsky, who had misidentified him in the first place. Maria accepts a marriage proposal from Ivan Hlestakov before it is discovered that he isn't really the titular figure. FTP, name this 1836 drama in which the people of a small town mistakenly assume that a travelling gambler is an official, a work by Nikolai Gogol.;;(The) Inspector General|(The) Government Inspector|Revizor
Music;;His son Ravi has produced such albums as Moving Pictures and From the Round Box. The final studio album produced by his best-known group was 1965's Sun Ship, which appeared in the same year as the widely-derided Om and Kulu Se Mama. "Number One" and "To Be" appear on Expression, which was made from his final recording sessions prior to his death in 1967. Better known are such tracks as "Naima" and "Countdown," which appear on his 1959 Giant Steps. FTP, name this tenor saxophonist whose other albums include My Favorite Things and A Love Supreme.;;(John) Coltrane
Noncomputational Math;;He argued that the Royal Society was ineffective because it was controlled by a small clique in his Reflections on the Decline of Science in England, which led to the founding of the British Association for the Advancement of Science. After touring factories on the Continent he wrote On the Economy of Machinery and Manufactures, but he spent most of his life working on two machines of his own, one of which was meant to integrate difference equations. FTP, name this English thinker who failed to create a machine which could change in response to its own calculations, the so-called "analytical engine" which is regarded as the forerunner of modern computers.;;(Charles) Babbage
Physics;;The K-correction must be applied to observations of extragalactic objects to account for this phenomenon. In principle, its value can be plotted against the apparent magnitudes of objects with the same intrinsic luminosity to yield a value for the deceleration parameter. One version of this phenomenon, together with time dilation, is seen in the Sachs-Wolfe effect. That version, predicted by general relativity, occurs when photons climb out of gravitational potential wells. FTP, transverse relative motion must, according to the relativistic Doppler shift, produce this increase in the wavelength of light.;;red shift;;cosmological redshift
World History;;The first member of this house to rule his country consolidated his power by winning victories at Arques and Ivry, after which his authority was acknowledged by the Duke of Mayenne. The second ruler of this family was threatened by conspiracies led by the Marquis of Cinq-Mars and the Duke of Montmorency, and his reign featured the siege of La Rochelle and the Day of Dupes led by his mother, Marie de Medici. That second ruler took the throne at the age of nine after Francois Ravaillac assasinated his father in 1610. FTP, name this royal house whose first French monarch was Henry IV and which included a number of kings named Louis, including the 16th.;;(the) (House of) Bourbon
Philosophy;;It includes a "psychological diversion" which claims to be "delivered before the fellowship of the dead" called "Silhouettes". Another section is "a venture in fragmentary endeavor" called "the tragic in ancient drama reflected in the tragic in modern drama," while a later "venture in a theory of social prudence" deals with "rotation of crops". More famously, this so-called "fragment of life" includes sections called "Diapsalmata" and "The Seducer's Diary". FTP, name this work written by the pseudonymous Victor Eremita, which was actually published in 1843 by Soren Kierkegaard and which deals with two distinct views of life.;;Either (/) Or
Literature;;His first novel features the Cloud Hotel, where a madman named Little Sunshine lives, and such characters as Jesus and Zoo Fever, who live at Skully's Landing. His trip to Russia with a company performing Porgy and Bess led to the writing of The Muses Are Heard, while his other works include the stories collected in A Tree of Night and the collection Music for Chameleons. In addition to Other Voices, Other Rooms, he wrote a book about the murder of a Kansas family and a short novel about Holly Golightly. FTP, name this author of In Cold Blood and Breakfast at Tiffany's.;;(Truman) Capote
Miscellaneous;;This team acquired cornerback Gary Baxter and safety Brian Russell following the 2004 season, and their other defensive additions include Jason Fisk and Matt Stewart. On offense, they picked up linemen Joe Andruzzi and L. J. Shelton and acquired a Super Bowl-winning quarterback who most recently played four seasons with the Seahawks. They drafted wide receiver Braylon Edwards, while Steve Heiden at tight end will have to fill in for the injured Kellen Winslow Jr. FTP, name this team in the AFC North which features Trent Dilfer and Lee Suggs on offense, and which is now coached by Romeo Crennel.;;(the) (Cleveland Browns|Cleveland|Browns){1}?
Noncomputational Math;;They typically lack memory allocation and explicit variable assignments, and the absence in them of side effects ensures referential transparency. Pure ones have no variables at all and are therefore thread-safe, and the first one was known as IPL and was developed for the JOHNNIAC at the RAND Corporation. They possess two different types of evaluation, a strict way which evaluates all arguments first, and a lazy way, which evaluates arguments as they are needed and is exemplified by the Haskell language. Typically making heavy use of recursion, they had their foundation in the development by Alonzo Church of the lambda calculus. Typically contrasted with imperative languages, for ten points, identify this type of programming language, most famously exemplified by Scheme and LISP, and which models itself on the evaluation of certain mathematical relations.;;functional (languages)
United States History;;He experienced a string of early successes in overrunning such forts as Ouiatenon, Venango, and Le Boeuf, but Henry Gladwin held him off from his major objective. He defeated Gladwin at Bloody Ridge, but Henry Bouquet's victory at Bushy Run rescued Pittsburgh from his troops, after which some of his allies signed a separate peace at Presque Isle. He himself only agreed to peace three years later, in 1766's treaty of Oswego, and was murdered at Cahokia three years after that. FTP, name this leader of the Ottawa Indians who in 1763 led a namesake rebellion against the English that aimed to capture Detroit.;;Pontiac
Geography;;It has access to the Pacific through a small coastline on the Gulf of Fonseca, where its port of Amapala is located. The Patuca and Ulua river systems drain the nation's north, which is home to many banana plantations, while its ports include Tela and La Ceiba. Featuring the treacherous Mosquito Coast, it is bounded by the Caribbean Sea, Nicaragua, Guatemala, and El Salvador. FTP, name this Central American nation whose capital is Tegucigalpa.;;Honduras
Literature;;He wrote about the American hotel industry in his Work of Art, while a young actress is the subject of his novel Bethel Merriday. Many of his readers were shocked by the sexual frankness of Cass Timberlane, while others were shocked by his novel about a man who discovers that he has African-American blood, Kingsblood Royal. He wrote about a retired automobile tycoon and his wife in his novel Dodsworth, and imagined a fascist takeover of the United States in It Can't Happen Here. FTP, name this American author who wrote about a physician, minister, and realtor in Arrowsmith, Elmer Gantry, and Babbit.;;(Sinclair) Lewis
Chemistry;;The Kapustinskii equation can be used to calculate this quantity based on an assumed ionic radius for (6,6)-coordination and the Madelung constant. As the ionic radius of either the cation or anion increases, this quantity decreases, and solids consisting of divalent ions have a much larger value than monovalent ions. The most famous way of calculating this quantity involves the atomization and ionization of a metal and nonmetal and is known as the Born-Haber cycle. The opposite of the energy of crystallization, FTP, name this chemical property defined as the energy required to separate a mold of a crystalline solid into a gas of its ions.;;lattice (e(nergy|thalpy){1}?){1}?
Philosophy;;In Book Four of this work, the author claims that in times of war, Christians may find their loyalty divided between defending the state and defending their religious convictions. In Book One he claims that slavery goes against human nature and that the divine right of kings is ludicrous, since a monarch cannot protect the interests of the people and his own interests simultaneously. Book Two centers on the concept of the "general will," which states that government is a natural occurrence that must be controlled by the wants and needs of the people. It is here that he establishes the title concept, which defines the relationship between the governors and the governed. FTP name this seminal tract on political theory by Jean-Jacques Rousseau.;;(A) (Treatise on the) Social Contract(: Or, The Principles of Political Law)|(Du) contrat social(: Ou, Principes du droit politique)
United States History;;One of their more prominent actions was dubbed the "crowded hour," and they became newspaper darlings under Samuel Young at Las Guásimas. After they returned to Montauk, their rank-and-file selected William S. Murphy to present a statue to one of their officers. Those officers included former White House physician Leonard Wood and the assistant secretary of the Navy, who led them in the battles of Santiago and San Juan Ridge. For 10 points, name this group, formally designated the First Volunteer Cavalry, whose popularity during the Spanish-American War brought fame to Theodore Roosevelt.;;Rough Riders;;First Volunteer Cavalry
Literature;;This poem mentions hedgerows which are "hardly hedgerows" but "little lines / Of sportive wood run wild," which are seen by the speaker as he sits under a "dark sycamore". Some "steep and lofty cliffs" impress upon the poet "thoughts of more deep seclusion," and he thinks that the "wreaths of smoke" might rise from "vagrant dwellers in the houseless woods". In the final section of the poem, the poet describes his "cheerful faith" that "all which we behold / Is full of blessings" to his sister Dorothy, who went with him on the walking tour that is this poem's subject. FTP, name this poem which was composed a few miles above a site on the river Wye, a 1798 work by William Wordsworth.;;(Lines Composed a Few Miles Above) Tintern Abbey (on Revisiting the Banks of the Wye During a Tour)
Music;;Among this man's lieder are one on the murder of Murray and another on the poem "Ivan". This man's late piano works include a set of seven "Fantasies," his Opus 116, and three sets of "Klavierstücke," though he is better-known for keyboard works like the two rhapsodies of his Opus 79. He wrote two sets of Gypsy Songs, his Opus 103 and 112, both of which reflect the influence Hungarian folk music had on his work. His first symphony is often called "Beethoven's 10th," although his fourth and final one is better known. He used a German text for his Deutsches Requiem, which he dedicated to his mother, but he is better known for a set of songs written for the University of Breslau. FTP name this composer, perhaps best known for his Academic Festival Overture and a namesake lullaby.;;(Johannes) Brahms
Miscellaneous;;This author of the poetry book Ten Last Night and performer of the vocal jazz albums The Other Parade and One Man's Meat played Caspar Goodwood in 1996's adaptation of The Portrait of a Lady and later painted the murals attributed to his character David Shaw in A Perfect Murder. He was also present at the "Miracle on Ice" game during the 1980 Winter Olympics in his official capacity as the English translator for the Swedish hockey team. While playing Jerome Stample in Salvation!, he met his onetime wife Exene Cervenka, and their son Henry convinced him to take his most successful role on short notice, replacing the fired Stuart Townsend. FTP, name this actor who recently portrayed Tom Stall in A History of Violence after starring as Aragorn in the Lord of the Rings films.;;(Viggo) (Peter) Mortensen (Jr(.)|Junior)
Physics;;Along with its lighter partner, it was predicted by Kobayashi and Maskawa, who deduced its existence from CP-violation in neutral kaons. Produced predominately in pairs after high-energy collisions between protons and antiprotons, this subatomic particle, which possesses a two-thirds charge, is sufficiently heavy that perturbative QCD could be used to give a theoretical estimate of its mass. It is unique among particles of its kind in that it does not hadronize, and therefore decays into a W boson and bottom quark, as seen in its discovery with the Tevatron accelerator in 1995 at Fermilab. With a mass of about 174 GeV, for ten points, name this heaviest and last-discovered quark, the partner of the bottom quark.;;top (quark)
World History;;It began and drew much of its support from the Hakka, who made up most of its leaders, and among the things it sought to prohibit were adultery, gambling, and the use of tobacco. Its initial successes were tarnished by the murders of its minister of state, Yang Hsiu-ching, as well as the general Wei Chang-hui, who had killed Yang. It was further weakened by the desertion of Shih Ta-k'ai, and in 1860, it failed to take Shanghai, which was defended by a force commanded by Frederick Ward. Growing out of the God Worshippers' Society, it was finally defeated by the Ever-Victorious Army under the command of Charles Gordon. Taking its name from the Chinese for "Heavenly Kingdom of Great Peace," FTP, name this anti-Manchu rebellion whose leader, Hung His-chuan, believed he was the younger brother of Jesus.;;Taiping (Rebellion)
Literature;;He used the pseudonym N. W. Clerk for a book written about the illness of his wife, A Grief Observed. He collaborated with literary critic E. M. W. Tillyard on the book The Personal Heresy, while his own works of literary criticism include one which belittles Milton's Satan, A Preface to "Paradise Lost", and 1936's Allegory of Love. His religious works include The Four Loves and The Problem of Pain, as well as a book that tries to establish a core of Christian dogma central to all denominations, Mere Christianity. He may be better known today for his novels, including such works of science fiction as Out of the Silent Planet. FTP, name this English author of The Screwtape Letters and such novels as The Silver Chair and Prince Caspian, two of his seven Chronicles of Narnia.;;((Clive) (Staples)|C(.) S(.)) Lewis
Social Science;;An exception to it postulates an intermediate step which could produce voiced spirants, and it explains the reduction in labiovelars. Based on an earlier idea put forth by Rasmus Christian Rask, it has two parts, the latter of which only applies to High German, and the former of which shows that voiceless stops changed into voiceless fricatives, voiced stops became voiceless, and voiced aspirated stops lost their aspiration and changed into plain voiced stops. FTP, name this rule of sound shifts put forth by a man who collaborated with his brother on collecting fairy tales.;;Grimm(') s (Law)
Literature;;Welsh author Rhys Hughes has recently published a book inspired by a series this man wrote for the newspaper The Critic. This man's protagonists include a secretary of a municipal library anxious to read a rare edition of The Arabian Nights' Entertainments, an Englishman with a vicious scar across his face, and a man given the appellation "Chronometer" before he dies from pulmonary failure. He was obsessed with the ideas of Heraclitus, as can be seen in a story about a man who worships a fire god and creates a man in his image, only to find out that he was created in a similar fashion. That story, "The Circular Ruins," is featured in a collection that also contains stories like "The Lottery of Babylon," "The Garden of the Forking Paths" and "Pierre Menard, Author of the Quixote". FTP, name this Argentinean writer of "The Library of Babel," El Aleph, and the collection Ficciones.;;(Jorge) (Luis) Borges
Biology;;The smallest class of this phylum contains Chironex fleckeri, which contains poison that can be fatal to humans. The endoderm and ectoderm of members of this phylum are held together by a layer of gelatinous material called a mesoglea. A gastrovascular cavity serves as both a mouth and an anus in members, all of which exhibit radial symmetry. Members of class Anthozoa only have a polyp form, while members of class Hydrozoa have a polyp and medusa form. For ten points -- name this phylum, whose members include sea anemones, corals, and jellyfish.;;Cnidaria(n)
United States History;;After leaving his homeland, he worked in Costa Rica as a time-keeper on a banana plantation, where he became concerned about black working conditions. He later launched the Edelweiss Amusement Company and traveled to Geneva to present the "Petition of the Negro Race" to the League of Nations. He wrote about his cause in a newspaper called The Watchman, and to promote worldwide commerce among black communities, he ran the Black Star Line. FTP, name this founder of the Universal Negro Improvement Association, the Jamaican-born founder of the Back to Africa movement.;;(Marcus) (Moziah) Garvey
Religion/Mythology;;In Chinese myth, there were originally ten of these, but nine were shot down by the Divine Archer, Shen Yi. In Hindu myth, the young Hanuman saw it, thought it was a fruit, and tried to eat it. Visvakarma placed the god associated with it in his lathe and shaved off part of that god, then used the shavings to create Vishnu's discus and other weapons. Visvakarma did this because the god associated with it, Surya, was too bright. In Japanese myth, the goddess associated with it was washed out of the left eye of Izanagi. FTP, the Japanese goddess Amaterasu was associated with what luminous celestial body?;;sun(s)
Literature;;The Lord Chamberlain refused a license for the second play he tried to publish because it contained Biblical characters. This slight led him to contemplate changing to French citizenship, and although he did not do so, that play was published in France the year before being released in England. In one of his plays, an illegitimate man named Gerald is torn between his father, Lord Illingworth, and his mother, Mrs. Arbuthnot. That play, A Woman of No Importance, appeared in 1893, two years before An Ideal Husband and a year after Lady Windermere's Fan. FTP, name this Irish author who also wrote The Importance of Being Earnest and The Picture of Dorian Gray.;;(Oscar) Wilde
World History;;It was enthusiastically supported by the newspaper of Charles Maurras and adopted the "attentisme" foreign policy and the motto "Work, family, fatherland". The United States sent William D. Leahy as ambassador to to this government, whose members included Marcel Déat, Maxime Weygand and Fernand de Brinon. Its secret police was headed by Joseph Darnand after being created by Pierre Laval. It was created after Operation Anton, and was headed by Henri Philippe Pétain. FTP, name this French government controlled by Nazi Germany.;;Vichy (France|Regime){1}?;;French State|Etat Francais;;Vichy
Astronomy;;This body is home to an irregular eastward-moving cloud known as the Scooter which may represent a plume rising in its atmosphere, which also shows shadows from high level clouds on a lower opaque cloud deck. Its atmosphere is also home to the fastest winds of any planet in the solar system, as well as a reservoir of methane gas which absorbs red light, producing its distinctive coloration. One of its moons has the highest known eccentricity of any natural satellite, while its largest moon is the only large moon with a retrograde orbit, and has active cryo-volcanos. Home to the Great Dark Spot, FTP name this outermost gas giant orbited by Nereid and Triton.;;Neptune
Literature;;The only character that is constantly cheerful in this work is a servant boy named Gerasim. One of the title character's close friends meets a colleague named Schwarz, who winks at him and tries to arrange an evening game of bridge. After losing two promotions, the title character gets a new job when a man named Miller is replaced by his friend Zachar, who helps set him up in St. Petersburg. His wife Praskovya and their son Volodya come to live with him in their new house, but while he is attempting to show an upholsterer how to hang some drapes he falls, hitting his side on the knob of the window frame. The bruise he gets eventually grows, and he grows sicker until he expires. FTP, name this short novel by Leo Tolstoy that concludes with the title event.;;(The) Death of Ivan Ilyich|Smert Ivana Ilyicha
Art;;Jonathan Harr's new novel The Lost Painting describes the search for this man's The Taking of Christ. This man won early success with mythological portraits such as his Bacchus, whom he depicts in a toga holding a black ribbon, and a portrait of Cupid standing over a heap of musical instruments with his arrows in his right hand. It did not take long, however, for him to start painting hagiographical portraits, such as The Incredulity of St. Thomas and a large depiction of the beheading of St. John that now resides in a church on Malta, where he lived toward the end of his life. He is more famous for works like his Supper at Emmaus and a depiction of St. Paul having fallen from his horse. FTP, name this Italian painter, who was born Michelangelo Merisi and who is best known for his Calling of St. Matthew.;;Caravaggio;;(Michelangelo) Merisi
Noncomputational Math;;Computer graphics known by this name were first used in programs like the SAGE air defense system and include primitive objects such as Bezier curves. In operating systems, this term refers to a memory location, while in mathematics, this term refers both to first-rank tensors and to spaces which, as a consequence of the axiom of choice, have a basis. In biology, an example is a mosquito which carries a malarial parasite. This term also denotes a one-dimensional array in many programming languages. In physics, velocity is an example of, FTP, what type of quantity specified by a magnitude and a direction?;;vector
World History;;Under the command of Aulus Plautius, he captured twenty hill-forts, including the Maiden Castle in Dorset, as well as the Isle of Wight in A.D. 43. Two decades later, he was appointed to quell the Great Jewish Revolt. His reign as emperor saw the Batavian rebellion and the campaigns of Agricola in Britain, as well as the start of construction on the Colosseum. His ten year rule was followed by reigns by both of his sons, Titus and Domitian. FTP, name this founder of the Flavian dynasty who emerged victorious from the Year of the Four Emperors.;;(Caesar) Vespasian(us) (Augustus)|(Titus) (Flavius) Vespasian(us)
Geography;;It cuts out Goring Gap and receives the Medway and Churn. Fry's Island and Canvey Island are found within it, and it ends after Teddington Lock near the lighthouse at Nore. Its freshwater to estuary transition occurs at Battersea. The Jubilee River was built during the 1990s to divert floodwater from this river, which originates near Kemble village in the Cotswold Hills of Gloucestershire County. It is called the Isis when it flows through Oxford. FTP, connects London to the sea.;;Thames (River)
Geography;;Harris Theater for Music and Dance can easily be seen from Randolph Street, and the BP Bridge crosses over Columbus Drive. Two 50-foot towers make up Crown Fountain, which also features high-tech LED video screens. Opening four years later than expected, this 25-acre landmark features Wrigley Square in its northwest corner. Cloud Gate resembles a drop of liquid mercury and is often referred to by residents as The Bean. Massive panels of stainless steel make up its centerpiece, a bandshell designed by Frank Gehry called the Pritzker Pavilion. FTP, name this park found in downtown Chicago.;;Millennium Park
United States History;;The majority opinion was delivered in a notoriously quiet voice derided as a sign of "shame" by opponents of this decision. In the aftermath of the case, Justice Curtis resigned angrily to protest attacks on his dissent by the Chief Justice. One party believed that his position had a strong precedent set in Rachel v. Walker, and thus the time spent in Fort Armstrong in Illinois entitled him to relief. Also encompassing the appellant's relatives Harriet, Lizzie, and Eliza, it declared the Missouri Compromise unconstitutional. FTP, name this case where Chief Justice Taney declared that the plaintiff, as a slave, had no rights as a citizen.;;(Dred) Scott (v(.)|versus) (John F.A.) (Sandford)|(John F.A.) Sandford (v(.)|versus) (Dred Scott)
Religion/Mythology;;The Orthodox Christian saint Josaphat was said to be one of these, and his name is a distortion of the word used to designate them. A 500-foot-tall statue is being built in Kushinagar in honor of one named Maitreya, who some believe will come after the teachings of Shakyamuni disappear. To become one, it is necessary to master the six perfections, after which you choose to be either one of these or an Arhat. Those such as the Avalokiteshvara and the 14th Dalai Lama who chose to stay behind and help others on their path to Nirvana are known by, FTP, what term used in Mahayana Buddhism that literally means "wise being"?;;Bodhisattva
Literature;;In one of this man's poems, he remarks that the Naiad has been torn from her flood and the Elfin has been torn from the green grass, while the speaker has lost "the summer dream beneath the tamarind tree". Another of his poems mentions a group of marvelous shrines whose "friezes intertwine / The viol, the violet, and the vine". That poem begins by noting that "Death has reared himself a throne" in the titular "City in the Sea," while another of his poems features a "pilgrim shadow" who advises a knight to travel "over the Mountains / Of the Moon" if he wants to "seek for Eldorado". FTP, name this poet who wrote about a maiden who lived "in a kingdom by the sea" in his "Annabel Lee" and about a bird who says "Nevermore" in "The Raven".;;(Edgar Allan) Poe
Physics;;In 1992, a pair of Russian researchers proposed the use of grazing reflections off the walls of small glass capillaries to guide this particle. If it turns out to have a nonzero dipole moment, it would imply CPT violation, as both P and T would be violated. This lightest particle classified as having isospin -1/2 is taken by an isospin rotation into its stable partner. It is stable when in a bound state, but in a free state it undergoes beta decay with a lifetime of approximately fifteen minutes, emitting an electron antineutrino along with an electron and another baryon. Consisting of two down quarks and one up quark, for ten points, what is this particle, discovered by James Chadwick in 1937 as the neutral counterpart to the proton?;;neutron(s)
World History;;One person by this name was exiled to Tremerius, while another was sent to Rhegium after being kept on the island of Pandataria for five years. Septimius Severus married the one called Domna. One was the mother of Mark Antony, and Gaius Marius launched his political career by marrying another. At the age of 12, the future Emperor Augustus eulogized one, and another, once betrothed to Sulla's heir, was married to Pompey the Great, cementing Pompey's alliance with her father. FTP, give this common name of Roman females, one of whom was Augustus's daughter, whose proclivities led to the banishment of Ovid.;;Julia (Caesaris)
Philosophy;;In a posthumously published interview entitled "Only a God Can Save Us," this man claimed that the coming of a new god was the only way for man to be saved from the nihilism of modern technological society. His critical analyses of previous philosophers include Plato's Doctrine of Truth and Kant and the Problem of Metaphysics. He explored the history of art in Poetry, Language, and Thought and his essay "Letter on Humanism," while his more metaphysical works include What Is Philosophy? and Existence and Being. He is best known, however, for a 1927 work in which he tries to destroy the history of metaphysics through an exploration of a concept he labeled Dasein. FTP, name this author of Being and Time.;;(Martin) Heidegger
Literature;;A pivotal moment in this work occurs when the writer Bergotte dies during an exhibition of Vermeer. The protagonist recalls his childhood when he takes Francois the Waif off the shelf at a party hosted by Gilberte [jeel-behrt], his childhood playmate and the widow of his friend Robert de Saint-Loup. As a young man the protagonist goes to the resort town of Balbec with his grandmother, where he meets and becomes infatuated with Albertine. He acknowledges his infatuation with Odette de Crecy after hearing a violin sonata written by the composer Vinteuil [vahn-toy], one of the many people he used to see in Combray on his walks along Guermantes' and Swann's Ways. FTP, name this seminal piece of French literature written by Marcel Proust.;;Remembrance of Things Past|In Search of Lost Time|(A) (La) Recherche Du Temps Perdu
Biology;;Immunity to kanamycin and chloramphenicol is a characteristic of this group of organisms, whose ribosomes are sensitive to diphtheria toxin. The membrane lipids of its members are ether-linked, and, like Gram-positive bacteria, members of it also lack peptidoglycan in their cell walls.  Containing groups known as halophiles, thermoacidophiles, and methanogens, this group of organisms was recently given a name coined by George Fox and Carl Woese. FTP, name this domain of organisms distinct from Eubacteria, often considered the oldest form of life on Earth.;;Archaea(bacteria)
World History;;He declared himself dictator through the "Organic Decree of Dictatorship" shortly after the Ocaña convention. During his time spent in New Granada, he authored the Cartagena Manifesto, and he would later write his famous La Carta de Jamaica, in which he stated that "the bonds that united us to Spain have been severed". Following the battles of Boyaca and Carabobo, he would become president of Gran Columbia, but after the revolt of Jose Maria Cordoba and the separation of Venezuela from his country, he resigned and died one year later in 1830. Known as El Libertador, FTP, identify this South American leader, whose name inspired that of a country with its capital at La Paz.;;(Simon) Bolivar
Art;;The largest factory producing crafts in the style of this period was at Meissen, near Dresden. In Germany its leading sculptor was Ignaz Gunther, while in France Etienne-Maurice Falconet was celebrated for his porcelain sculptures produced at Sevres. In Catholic Germany, the churches of Neumann and Dominikus Zimmerman exemplify this style, while in Italy its influence was confined primarily to Venice. Its primary Venetian proponent was the painter of The Apotheosis of the Spanish Republic and Tarquin and Lucretia, Giambattista Tiepolo, but it was most prominent in France., whose painters of this style included Francois Boucher, Antoine Watteau, and the artist of The Swing. FTP name this period of art that directly followed the Baroque, known for its overly ornate style as exemplified by Jean-Honore Fragonard.;;Rococo
Religion/Mythology;;He hid in Franang's falls after fleeing a banquet where he used the phrases "a bench ornament in times of war" and "a pisspot" to describe a god of poetry and a god of the sea, respectively. In the guise of Thokk, he refused to shed a tear, dooming another god to the underworld. In a last-ditch effort to slow the work of a rime-giant, he took the form of a mare and coupled with the stallion Svadilfari. After eating the charred heart of Gullveig or Angrboda, he gave birth to Hel, the Midgard Serpent, and Fenrir. FTP, name this Norse trickster god of fire.;;Loki
Literature;;In one of this man's poems, he describes "Yesterday's news" as "more remote / than a cuneiform tablet smashed to bits" and calls people "buffoons," "coyotes," and "satraps". That poem, "Return," was published in an eponymous volume after he ended his tenure in a government post he described in his poem "Vrindaban". His love of free verse is seen in works like "Same Time," "Clear Night" and "A Draft of Shadows," while his attachment to the mythology of his home country is evident in "The Broken Jar" and "Sun Stone". He summed up his theories on poetry in The Bow and the Lyre, although he is better known for a prose work about his home country. FTP name this Mexican poet, the author of The Labyrinth of Solitude.;;(Octavio) Paz
United States History;;It presaged the Fourteenth Amendment by including a clause guaranteeing the "privileges and immunities" of all citizens. It also contains a provision allowing legislative appointment of all military officers below the rank of colonel. Its eleventh article pre-approves the membership of Canada, and it ends by thanking "the great Governor of the world". Allotting one vote per state, it was faulted for ambiguity regarding militias and the failure to allow Congress to collect taxes directly. FTP, name this document establishing a "firm league of friendship," but not a federal union, among the newly independent colonies of America.;;(The) Articles of Confederation (and Perpetual Union between the States of New Hampshire, Massachusetts Bay, Rhode Island and Providence Plantations, Connecticut, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina and Georgia)
Physics;;Zwicky introduced this hypothesis, which can explain the growth of large-scale structure in the relatively short period since the time of electron-photon decoupling. Zwicky was prompted to postulate it on the basis of his measurements of galactic velocity dispersions in the Coma cluster. Further support came from Vera Rubin's work demonstrating that galactic rotation curves typically remain flat rather than falling off with radius. Candidates include axions, MACHOs and WIMPs. Approximately 25% of the density of the Universe is thought to reside in, FTP, what non-luminous material?;;(cold|nonbaryonic) dark matter
Music;;The score for this piece asks the pianist to make mistakes in certain passages. Modern performances use the glockenspiel rather than the glass harmonica, and this piece references Berlioz's Valse des Sylphes, Can-Can from Offenbach's Orpheus in the Underworld, the aria from Rossini's Barber of Serville, "Ah vous dirais-je maman", and even the same composer's Danse Macabre. With introduction verses by Ogden Nash, FTP, name this famous piece by Saint-Saëns that features creatures as diverse as lions, elephants, kangaroos, and of course, the swan.;;Carnival of the Animals
Miscellaneous;;In 2006, he will star alongside several Saturday Night live alums as Karl in The Benchwarmers. After graduating from Boston College in 1988, he was selected in the third round of the NFL Draft by the San Francisco 49ers. He later passed through Philadelphia and played as a linebacker on two Super Bowl-winning Denver teams. The attitude behind his declaration "if it wasn't on the list, I was going to take it" led to his wife Julie being charged with illegally obtaining phentermine for him, and his rampant and obvious steroid use probably triggered his confrontation with Marcus Williams. FTP, name this fomer Raider who was recently ordered to pay for causing eye and brain injuries by punching Williams during practice.;;(William) (Thomas) (Bill) Romanowski
Literature;;After remarking that there's "husbandry in heaven", this character gives a diamond to the title character of the play in which he appears. In the first scene of Act 3 of the play in which he appears, this character decides to go riding for as long "as will fill up the time" before supper, and fears that unless his horse is faster than he thinks he will have to "become a borrower of the night / For a dark hour or twain". This character's last words are "O slave," though even after he receives "twenty trenchèd gashes on his head" he repeatedly sits in another man's chair. As he dies, he hopes that his son Fleance will live to revenge him. FTP, name this Scottish lord whose ghost returns after he is murdered in Macbeth.;;Banquo
World History;;In 1949, he received a scholarship to study radio engineering in Paris, and joined the French Communist Party during his stay. His main doctrine, a form of Maoism called the "Anka" doctrine, was heavily influenced by André Frank's theory that cities are parasites on the rural landscape, a theory he implemented after becoming "Brother #1" of his country in 1976 after Lon Nol was forced to flee when Communist forces captured Phnom Penh. FTP, identify this notorious leader and mass murderer, who oversaw the genocide of more than 1.5 million Cambodians while attempting to create a classless society as leader of the Khmer Rouge.;;Pol Pot|Saloth Sar
Chemistry;;Both endo- and exo-attack occur in the LUMO during this reaction, in which one of the reactants must be able to take on the cisoid conformation; if it remains stuck in the transoid conformation, the reaction cannot occur. Resulting from sigma-overlap of two pi orbitals, it can be viewed more generally as a [4+2] reaction because one reactant has 4 pi electrons and the other has 2 pi electrons. In its first use, its discoverers produced 1, 2, 3, 6-tetrahydrophthalic anhydride by reacting maleic anhydride with butadiene. FTP, name this reaction in which a certain kind of diene is reacted with a dienophile to produce an unsaturated six-membered ring, which earned its namesakes the 1950 Nobel Prize in Chemistry.;;Diels-Alder (reaction)
Miscellaneous;;His widow, the painter Valetta Swann, finished his posthumously published Scientific Theory of Culture. He emphasized the importance of daily interaction with his subjects over structured interviews and was the first person to document the kula exchange of Papua New Guinea, while his studies in Melanesia and the Trobriand Islands led to his founding of the functionalist school. He also wrote the introduction to his student Jomo Kenyatta's Facing Mount Kenya. For 10 points, name this author of 1922's Argonauts of the Western Pacific.;;(Bronislaw) (Kasper) Malinowski
Geography;;This mountain was first summitted on December 18, 1966, in an American Alpine Club expedition sponsored by the National Science Foundation and led by Nicholas Clinch. In January 2001, an eight-person team sponsored by Nova became the first to climb the eastern face of this Sentinel Range peak discovered by Herbert Hollick-Kenyon and Lincoln Ellsworth. For ten points, name this mountain visible from the Ronne Ice Shelf, the highest in Antarctica.;;Vinson (Massif)
Noncomputational Math;;PCX and TTA are, but AAC isn't, although Apple does support one of them. PNG is, and GIF should be, but because of dithering, in practice it usually isn't. Its performance is limited by the Shannon entropy of the original source, which cannot be reduced by applying this method. When the target is a text file, the Burrows-Wheeler method may be used, as, for example, in bzip2, while for audio targets WavPack or FLAC can be used. MP3s do not use it, and it can be achieved by the LZW algorithm and Huffman coding, but not by the discrete cosine transform, which is used to make JPEG images. For ten points, what is this type of encoding that is fully reversible, ensuring that all of the original data can be recovered?;;lossless (compression)
Literature;;One of this man's novels consists of the so-called "Everhard Manuscript," which describes Ernest Everhard's struggle against the Oligarchs. Another of his novels features Van Horn, a man who is killed by cannibals, after which the title character is trained to be a sentinel by the islanders who killed him. In addition to Jerry of the Islands, this man wrote about prehistoric man in Before Adam and about life in the slums of London in The People of the Abyss. Some of his stories were collected in South Sea Tales, while the collection Lost Face includes his "To Build a Fire". FTP, name this American author who also wrote The Sea-Wolf and The Call of the Wild.;;(Jack) London
Art;;Renoir referred to it as a "big gendarme", despite a popularity campaign spearheaded by the French government. Discovered by a peasant named Yorgos and sold for 1,000 francs to the Marquis de Rivière, the island on which it is found has the name of the Greek word for "apple," which lends credence to the theory that this figure was holding the golden apple awarded to her by Paris. However, that apple, along with the plinth, is now lost. FTP, name this sculpture, originally thought to be by Praxiteles but now attributed to Alexandros of Antioch, which is most famous for her conspicuous lack of arms.;;Venus de Milo
Philosophy;;The author of this work attacks the abstract language used by the Peripatetic school in chapter 10 of book 3, entitled "On the Abuse of Words". This work identifies man’s association of goblins and sprites with darkness as a root cause of the existence of madness in chapter 33 of book two. Also in Book two, called "On Ideas," the author distinguishes between "Primary" and "Secondary" qualities of objects and claims that all knowledge is derived from either sensation or reflection. FTP identify this work in four parts, a lengthy work by John Locke that should not be confused with similarly-titled works by Leibnitz and Hume.;;(An) Essay Concerning Human Understanding
Literature;;He noted that "Lovers lying two and two / Ask not whom they sleep beside" when they die and join the "nation that is not" in his "When I Watch the Living Meet". He notes that the "stuff of life to knit" him blew hither from the "twelve-winded sky" in his "From Far, from Eve and Morning". A poem in which it is claimed that we should "look into the pewter pot / To see the world as the world’s not" includes the statement that "malt does more than Milton can / To justify God’s ways to man" and begins with the assertion "Terence, this is stupid stuff". FTP, name this British poet who also wrote about a "smart lad" who slips "betimes away" in "To an Athlete Dying Young," best known for his A Shropshire Lad.;;(Alfred) (Edward) Housman
Biology;;The permeability transition pore of one of the cristae contains a protein named for its ability to transport this molecule. It has two nitrogen-containing rings connected to an amine functional group, and is theorized to have been first formed from the polymerization of five hydrogen cyanide molecules. Formerly known as vitamin B4, it was one of the subjects of Edwin Chargaff’s studies during the 1940s. Requiring only two hydrogen bonds to be bound to its complement, it is a crucial component of both an important second-messenger protein and the principal energy transfer molecule in the human body. FTP, name this nitrogenous base, a purine that pairs with thymine in DNA.;;adenine
United States History;;In 1991, his body was exhumed from a Louisville cemetery and tested for arsenic poisoning, with negative results. A former commander at Fort Harrison, he won his nickname at the Battle of Lake Okeechobee in the Second Seminole War. As a colonel in the Black Hawk War, he met Jefferson Davis, who married his daughter Sarah, and he later won at Monterrey and Buena Vista during the Mexican War. FTP, name this Whig general known as "Old Rough and Ready" whose presidency ended with his 1850 death and the succession of Millard Fillmore.;;(Zachary) Taylor
Economics;;Henry George suggested in Progress and Poverty that a tax on land alone can eliminate this. It cannot be eliminated during ordinary taxation, though it is minimized when supply is relatively inelastic. On a supply and demand curve, this is represented by the area taken away from producer and consumer surplus that does not go to the government. FTP, what is this fall in total surplus from when a tax is issued in an economy, changing the market outcome?;;deadweight loss
Music;;One section of this work is based on designs for costumes for children dressed as canaries that would have been featured in the ballet Trilbi. The second movement comes from a nutcracker in the shape of a gnome, while the fourth is dominated by a sustained bass that is heard constantly while the primary tune plays above. That movement, "The Old Castle," accompanies such sections as "Limoges – The Market," "Bydlo," and "Two Jews, Rich and Poor," each of which is accompanied by a promenade. The piece culminates with the penultimate movement, "The Hut on Fowl’s Legs," followed by "The Great Gate at Kiev". FTP name this suite based on a set of paintings by Victor Hartmann, a work of Modest Mussorgsky.;;Pictures (at|from){1}? an Exhibition
Geography;;Grosse Garten park is found in this city, whose Museum of Hygiene is a world leader in the manufacture of see-through anatomical models. It is home to such museums as the Japanese Palace, Semper Gallery, and Zwinger Gallery. The Wettinerpalais, Albrechtsberg, and Georgenschloss palaces and such churches as the Hofkirche, , and Kreuzkirche are found here, and its Old City houses the Old Masters Picture Gallery and the ‘Green Vault’, the treasure chamber for Saxon kings. FTP, name this "Florence on the Elbe," the capital city of Saxony state and original center of European porcelain manufacture which was nearly destroyed by Allied bombings.;;Dresden
Physics;;The austausch coefficient gives the proportionality between the rate of transport of a component in this process and that component’s gradient’s rate of transport. Its Lagrangian form involves solving the biharmonic equation, and Kolmogorov proposed that during this process, the velocity difference between two points scales as the distance between them to the one-third power. This term characterizes the behaviour in an area known as the "corner region". A "wake" form of it, also known as jetwash, is responsible for wingtip vortices, and the Froude number helps determine its onset in open channels. Typically ocurring at Reynolds numbers of over 4000, for ten points, identify this chaotic flow regime, the opposite of laminar flow.;;turbulent (flow)|turbulence
Literature;;The narrator of this work uses an analogy of hitting a wall to differentiate between the ways intellectual men and direct men enact revenge. During an episode of fever, the narrator visits his superior Anton and sits in silence with him and his family for hours. After a police officer refuses to throw the narrator out of the window of a billiards parlor, he writes a satirical novel about the officer that is rejected because its style is outdated. He calls on an old schoolmate named Simonov, who is holding a farewell dinner for another of their old schoolmates, Zverkov, that he attends. He follows Zverkov to a brothel where he meets the prostitute Liza, who abandons him after he falls in love with her. FTP name this short existential novel by Fyodor Dostoevsky.;;Notes from (the) Underground|Letters from (the) Underworld|Zapiski iz podpolya
Religion/Mythology;;Before rising to her most famous role, this woman bore a name meaning "Myrtle" which is now shared by the Women’s Zionist Organization of America. The daughter of Abihail, she was a resident of Susan (SOO-Sahn), to which her family emigrated in the time of Jechonias. After winning a beauty contest prompted by the refusal of Vashti to appear naked before the king and his advisor, she became Queen to King Ahasuerus of Persia, in which capacity she warned the king of Haman’s plot to kill her uncle Mordecai and the rest of the Jews. FTP name this title character of an apocryphal book of the Bible, whose story is read from her namesake Megillah on Purim.;;Esther
World History;;Before embarking on his most famous conquests, he secured Kandahar against Uzbek opposition, and his best-known battle was the result of appeals from Dawlat Khan and Alam Khan. His diaries detail the ways in which he motivated his troops during their southward march, and at Khanua, his forces stood firm against the forces of Rana Sanga of the Rajputs. He lost an early battle at Sar-e Pol, which resulted in his losing both Samarkand and his principality of Fergana. In his most famous clash, he used wagon tactics and his 12,000 troops decisively defeated Ibrahim Shah Lodi at the 1526 battle of Panipat. FTP, name this father of Humayun, who founded the Mughal empire.;;Bab(u|e){1}?r|Zahir-ud-din Muhammad
Chemistry;;In the Kastle-Meyer test, it is used in conjunction with alcohol and hydrogen peroxide to show whether there is blood present. Derived from a specific anhydride, this compound was reclassified by the FDA in 1997, indicating that it should no longer be the active ingredient in Petrogalar and Ex-Lax, in which it induced smooth muscle relaxation and diarrhea. It is debated whether or not this compound is carcinogenic, but it is usually produced in an alcohol solution, and in high concentrations of hydroxide, nucleophilic addition can occur, rendering it colorless. FTP, name this frequently-used acid-base indicator, which turns pink between pH 8 and 10.;;phenolphthalein
World History;;It especially targeted sheriffs who did not collect ship money and enforced the decrees against enclosures. Not bound by common-law protections against self-incrimination or the use of pillory on the gentry, it was expanded to punish rioters under Thomas Wolsey and became known thereafter as incorruptible. Along with its counterpart at the High Commission, it was abolished in 1641 by the Long Parliament. FTP, name this supplementary court used to persecute the Puritans by Charles I, named for the figure painted on the ceiling of its meeting room.;;(Court of the) Star Chamber
Literature;;One of this man’s novels ends with the title character telling George Strong that she loves Hazard and not him. That novel was published under the pseudonym Frances Snow Compton, while another of this man’s novels was published anonymously. The latter novel features such characters as Sybil Ross, the sister of the main character, and a Virginia lawyer named John Carrington who falls in love with Madeleine Lee. In addition to that "American novel," Democracy, and Esther, this man wrote numerous non-fiction works, including a book on the Middle Ages, Mont Saint Michel and Chartres. FTP, name this man who wrote a book about his "education," the grandson and great-grandson of American Presidents.;;(Henry) Adams
Art;;The artist of this work had doctors provide him with used parts of cadavers, on which he based a number of preparatory sketches known as his Severed Heads and Dissected Limbs. On the left sits a bearded man with curly, silver hair hunched over in pensive despair, his arm over a dead body clothed only in shoes. On the right is another body wrapped in cloth whose head disappears below the boundary of the painting. The center is dominated by a number of figures looking and reaching upward, culminating in a black man holding a red and white signal flag. FTP name this painting depicting the aftermath of the wreck of a ship carrying Algerian immigrants, a work of Theodore Géricault.;;(The) Raft of the Medusa
World History;;A contributor to the daily Action Nationale under the pseudonym Abderrahman, he helped Lorimer Denis found Les Groups de Griots. This supporter of Dumarsais Estime placed himself in opposition to Paul Magloire, and when Magloire resigned, this man ran against Louis Dejoie, a mulatto, on a platform of black nationalism. His son nationalized the Tortuga freeport to which this man had agreed, and together with his chief aide, Clement Barbot, this man organized the Voluntary Militia for National Security, better known as the "Bogeymen," or the Tonton Macoutes. A fervent follower of voodoo whose nickname derives from his medical training, FTP, name this dictator of Haiti from 1957 to 1971 who was succeeded by his son Jean-Claude.;;(Fran(ç|c){1}?ois) (Papa Doc) Duvalier
Earth Science;;Some of the effects of the stresses associated with these regions can be seen in inclined planes known as Wadati-Benioff zones. Tomographic imaging indicates that the motions associated with these regions can extend through the 670 km discontinuity, occasionally reaching the Gutenberg discontinuity. Surface features associated with these regions include volcanic and island arcs formed from andesitic magma derived from mantle material and sediments melted off of the affected slab, which must consist of oceanic plate material. FTP, name this type of convergent plate boundary in which one plate descends under another plate into the mantle.;;subduction (zone(s))
Literature;;This man’s latest novel is After Dark, set to be released in English in 2010. While watching a baseball game, he was suddenly inspired to write his first novel, Hear the Wind Sing. A translator has an asexual relationship with twin sisters named 208 and 209 in his second novel, Pinball 1973, which features the recurring characters "J" and "The Rat". Later novels include one about the subconscious of a human computer, Hardboiled Wonderland and the End of the World, and his most recently translated work, Kafka on the Shore, but he is best known for novels about a man in search of his cat and his wife and one about Japan in the 1960s. FTP, name this Japanese author of The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle and Norwegian Wood.;;(Haruki) Murakami|Murakami (Haruki)
Religion/Mythology;;This character proved his mettle at an early age by taking up a toy sword against a stool covered with a lionskin. This early promise was borne out in this hero’s later deeds, such as snapping the neck of Cercyon and crushing the skull of the Crommyonian Sow. In later life, he lost part of one buttock after a failed attempt to abduct Persephone for his friend Pirithous. He fed Sciron to a monstrous turtle, tied Sinis to some pine trees, and beheaded Procrustes while traveling to Athens to meet Aegeus. FTP, name this Greek hero who abandoned Ariadne after she helped him defeat the Minotaur.;;Theseus
World History;;His only son served in the British Army and was speared to death in 1879 by Zulus. Father and son are buried together in Farnborough, England, even though this man oversaw the construction of the railway network and investment banking system in France. Such achievements, however, pale in comparison to his failed military ventures such as the Strasbourg coup of 1836 and, during his later rule following the coup of the duc de Morny, the attempt to conquer Mexico and the disastrous war with Prussia. FTP, name this man who was president of the Second Republic before declaring himself emperor in 1851.;;Napoleon (III|the Third){1}?|Louis Napoleon (Bonaparte);;Napoleon
Miscellaneous;;This work was inspired by a painting by Albertus Pictor that its creator saw in Taby. Early on, one of the characters claims he has heard of two horses devouring each other after he sings a song about strumpets. Other omens include an acrobat who has a vision of the Virgin Mary dressed in a blue robe and a troupe of performers dancing the tarantella. The climax comes when the protagonist reveals his plan to win a contest to a priest that turns out to be his adversary in disguise, leading to his inevitable failure. FTP name this film in which Max von Sydow plays chess with death, the best-known work of Ingmar Bergman.;;(The) Seventh Seal|(Det) Sjunde inseglet
Physics;;Observations of interference between various types of kaons led Good to conclude that this stuff does not experience gravitational repulsion. The ATRAP and ATHENA projects are working on methods of containing its atoms, with the goal of using it to test the CPT theorem. Some of it was synthesized following the Big Bang, but no remnants have been observed. The first example of it was discovered by Carl Anderson during observations of cosmic rays with sufficient energies to undergo pair production. That first example was predicted by Paul Dirac as a "hole" state of negative energy. FTP, name this material which undergoes annihilation when it combines with regular matter.;;antimatter
Literature;;This author wrote about an insurance clerk named George Bowling in a novel published just before the outbreak of World War II, Coming Up For Air. In a book commissioned by Victor Gollancz for the Left Book Club, he wrote about the "industrial wastelands" of Lancashire and Yorkshire. In addition to The Road to Wigan Pier, he wrote about being shot in the throat and nearly captured as a member of the Workers’ Party of Marxist Unity while fighting in the Spanish Civil War in his book Homage to Catalonia. His earlier books include the novel Burmese Days and the autobiographical Down and Out in Paris and London. FTP, name this English author whose better-known works include 1984 and Animal Farm.;;(George) Orwell|(Eric) Blair
Miscellaneous;;In August 2005 his family reached a settlement with Anheuser Busch regarding the cancellation of a distributorship contract. After playing the 1957 season with the Cleveland Indians, he was traded to the Kansas City Athletics, and moved again in a 1959 seven-player deal. He was MVP the following year, and one year later sportswriter Dick Young suggested to Ford Frick that his defining achievement be marked with an asterisk.  FTP, name this man who broke Babe Ruth’s home run record in 1961.;;(Roger) (Eugene) Maris
World History;;This battle was made more difficult for the winner when the Culloden ran into a reef and diverted the Leander in a rescue mission. The losing admiral had studied his enemy's prior tactics at the Battle of the Saintes, and had his ships chained together while at anchor to prevent the British from dividing his fleet. However, the French fleet was too far from the shore, allowing the British to attack the line under Brueys from both sides, culminating in the explosion of the flagship, L'Orient. Only two French ships-of-the line escaped, while Lord Nelson's fleet did not lose a single ship to French fire. FTP, name this 1798 naval battle that stranded Napoleon in Egypt.;;(Battle of) ((The) Nile|Aboukir Bay){1}?
Philosophy;;A book on this man "and metaphor" was written by Sarah Kofman, while this man's "life as literature" is the subject of a book by Alexander Nehamas. Gilles Deleuze wrote a book about this man "and philosophy," while important English-language books about him were written by Arthur Danto and R. J. Hollingdale. One of this man's books begins "We remain unknown to ourselves, we seekers after knowledge" and includes an essay asking "What is the Meaning of Ascetic Ideals" and another about guilt, bad conscience, and related manners. This man's early works include essays "On the Use and Disadvantage of History" and on "Schopenhauer as Educator" collected in his Untimely Meditations, while later works include On the Genealogy of Morals. FTP, name this German philosopher of The Birth of Tragedy and Beyond Good and Evil.;;(Friedrich) Nietzsche
Chemistry;;Its value can be derived by applying the Bragg-Williams approximation to a 2-dimensional Ising model, resulting in a mean-field theory. It is given by the coupling constant times the number of nearest neighbors divided by Boltzmann's constant, and Onsager's solutions imply that near it the spontaneous magnetization scales as the one-eighth power of the temperature. TRM occurs when a substance is cooled in the presence of a magnetic field below this point, which has an antiferromagnetic counterpart in the Neel temperature. Associated with a second-order critical transition, for ten points, identify this temperature above which a ferromagnetic substance becomes paramagnetic, discovered by the father-in-law of Frédéric Joliot.;;Curie (Point|Temperature ){1}?
Literature;;As a young man, the people of this man's county called him Ole One Shot because of his marksmanship. This man earns the ire of Miss Caroline, his daughter's teacher, when she discovers that this man taught his daughter to read with the assistance of his cook Calpurnia. In one episode, this man proves that a young woman named Maybella was beaten by someone who mostly used his left hand, which indicates that she was not attacked by Tom Robinson. This man is the father of a boy named Jem and a girl named Jean Louise, who goes by the nickname "Scout". FTP, name this attorney who stands up for a falsely-accused black man in Harper Lee's To Kill a Mockingbird.;;Atticus (Finch);;Finch
Art;;The oldest surviving one is known as Sialk and is located in the suburbs of Kashan. Robert Koldewey found one in Borsippa which dates back to the 5th century BC, and the largest of them, known as Chogha Zanbil, was created in Dur Untashi, near Susa, around 1200 BC under the direction of Untash-Gal. Koldewey also found one that he took to be a temple to Marduk, the name of which, Etemenanki, translates as "The Foundation of Heaven and Earth". Having no interior chambers, it typically possessed a mud-brick core and an exterior covered with baked brick. With about 25 remaining today, FTP, name these step-pyramids of ancient Mesopotamia.;;Ziggurat(s)
Art;;Antonio Buero Vallejo wrote a play about this painting that shares its title. The most important commentaries on are those of Sir Kenneth Clark and Michel Foucault, whose take on it can be found in his book The Order of Things. The ceiling of the room in which it is set has two mounts for chandeliers that do not appear in the painting. In the rear are two large but unintelligible paintings above a mirror in which two people can be seen. In the right front corner stand two dwarves and a dog, while on the left stands the artist himself with a red cross on his chest, in the act of painting. In the foreground is the Infanta, surrounded by the titular servants. FTP, name this painting of the Spanish court by Diego Velázquez.;;(Las) Meninas|(The) Maids of Honor|(The) Ladies in Waiting|(La) Familia de Felipe IV|(The) Family of Philip IV
Biology;;Artificial selection is required for the rare Vanilovian variety of this behavior, which can be seen in the gold-of-pleasure plant with respect to flax. Egg behavior in cuckoo wasps and signaling by predatory photus fireflies are examples of the aggressive variety of this phenomenon. Also exhibited by viceroy butterflies and the two-headed snake, for ten points, identify this biological phenomenon, best known in its Müllerian and Batesian varieties, in which one species benefits from a superficial resemblance to another.;;mimicry
Literature;;He wrote about the fates of Sinfin Carrasco, Justino Perez, Roberto Lopez, and the rest of the "crew" who engaged in the titular fight in his "Furious Struggle Between Seamen and an Octopus of Colossal Size," which along with "Fear" and "We Are Many" appeared in the volume Estravagario. He wrote poems to a "fallen chestnut," a "yellow bird," and "laziness" in his Elemental Odes, while his earlier works include poems about the battle of the Jarama River and one entitled "The Magellan Heart". Later in his career politics played a larger role in his work, as seen in book-length historical poems like Canto general and a work based on his visit to an Incan city in the nation north of his own, "The Heights of Macchu Picchu". FTP, name this author of Twenty Love Poems and a Song of Despair, a Nobel laureate from Chile.;;(Pablo) Neruda|(Ricardo) (Eliecer) (Neftali) Reyes (Basualto)
World History;;His wife was never permitted in the royal carriage, as a condition of his marriage to the lower-class woman after he became heir apparent following the death of his cousin Rudolf and father Charles Louis. Alleged to have died because surgeons could not find any buttons on his clothing, which he had sewed onto himself each day for a perfect fit, this man held the office of inspector general of all land and sea forces, which spurred Oscar Potiorek to invite him to a review of maneuvers in Bosnia. FTP, name this Hapsburg prince, assassinated by Gavrilo Princip in Sarajevo on June 28, 1914.;;(Archduke) (Franz) Ferdinand|(Francis) Ferdinand(, Archduke of Austria-este)|(Franz) Ferdinand(, Erzherzog Von Österreich-este)
Miscellaneous;;Its protagonist visits his mother's grave and sees a line from "Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard" on her tombstone. In a dream, that character derives the area of an ellipse using integration in front of the class. One of the plays written by the same character, Heaven and Hell, features several references to Apocalypse Now, but the play was not produced at the titular school because a student got his finger blown off during rehearsal. The film focuses on a poor student with many extracurriculars who falls in love with an elementary school teacher. FTP, name this film Bill Murray as Herman Blume and Jason Schwartzman as Max Fischer.;;Rushmore
Religion/Mythology;;The sect of Judaism known as Chasidism takes its name from one of the two groups commemorated on this holiday, although there is no direct connection. The other group was a nationalist organization lead by Matthias the Hasmonean and his son that mounted a revolution against the Seleucid King Antiochus IV, who had massacred Jews and desecrated the temple by sacrificing pigs. To avoid scrutiny by the Greek guards, the Jews hid their Torahs and pretended to be playing a game involving an object marked with the Hebrew letters Nun, Gimmel, Heh and Shin, a game still played today. With a name meaning "Rededication," FTP name this Jewish holiday that commemorates the rebellion of the Maccabees and the miraculous eight-day endurance of a small vial of oil.;;(C)hanu(k)kah
United States History;;Among its staunchest opponents were Thomas Platt, and arguments for it comprise a full third of the Chicago Platform. Swayed by a William H. Harvey book, proponents of its use adopted the slogan "16 to 1" and convinced Henry Teller's namesake faction to leave the Republican Party. Its use was ended in the "Crime of '73" and the Specie Resumption Act, restored by the Bland-Allison Act, and required by one of the two Sherman acts. FTP, name this substance, believed by the 1896 Democrats to be the key to ending poverty, which William Jennings Bryan and the bimetallists wished to see coined "freely".;;(free) silver;;bimetallism
Physics;;As a quantum-mechanical operator, its eigenvalues are given by h-bar squared times its quantum number times the quantity that quantum number plus one and its eigenstates are given by spherical harmonics. It is also obtained as the 2-form Noether charge associated with rotational invariance, with the consequence that its conservation does not hold for generally curved spacetimes. The derivative of this quantity with respect to time gives the torque, and Kepler's Second Law is one expression of its conservation. For ten points, identify this physical quantity, given in classical mechanics by the position vector crossed with the linear momentum vector.;;angular momentum
Literature;;It mentions people who "in humorless protest overturned only one symbolic pingpong table". Other figures in this work include the "Chinaman of Oklahoma," people who "journeyed to Denver," "died in Denver," and "came back to Denver and waited in vain," and others who "ate fire in paint hotels or drank turpentine in Paradise Alley". Another passage refers to people who "sat through the stale beer afternoon in desolate Fugazzi's, listening to the crack of doom on the hydrogen jukebox". This work is dedicated to a man who met its author while both were at the Columbia Psychiatric Institute, Carl Solomon. FTP, name this poem that begins "I saw the best minds of my generation destroyed by madness," a work by Allen Ginsberg.;;Howl
Geography;;Its level is greatly affected by the sudestanos and pampero winds. It contains the islands of Farallón , Hornos, and Martín García, and its banks form several shoals which bear names such as Honda, Rouen, and Arquímedes. Colonia and Tigre are on its banks, while a notable part of it extends from Punta Lara to Colonia del Sacramento. Formed out of the confluence of the Paraná, this area is overlooked by Buenos Aires and Montevideo. FTP, identify this river and estuary system of Uruguay and Argentina.;;(Rio de la) Plata|River (of Silver|Plate){1}?
Art;;This man's first commission was for the Vincens House, on which he used a Gothic Revival style that he would later greatly alter. His other works include the Monumental Rosary in Montserrat and the Workers Cooperative in Mataro, although he is better known for buildings such as The Santa Teresa School and El Capricho in Cantabria. For Eusebi Güell, his friend and patron, he constructed a house and Park Güell along with some eponymous catacombs. At the end of his life he devoted himself to the construction of a cathedral that is still under construction, the Sagrada Familia. FTP, name this architect who designed numerous buildings found in Barcelona.;;(Antonio) Gaud(í|i){1}?
Noncomputational Math;;This man's namesake inequality, a form of the Bonferroni inequality, states that for any finite or countable set of events, the probability of at least one of them occurring is no greater than the sum of the probabilities of the individual events. His namesake algebras satisfy the properties of a lattice, and his name is given to rings in which every element is idempotent. In 1938 Claude Shannon applied his theories to electrical switching circuits, showing that, with two variables, the operators "meet" and "join" could be used to simplify electromechanical relays, laying the basis for computer chips. For 10 points, name this mathematician whose work is associated with truth tables and binary mathematics.;;(George) Boole
Religion/Mythology;;His twin brother was a god of lightning as well as a psychopomp, and guarded the sun during its nighttime journey through the underworld. In one story, he has sex with a female relative after getting drunk on four draughts of pulque. He recreated mankind at the beginning of the Fifth Sun by sprinkling blood from his penis over a bone taken from Mictlan with the help of his twin brother Xolotl [shoh-LOH-tull]. He committed suicide, or departed on a raft of snakes, after being shamed by his rival, Tezcatlipoca. Often identified with the morning star, FTP, name this benevolent Aztec god, known as the Feathered Serpent.;;Quetzalcoatl
World History;;She was said to have dressed as an Amazon to ride a white horse around Vézelay Cathedral. In her senior years, she made trips to Sicily to deliver Berengaria of Navarre and to Spain to retrieve Blanche of Castile. Her progeny married such figures as Raymond of Toulouse, Alfonso VIII of Castile and Henry the Lion of Saxony. Her alleged liaison with her uncle Raymond of Antioch contributed to the collapse of the Second Crusade and led to the annulment of her marriage to Louis VII of France. FTP, name this queen who then wed Henry II of England and became the mother of John and Richard the Lionheart.;;Eleanor (of (Aquitaine|Guyenne){1}?){1}?
Literature;;He wrote that "poets are far rarer births than kings" at the beginning of a poem dedicated to Elizabeth, Countess of Rutland, while he claimed that "Venus' ceston every line you make" at the end of a sonnet "to the most noble lady," Mary Wroth. He wrote about a "brave infant of Saguntum" who crawled back into its mother's womb after seeing that the city had been destroyed in a Pindaric Ode "to the immortal memory and friendship of that noble pair, Sir Lucius Cary and Sir Henry Morrison". His poem "Slow, Slow, Fresh Fount" came from his play Cynthia's Revels, and his other dramatic works include The Devil is an Ass and masques on Bartholomew Fair. FTP, name this Jacobean dramatist, the author of The Alchemist, Every Man in His Humour, and Volpone.;;(Ben) Jonson
Music;;In 1954, this composer was posthumously awarded a Tony Award for his unwitting contribution to the Broadway musical Kismet. He arranged an Arabian melody as a favor to Darya Leonova, for whom he also orchestrated a setting of the satiric poem At Some Folks Houses. This artist's farce Bogatyry, or The Heroic Warriors mostly consists of themes from other operas, while his B minor symphony is frequently performed. His operas include The Tsar's Bride, which is lost, and the fourth act of Rimsky-Korsakov's Mlada, although they are less well known than the suite of Polovetsian dances excerpted from his most famous work, or his tone poem In the Steppes of Central Asia. FTP, name this research chemist and composer of Prince Igor.;;(Aleksandr) (Porfirevich) Borodin
Literature;;One of this man's works features a painter named Einar, his wife Agnes, and a gypsy girl named Gerd who makes fun of the titular priest. Many of this man's title characters are clergymen, including one that vows to cure the world of sickness after a half-gypsy girl invites him to her mountain church of ice and another that commits suicide after falling in love with Rebecca West. Several creators appear in his works as well, such as the sculptor Arnold Rubek in When We Dead Awaken and Oswald Alving in Ghosts, although best known is Halvard Solness, the title character of The Master Builder. FTP, name this author of such dramas as An Enemy of the People, Hedda Gabler, and A Doll's House.;;(Henrik) Ibsen
Physics;;The formula underlying this phenomenon gives the wave number of H alpha. That formula may be derived rigorously by considering a transition to the second excited state with the Born-Oppenheimer approximation, or by invoking the Bohr model of the hydrogen atom, and involves the Rydberg constant. H alpha corresponds to a wavelength of about 655 nm so, like most of the lines in this series, it is visible. For ten points, name this set of hydrogen emission lines named for a Swiss mathematician, which correspond to transitions to the n = 2 state.;;Balmer (series|lines)
Literature;;He dropped seven of his names because their initials spelled out PINHEAD, from his birth name of Oscar Zoroaster Phadrig Isaac Norman Henkel Emmannuel Ambroise Diggs. He saves a central character from the Mangaboos, and later returns with her to the land he once ruled, where he is taken on as a witch’s apprentice. He is then decreed to be only the third person in the land who can perform magic after Glinda and Ozma. FTP, name this magician, the namesake of a series of books by L. Frank Baum, who asks you to pay no attention to the man behind the curtain.;;(The) Wizard of Oz;;(The) Wizard
United States History;;It extended a doctrine first mandated in Weeks v. U.S. The woman at the center of this case had a proclivity for dating light-heavyweight boxing champions, being the ex-wife of Jimmy Bivins and former girlfriend of Archie Moore. Justice Harlan delivered the dissenting opinion in this case, arguing against overturning Wolf v. Colorado, which had incorporated the Fourth Amendment without providing for an enforcement mechanism. FTP, name this 1961 case which ruled that the Fourth Amendment protection against "unreasonable searches and seizures" required the use at state levels of the exclusionary rule.;;Mapp (v(.)|versus) (Ohio)|Ohio (v(.)|versus){1}? Mapp
Miscellaneous;;His later works include That Royle Girl, Sally of the Sawdust, and a film adaptation of The Sorrows of Satan. One of his early films was also known as "the lost art of minding one’s business," while another was a "psychological comedy founded on Darwin’s theory of the genesis of man" entitled Primitive Man. His film An Unseen Enemy features such notable actors as Harry Carey and Dorothy and Lillian Gish. Lillian would become his favorite actress, and he later gave her a lead role in his films Way Down East, Orphans of the Storm and Intolerance. FTP name this director who also cast Gish as Elsie Stoneman in his 1915 epic Birth of a Nation.;;(David) (Wark) (D(.)W(.)) Griffith
Literature;;Headmaster Michael and Nancy attempt to modernize a rural village run by a traditional priest in this man’s short story "Dead Men’s Path". He only wrote two volumes of stories, The Sacrificial Egg and Girls at War, while his sole collection of poetry was entitled Beware. He is better known for his novels, whose protagonists include the writer-slash-journalist Ikem and the chief priest of Ulu, Ezeulu. Those novels, Anthills of the Savannah and Arrow of God, take a backseat to this man’s two novels about a hunter and his civil servant son. FTP name this author of an influential essay on race in Conrad’s Heart of Darkness and the novels No Longer at Ease and Things Fall Apart.;;(Chinua) Achebe
Chemistry;;In basic solution, it can undergo the Cannizzaro reaction to produce methanol. Accidentally produced by Alexander Butlerov in 1859, credit for its identification is given to August Wilhelm von Hofmann. Capable of adding electrophilically to alkenes, it can be prepared industrially by heating dry air and methyl alcohol vapor in the presence of a catalyst like copper or silver, and can also be synthesized from carbon monoxide and hydrogen. Frequently used as a disinfectant and also known as methanal, FTP, name this compound with chemical formula C-H-2-O, the simplest of the aldehydes.;;formaldehyde
Geography;;Its portion above King Hill powers the American Fall Dam and receives the Portneuf, Raft, Big Wood, and Henrys Fork tributaries. The South Fork of this river flows along the east of the Grand Tetons, south from Shoshone, Lewis, and Heart lakes, in Yellowstone, widening into Jackson Lake, from which it passes through Jackson Hole, Wyoming. It receives its North Fork and makes a turn at Lewiston after forming part of the Oregon-Idaho border, and then flows west to Pasco. FTP, name this river, the chief tributary of the Colombia, which flows through Hells Canyon.;;Snake (River)
World History;;The Treaty of Neuberg ended this family’s custom of holding hereditary lands in common by assigning separate domains to Albert III and Leopold III. The earliest known ancestor of this house was a Carolingian noble of the tenth century named Guntram the Rich. Their ancestral home was built in 1020 in what is now the Swiss canton of Aargau, by Bishop Werner of Strasbourg, and is known as "Hawk's Castle". Rudolf IV created their title of "archduke" and the motto AEIOU, or "Austria is destined to rule the world". FTP, name this royal family of Austro-Hungary which, under Charles V, had ruled Spain and the Holy Roman Empire.;;Ha(b|p){1}?sburg
Literature;;One character in this novel spends an evening drinking with Harvey Stone at the Café Select, where he has an unpleasant encounter with Frances Clyne and her lover. Later, that character takes a bus to Burguete with Bill Gorton, and the two of them spend some time fishing with an Englishman. Back at the Montoya Hotel, a young man named Pedro Romero proves attractive to this novel’s central female character, and after they sleep together Robert Cohn becomes agitated and hits Mike Campbell and the main male character. That character is an American newspaper writer who is also in love with Brett Ashley. FTP, name this 1926 novel about Jake Barnes, a work by Ernest Hemingway.;;(The) Sun Also Rises
Physics;;It was incorrectly proposed by William Crookes as the operational principle behind his namesake tube. Svante Arrhenius believed that life on earth arose from organisms transported through the cosmos by this effect. It scales as the fourth power of the temperature according to the Stefan-Boltzmann law, and helps balance gravity in a star. For a uniform source, it is given by one third times the total energy per unit volume within the appropriate space. The operating principle behind the "solar sail" concept, FTP, identify this force per unit area exerted by photons.;;radiation pressure
Religion/Mythology;;The god Aker, guardian of the Double Horizon, took the form of two of these creatures back to back. Hera sent one as a punishment for the abduction of Chrysippus, and it made its home on Mount Phicium. The one sent by Hera was, according to Hesiod’s Theogony, a daughter of Orthrus and Echidna, and was said to strangle travelers that failed its test. The Egyptian god Amun was sometimes depicted as a ram-headed variant of one of these creatures, but they were typically pictured with the face of a monarch and the body of a lion. In Greek myth, this creature committed suicide after hearing the correct response, "Man," from the son of Laius. FTP, name these creatures, one of which failed to stump Oedipus with its riddle.;;sphinx(es)
Art;;After a Merchants’ Guild commissioned this man to create a bronze statue of their patron saint, John the Baptist, a rival guild of bankers commissioned this man to create a larger bronze statue of their patron saint, Matthew, both of which appear along with a statue this man made of Saint Stephen in Or San Michele. In this man’s Commentaries he wrote his autobiography as well as explained some of his artistic views. Two of his students, Donatello and Paolo Uccello, helped him in completing his first major commission, that being the making of second pair of doors for the baptistery of the cathedral of Florence. Apparantly, he did such a good job on these doors he was asked to complete a 3rd pair. FTP, name this sculptor who created the "Gates of Paradise".;;(Lorenzo) (Ghiberti|di Bartolo){1}?
Religion/Mythology;;In the art of this religious tradition, the semicircle is a common motif representing the female reproductive cycle, which in this religion’s mythology is akin to the solid matter that coalesced into a clot with a crust when the Great Mother created the Earth. Many of its followers wear a "tilaka," which is traditionally black for unmarried women but red for others. Alternate names for this religion include Sanatana and Vaidika. FTP name this henotheistic faith, whose followers are divided primarily between Vaishnavism and Shaivaism, whose deities include Kali, Ganesha, and Vishnu, which is the dominant religion of India.;;Hindu(ism)
Literature;;In one of this man’s novels, the main character is visiting his aunt Mrs. Failing when he learns that he has a half-brother, Stephen Wonham. Later, that main character marries Agnes Pembroke but dies before his story collection Pan Pipes can achieve fame. In his first novel, Philip arrives in Italy too late to prevent his sister Lilia from marrying a dentist named Gino Carella. In addition to The Longest Journey and Where Angels Fear to Tread, this man wrote about the love of George Emerson and Lucy Honeychurch in 1908’s A Room with a View. FTP, name this English novelist who also wrote Howards End and A Passage to India.;;(Edward) (Morgan) Forster
Biology;;Give the shorter name for them.  Suggested to be evolutionarily advantageous for the fungus Podospora anserine, typical examples of these molecules in yeast contain a high number of glutamine and asparagine residues. These molecules have no known genetic material associated with them, and they are produced by a mutation to a gene that codes for a normal PrP protein. When this mutation occurs, it induces incorrect folding in the normal protein, resulting in accumulation and subsequent brain cell destruction. Transmissible by injection or ingestion of infected tissue, these objects are responsible for fatal familial insomnia, kuru, and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. FTP, name these abnormal proteins discovered and named by Stanley B. Prusiner, a portmanteau for "proteinaceous infectious particle".;;prion(s)
United States History;;It is blamed for triggering the "beggar-thy-neighbor" phenomenon and for creating the sugar crisis which brought Fulgencio Batista to power in Cuba. Sponsored by the Utah chair of the Senate Finance Committee and the Oregon chair of the House Ways and Means Committee, it raised the levels set by the Fordney-McCumber Act to an average of sixty percent and remained in force until the Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act was passed in 1934. FTP, a petition signed by a thousand economists failed to stop what 1930 tariff act, a major factor in worsening the Great Depression?;;(Hawley-Smoot|Smoot-Hawley){1}? (Tariff) (Act)
Social Science;;For fifteen years, she edited the Journal of American Folklore. Her doctoral dissertation was on "The Concept of the Guardian Spirit in North America," and she wrote poetry under the name Anne Singleton. She used the Dobu and Kwakiutl as examples in one of her books and published the critique of scientific racism, Race: Science and Politics. After the U.S. entered World War II, this author of Zuni Mythology and Patterns of Culture was recruited by the Office of War Information as a consultant. FTP, identify this anthropologist who never went to Japan but wrote The Chrysanthemum and the Sword.;;(Ruth) (Fulton) Benedict|(Ruth) Fulton
Chemistry;;Its namesake asserted that, in exchange reactions of neutral salts in aqueous solution, no heat effect is observed, and silver telluride is also named for the man who came up with this idea. Discovered in seminal experiments involving work with sulfuric acid, it was first published in Recherches Thermochimiques in 1840. Arising from the law of conservation of energy, its relevance comes from the fact that energy changes are state functions. FTP, name this law of summation indicating that the heat of a chemical reaction is independent of the path of the reaction, named for a Swiss-Russian chemist.;;Hess(')(s) (First|1st) (Law)
World History;;It gives permission to use white linen for saddlecloths and is dated to the consulate of Galligano. Expressing gratitude for the end of worshipping "mute and deaf images made by hand," it contains an out-of-place reference to satraps and makes pledges regarding a city that had not yet been founded. Commissioned by Stephen II, it was based on legends surrounding St. Sylvester. Questioned as early as the tenth century by Otto III, it was finally discredited in 1440, when analysis of Latin styles by Lorenzo Valla proved that it was a forgery. FTP, name this document, purportedly a grant of temporal authority to the Pope by a Roman Emperor.;;Donation of Constantine|Donatio Constantini|Constitutum Constantini
Literature;;In this work, a messenger encounters the title character singing on a farm and announces that a festival would be held in the honor of the Goddess Hera and that all Argive maidens were to attend. However, the protagonist refuses to attend so as to avoid becoming the object of the pitying eyes of the people of Argos. This is because the protagonist was forced to marry an elderly peasant farmer, so that her husband would not be able to avenge the wrongs wrought on her male family members by her mother and stepfather Aegisthos. Fortunately, her brother Orestes will return from hiding and kill not only Aegisthos, but also Clytemnestra. FTP, name this daughter of Agamemnon, the titular character of a drama written by Euripides.;;Ele(c|k){1}?tra
Philosophy;;The principal Italian member of this school was Roberto Ardigo, while its German members included Friedrich Jodl and Ernst Laas. An early work of its French movement was The New Christianity, while one work by its best-known French member was Philosophy of Mathematics, which argued for a kind of trinity composed of the Great Being, the Great Way, and the Great Fetish. That French member attracted followers such as Emile Littré and George Herbert Lewes, and argued that science aims only at prediction. Those views appeared in a massive six-volume work published between 1830 and 1842 and known as the "course" in a certain kind of philosophy. FTP, name this intellectual movement which was founded by Auguste Comte.;;positivism
Art;;Ted Rose did a watercolor "Revisited" version of this work into which he inserts an incredulous officer of the law with his white dog. In the upper left-hand corner of this painting one can see that the windows have their blinds halfway down, and the shops below are bare. Two large percolators sit on a counter toward the back next to a door with a window but no knob. The clothes of the people inside the all-night diner bring to mind the 1930s and early 40s, as well as the lettering which reveals the name of the "lunch-counter" as being Phillies. FTP, name this painting by Edward Hopper.;;Nighthawks
World History;;Typical ones used the kashindan to run their administration, and took policy advice from a council of elders called the karo. Those of the 14th and 15th centuries were known as shugo, and were supplanted by the Sengoku type, which took their name from that period. During the Edo period, they controlled three-fourths of the land not held by the bakufu, and under Tokugawa rule, they came to be known as kinsei, or "early modern". In 1869, the year after the Meiji restoration, they bounded together with the kuge to form a new aristocratic group, the kazoku, and in 1871 their family holdings were abolished and their land was confiscated by the emperor. Literally called "large private land," FTP, name these powerful feudal rulers from the 12th century to the 19th century in Japan.;;Daimyo
Literature;;He wrote about a lady whose "thrushes sing in Rathburn bowers" who "cannot guess" that the speaker kneels "to share her hound’s caress" in his poem "The Henchman". He wrote about a man who didn’t believe that the "Dark Day" of May 19, 1780 was the Day of Judgment in "Abraham Davenport," while he wrote about the death of a woman named Mary and the need of informing some insects of her demise in his "Telling the Bees". His early works include the narrative poem Moll Pitcher and the prose Legends of New England, though he gained recognition as a major poet with the appearance of 1866’s Snow-Bound. FTP, name this American author of "Ichabod" and "Barbara Frietchie".;;(John) (Greenleaf) Whittier
Physics;;In a plasma, it is proportional to the ion and electron density and is therefore a good indicator of the pressure of a star’s atmosphere. Its two-dimensional form can yield cascades when applied to quantum wires and it is particularly useful for molecular rotational spectra because its manifestations indicate low-J transitions. In its quadratic form, the first-order terms vanish in accordance with the Wigner-Eckart theorem, but a linear case exists which depends on the degeneracy of the 2s and 2p states and thus is not exhibited by alkali atoms. For ten points, identify this effect which breaks degeneracy through the application of an electric field.;;Stark (effect)
Physics;;Two tensors giving the material and nominal stresses are named for Piola and this man, who demonstrated that current moves through conductors at the speed of light. Green’s second identity applied to an integral taken over an aperture results in an integral expression of central importance in scalar diffraction theory named for this man and Fresnel. He explained the Fraunhofer by stating that cold, tenuous gases produce absorption patterns that match the emission patterns they would produce if heated. He co-discovered cesium and rubidium using the technique of emission spectroscopy he developed with his partner Bunsen. FTP, name this physicist who enunciated his namesake junction and loop rules of circuit analysis.;;(Gustav) (Robert) Kirchhoff
Philosophy;;At the end of Chapter 27, "Of Crimes, Excuses, and Extenuations," the author compares various crimes against "private men," noting that mutilation of a limb is worse than spoiling a man of his goods. Chapter 16 considers "persons, authors, and things personated," and children, fools, and madmen cannot be authors of their own actions. Chapter 9 offers a table which divides up the "several subjects of knowledge," while other chapters in the first part, "Of Man," deal with sense, imagination, and speech. The fourth and final part considers the "kingdom of darkness," while a commonwealth is the subject of the middle books. FTP, name this book which posits a "war of all against all" in the state of nature, where life is "solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short," a work written by Thomas Hobbes.;;Leviathan(,) (or the Matter, Form, and Power of a Commonwealth Ecclesiastical and Civil)
United States History;;He used the pseudonym Shubel Morgan when he returned to the state where he had earlier commanded a company in the Wakarusa War. He was frequently assisted by Gerrit Smith, who donated land in North Elba, New York where this man settled his family. After his death, he was compared to Orsini in a famous speech delivered at Cooper Union. He was executed after Governor Wise refused to have him evaluated for insanity, though his actions in the 1850s which gave him the nickname "Old Osawatomie" following a massacre at Potawatomi Creek suggest that he may have been mad. FTP, name this man whose army was put down by a company led by Robert E. Lee after they seized the armory at Harper’s Ferry.;;(John) Brown
Literature;;English author David Garnett claimed this man taught him to sail using a laundry hamper with sails made of sheets. He defended his homeland in the essay "The Crime of Partition," and his ethnicity is shared by the peasant Yanko Goorall, the protagonist of his short story "Amy Foster". Other short stories of his include interactions between whites and "natives," such as "An Outpost of Progress" and "The Lagoon". Despite forays into drama such as Laughing Anne and One More Day, he is best known for novels, such as the story of Heyst and Lena, Victory, the tale of Captain Anthony and Flora, Chance, and the story of Mr. Verloc, The Secret Agent. FTP, name this Polish-born creator of the character Marlow, the author of novels like Nostromo, Lord Jim, and Heart of Darkness.;;(Joseph) Conrad|(Josef) (Teodor) Konrad (Korzeniowski)
Literature;;One of the characters in this novel is finishing a degree in chemistry at USC, and writes a dissertation on "The Problem of Colloids in the Reduction of Low-Grade Gold Ores". Another character once spent a week at Lake Arrowhead with her future step-daughter’s mother, who caught pneumonia there. In the final chapter, two of the main characters find themselves together on a ship off the coast of Mexico, and discover from the ship’s paper that Nino and Lola were married after they left California. The novel is told in the form of a confession demanded by Mr. Keyes, who also works at General Fidelity with Walter Huff. FTP, name this novel in which Mr. Nirdlinger is murdered and his body thrown on a railroad track to collect on special kind of insurance, a work by James M. Cain.;;Double Indemnity
Chemistry;;The Kucherov reaction uses it to hydrate acetylenic hydrocarbons in the presence of a boron trifluoride catalyst, and the Jacobsen rearrangement of polymethylbenzenes also makes use of it. With diphenylamine and acetic acid, it helps comprise the Dische reagent, and its reaction with zinc oxide causes the pigment zinc yellow to have that color. Originally produced by burning a certain element with potassium nitrate, one innovative way to manufacture it includes the brainchild of Peregrine Phillips, the contact process. Also known as oil of vitriol, for 10 points name this strong acid found in car batteries with chemical formula H-2-S-O-4.;;sulfuric acid;;H2S04|(oil of) vitriol
World History;;He ordered a woman named Cornificia to be killed after she was caught weeping for this man’s dead brother, and the same punishment was given to this man’s wife, Publia Flavia Plautilla. This man gained popularity when he marched on foot while touring the German borders with his soldiers, and after a victory over the Agri Decumates he was given the title "Germanicus Maximus". While he was fighting the Parthians in the east, a conspiracy against his life was assembled, and he was killed while preparing to defecate by Julius Martialis, after which the commander of the Praetorian Guard, Macrinus, took power. FTP, name this Roman emperor who was born Lucius Septimius Bassianus, who murdered his brother Geta in 211 to become sole ruler after they succeeded Septimius Severus.;;Caracalla
Literature;;He remarked upon the sin of sloth in the essay "Nearer, My Couch, to Thee" and expounded upon technology in "Is it OK to Be a Luddite"? In one of his short stories, Cleanth Siegel induces Irving Loon to go on a shooting spree by uttering the word "Windigo," and another short story by this man follows Nathan "Lardass" Levine. These stories, "Mortality and Mercy in Vienna" and "The Small Rain," can be found in his 1984 collection Slow Learner, which also features the story "Entropy". The female ninja DL Chastain helps Prairie Wheeler on a quest to find her mother in Vineland, while Reverend Wicks Cherrycoke narrates the story of an astronomer and a surveyor in Mason and Dixon. Best known for characters like Oedipa Maas and Tyrone Slothrop, his most well-known work opens "a screaming comes across the sky". FTP, name this reclusive author of V, The Crying of Lot 49, and Gravity’s Rainbow.;;(Thomas) (Ruggles) Pynchon (Jr.)
Biology;;It suppresses plasma membrane permeability in sufferers of renal Fanconi syndrome, thus reducing nephrotoxicity, and a point mutation in a gene for its receptors causes hereditary hyperplexia. Substitution of it by aspartate in the protein COL2A1 causes cataracts and retinal detachment, and William Stein discovered that potassium trioxalatochromate could be used to identify this precursor of creatine. A co-agonist of glutamate, it is the principal inhibitory neurotransmitter in the spinal cord, and many molecules of it can be found in collagen helices. For 10 points, name this nonpolar and optically inactive amino acid, which owes its small size to having only a hydrogen atom as its side chain.;;glycine|amino acetic acid|aminoethanolic acid;;G(ly)
World History;;One of their great leaders was Winrode of Kniprode. Another was Hermann of Salza, who came to the aid of Conrad of Masowia and established their power in Prussia. Their fortunes declined after Witold of Lithuania and Ladislav of Poland defeated an army led by Ulrich von Jungingen at a battle in Grunwald. The Golden Bull of Rimini in 1226 gave them all lands taken from the Prussians. FTP, name this group which was known as the Order of St. Mary of the Germans when it was founded at Acre in 1190, and which was crippled by a 1410 defeat at Tannenberg.;;Teutonic Knights
Miscellaneous;;In Boas’ "Laguna Myth," the "co’hona" of Acoma mythology is identified as one of these creatures. Yanomamo mythology tells of a pregnant woman being killed by one of these creatures after urinating on him. The fourth house of Xibalba is guarded by these creatures, and men crossed with them are depicted on the façade of the Olmec temple at La Venta. The Mayans called them Balam, and a horde of them devoured a race of giants at the behest of Tezcatlipoca, who often disguised himself as one. FTP identify this species of big cat native to Central America, the namesake of a luxury car company.;;Jaguar(s)
Music;;He wrote about how the wedding night of Serafina and Annibale Pistacchio is marred by Enrico’s use of the titular object in The Night Bell. He wrote about the title character’s love for the count of Chalais, who is killed in a duel by a man who had previously killed the nephew of Richelieu, in Maria di Rohan. In his greatest comic opera, the title character has a fake marriage with Sofronia, who is really Norina in disguise, after which Doctor Malatesta makes things right. He first gained fame with 1830’s Anna Bolena, and went on to write operas about Robert Devereux and Lucrezia Borgia. FTP, name this Italian composer of Lucia di Lammemoor, Don Pasquale, and The Daughter of the Regiment.;;(Gaetano) Donizetti
Literature;;He participates in a 12-year feud after being offended by the sound of singing. His killer boasts of having killed nicors at night, and wears armor fashioned by Wayland the smith. He is immune to ordinary swords, but he is beheaded with the sword of the giants after the death of his mother. He is described as an "etin," a "march-riever," and an "unhallowed wight" in the epic poem in which he appears. He sustains a mortal injury during a wrestling match which shakes the walls of Heorot. FTP, name this descendant of Cain who dies after his arm is wrenched off by Beowulf.;;Grendel
United States History;;It was the subject of a book entitled The Never-Ending Wrong, which appeared 50 years later. It was also the subject of a "critical analysis for lawyers and laymen" by Felix Frankfurter, which concluded that members of the Joe Morelli gang along with Celestino Madeiros were responsible. Frankfurter suggested that those men were responsible for the deaths of Frederick Parmenter and Alessandro Berardelli, who were at a shoe factory in South Braintree that was robbed in 1920. Seven years later, a commission led by Harvard’s President Lowell supported the court’s finding, and two men were electrocuted. FTP, name this case in which two Italian anarchists were executed even though they had alibis.;;(the) (Sacco-(and) Vanzetti (case)|executions (of Nicola) Sacco (and Bartolomeo) Vanzetti){1}?
Physics;;In 1995, Kazuaki Kuroda raised concerns about the most popular method of measuring this quantity, and in that same year German scientists used a mercury bath to get a surprisingly different value for it. It is replaced by a scalar field determined by the distribution of the universe's mass-energy in Brans-Dicke theory. It is combined with the speed of light and Planck’s constant in equations that give the Planck time, length, and mass. First measured with a torsion balance by Henry Cavendish, FTP name this constant of proportionality found in an inverse-square law posited by Sir Isaac Newton, which represents the intrinsic strength of the weakest fundamental force.;;(universal) gravitational (constant)|G
Miscellaneous;;One of his colleagues is outraged upon realizing that this man shares his love of Nike Shox shoes, and he asks another friend for a 5000 dollar loan he doesn’t need for a used motorcycle. He willingly breaks his pinky with a paperweight in an attempt to win a bet with his boss, whose home he enters unlawfully in search of mold. His nemesis is Edward Vogler, a billionaire donor that consistently tries to get him fired. His wife, a constitutional lawyer, left him due to his refusal of a course of medical treatment for an infarction in his thigh, a condition that caused his vicodin addiction and need for a cane. FTP name this head of diagnostic medicine at Princeton-Plainsboro Teaching Hospital, played by Hugh Laurie on a Fox show bearing his name.;;(Gregory) House(,) (M.D.)
Literature;;In a letter to the Reverend Samuel Occom, this figure strongly condemned slavery, comparing ministers who held slaves to the Ancient Egyptians. This author also wrote of a desire to "surpass the wind, and leave the rolling universe behind," implying that the titular figure has "pinions" in the poem "On Imagination". Imagination is further glorified in a poem addressed to the painter Scipio Moorhead, but this poet took on a more overtly political tone in poems like "On the Death of Mr. Snider Murder’d by Richardson" and "To his Excellency General Washington". In a better known work, this poet asks "Christians" to remember that Africans can "join the angelic train," though her conversion to Christianity did not spare her a life of poverty and bondage in Boston. FTP name this poet who wrote the collection Poems on Various Subjects, Religious and Moral, and also wrote of her own experiences in "On Being Brought from Africa to America".;;(Phillis) Wheatley
Religion/Mythology;;Some groups break these up into 30 equal parts known as "juz," in which one of them is assigned to each day of the lunar month. About a quarter of them are preceded by "fawatih," or detached letters whose purpose is obscure. The first and most important of them is the "fatiha," or "opening," which is used as a devotional prayer. Traditionally, each begins with either the word "Madaniya" or "Makkiyah," indicating its city of origin. The ninth is the only one which does not begin with the "basmala," but each of them consists of numbered "ayas" in prose. FTP, name this collection of 114 writings, which are revelations disclosed by Allah to Muhammad and constitute the chapters of the Qur’an.;;sura(s)
Earth Science;;Members of this group of framework minerals include the two-phase intermixture perthite and microcline. Like halite and the pyroxenes, they exhibit two cleavages separated by about 90 degrees. One of the two major subgroups of these aluminosilicate minerals forms a continuous solid solution series with endmembers anorthite and albite, corresponding to calcium and sodium cations, respectively. Granite commonly contains large quantities of these minerals, which have a Mohs hardness of 6. FTP, name this group of minerals which includes orthoclase and plagioclase.;;feldspar(s)
World History;;He took his first important post after his older half-brother Yilma died. He was named heir to the throne after a man named Iyasu converted to Islam, after which Iyasu’s aunt was named Empress Zauditu. When his country was invaded by a European power, he made his headquarters at Desse, but after losing a battle at Maychew he was forced to flee. He was restored to power by the British in 1941, and would later be temporarily ousted by a 1960 coup before finally being deposed in 1974 led by the Dergue. FTPE, name this cousin of Menelik II who in 1930 became emperor of Ethiopia.;;(Haile) Selassie (I|the First)|(Lij|Ras) Tafari (Makonnen)
Art;;He aroused controversy by depicting a chamber pot and a pair of slippers in a painting which shows a woman with her legs crossed removing a red sock, The Toilet. An old woman offers Joseph a bowl of eggs in his Adoration of the Shepherds, while an ugly child holding a statuette and a pail looks at her grandmother in his The Feast of Saint Nicholas. A lute hangs behind the bed on which the title character’s head rests while a doctor takes her pulse in his The Sick Lady,. while the artist included a self-portrait as a man playing the bagpipes in a 1668 work, The Merry Family.;;(Jan) Steen
Biology;;Much of the basis for it was first postulated by Gorter and Grendel, although their work was later modified by Danielli, Davson, and Robertson. Caveolae and certain kinds of "rafts" belie its name, as these are more cohesive regions unable to diffuse as freely. A central point of it is that proteins can move laterally, and it divides proteins into the categories of integral and peripheral, or intrinsic and extrinsic. Proposed by Singer and Nicolson in 1972, it describes the matrix and two-dimensional solvent nature of the phospholipid bilayer. FTP, name this currently-accepted model of the cell membrane, named for the liquid-like movement of the lipids within it.;;fluid mosaic (model)
World History;;On Ascension Day, he boarded the Bucentaur and led a fleet of a thousand ships to preside over the "Wedding of the Sea" ceremony. The original holders of this title replaced the tribunes as the local representatives of the Byzantine emperor. The first was Paolo Lucio Anafesto, and the last one, Ludovico Manin, was deposed by Napoleon. The Porta della Carta is the gateway to their palace, designed by Buon and Giovanni, which was built after such figures as Freancesco Foscario and Enrico Dandolo held this title. FTP, name this office, the elected leader of Venice.;;doge
Philosophy;;Near the beginning of this work, its central figure speaks of a dream in which a beautiful woman dressed in white expressed her wish that he would "arrive at fertile Phthia on the third day". Later, the title character speaks of his friends Simmias the Theban and Cebes, both of whom have money, and notes that he has friends in Thessaly. The second half of this work is devoted to an imaginary speech delivered by the laws of a certain city, which argue that since a citizen enjoys the benefits of life in a state, he must subject itself to the decisions of that state. Thus, the central figure refuses to go anywhere, even though a ship from Delos is scheduled to arrive later that day. FTP, name this dialogue in which Socrates explains to the title figure why he won’t escape from jail, a work which comes between the Apology and the Pheado.;;Crito
Literature;;In one of his works, Lenny and Joey hit on Ruth soon after she visits the home of her husband Teddy, who in the end decides to leave Ruth to his family so that they can turn her into a prostitute. In another of his works, Aston offers the title position to a tramp named Davies, but later Aston and his brother Mick turn against Davies and throw him out. In addition to The Homecoming and The Caretaker, he wrote about the plight of an unemployed pianist named Stanley in a 1958 work that appeared shortly after his first play, The Room. FTP, name this British dramatist of The Birthday Party, who recently won the 2005 Nobel Prize for Literature.;;(Harold) Pinter
Noncomputational Math;;Matsumoto and Nishimura developed a method of generating random numbers using these numbers in their namesake twister. These numbers were first studied due to their one-to-one correspondence with even perfect numbers. As of August of this year, there are only 42 known ones, and they are currently being searched for by the GIMPS project, which makes use of the Lucas-Lehmer algorithm. FTP, identify these special primes given by 2 to the power p minus one, where p itself is prime, and which take their name from the French mathematician Marin.;;Mersenne primes
Religion/Mythology;;The Japanese spirit known as the baku was thought to have the head of an elephant or this creature. In Arthurian legend, the Questing Beast was thought to have the haunches of this animal. In Hindu myth, the demon Hiranyasipu was killed by Vishnu’s fourth avatar Narasinha, which had half of this creature’s body. In Egyptian myth, Ptah’s wife, who was frequently depicted with the head of this creature, was the fierce goddess Sekhmet. This animal was also thought to supply the body type for the manticore and the griffin. Heracles was frequently depicted wearing the pelt of, FTP, what sort of creature, which he had killed in Nemea?;;lion
United States History;;In 1967, he was defeated in the special election that returned Adam Clayton Powell to congress. Disobedience of an earlier ruling in his favor led to the case which determined that there is no right to a jury trial for the charge of refusing a federal court order. William Faulkner’s nephew pulled him away from a group of rioters led by disgraced former Major General Edwin Walker, who was supported Governor Ross Barnett’s defiance of troops sent by John F. Kennedy to escort him into he Lyceum Building. FTP, name this first African-American to enroll at the University of Mississippi.;;(James) Meredith
Literature;;After the death of his aunt Drusilla, the title character of this novel moves with his lover to Aldbrickham, where they are later joined by the title character’s son. Earlier, the title character had persuaded his cousin, who was working in an ecclesiastical warehouse, to take a job as a teaching assistant. The title character comes from the village of Marygreen, but always wanted to follow his teacher, Richard Phillotson, to Christminster, where he could get an education. That title character is unhappily married to Arabella Donn, but really loves Sue Bridehead. FTP, name this 1894 novel set in Wessex, a work about a stonemason written by Thomas Hardy.;;Jude the Obscure
Biology;;Defects in these objects can cause Kearn-Sayre Syndrome or Luft Disease. They contain porins to allow for passive diffusion of selected molecules through their outer membranes. They provide evidence for Margulis’ endosymbiotic theory and are important to evolutionary and genetic studies due to their derivation solely from the mother. They allow some ribosomes in their matrix to allow for processes such as chemiosmosis and the citric acid cycle. FTP, name these organelles whose primary function is to convert organic materials into ATP, the so-called "powerhouses" of the cell.;;mitochondria;;mitochondria(l) DNA
Geography;;A type of glacier formed wholly from drift snow is endemic to and named for this range. Their southern branch has its highest point at Yamantau and extends to the Mughalzar Hills. Their namesake river originates at Kruglaya and flows into the sea at Atyrau. A major source of topaz and beryl, they have a branch called Pay-Khoy Ridge, they can be passed at Perm and Yekaterinburg, and their highest peak is Mount Narodnaya FTP, name this mountain range that is considered to be the border between Europe and Asia.;;Ural (Mountains)|Urals(ky) (Khrebet)
Music;;The composer of this work created it after abandoning a work about Cinderella, and later commented that he should not have composed it as it paled in comparison to Debussy’s Sylvia. The title locale is formed from the tears of the central female character’s parents after she is kidnapped by an evil sorcerer, whose enchantment can only be broken by a pledge of fidelity from a prince. That sorcerer tricks the prince into pledging his fidelity to Odile, who is Rothbart’s daughter. In most versions, Odette then dies or is condemned to remain away from Siegfried in the form of the titular creature. FTP, name this first ballet by Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky.;;Swan Lake|Lebedinoje osero
Chemistry;;This isotope is relatively enriched in the Martian atmosphere, probably as a result of thermal Jeans escape of its lighter counterpart. The primordial abundance of this isotope produced in Big Bang nucleosynthesis provides an important constraint on the density of ordinary baryonic matter. Stellar neutrinos are generated in a reaction which produces nuclei of this isotope through a weak interaction as the second step in the proton-proton chain. That weak interaction involves changing one of two fused protons into a neutron. Found in heavy water, FTP, name this isotope of hydrogen that contains one neutron.;;deuterium
Psychology;;As all its subjects were male, it was followed by studies which found that females behaved the same, although more nervously, and several other variations including one using a telephone and one using a contact plate. One of the participants, unbeknownst to the rest, was in fact an actor who would bang on the wall separating him from the participant and cite his heart condition, after which he would cease both responding and complaining. Approximately 65% of subjects, who believed they were testing learning methods, continued on, and all administered a 300-volt shock in, FTP, what experiment which was actually testing the subjects’ willingness to follow authority?;;(Stanley) Milgram (obedience (to authority)) (experiment);;obedience experiment
Literature;;He wrote about some photographs taken by Roy DeCarava in the book The Sweet Flypaper of Life, while he wrote about his decision to take a job as a messboy on a freighter in his autobiographical The Big Sea. His first book featured seven sections, the last of which, "Our Land," includes the poem "Mother to Son". That book was followed by 1927’s Fine Clothes to the Jew, while later volumes of poetry included Fields of Wonder and Shakespeare in Harlem. FTP, name this author of Montage of a Dream Deferred and The Ways of White Folks who wrote "The Negro Speaks of Rivers".;;(Langston) Hughes
World History;;A rural phase of this movement ended with John Litster’s defeat by troops under Henry le Despenser, the bishop of Norwich. Archbishop Simon of Sudbury and treasurer Robert Hales were beheaded during this event, which also destroyed the palace of John of Gaunt. Artists and villeins joined it in protest of a maximum wage set by the Statute of Laborers, and negotiations at Mile End led to promises for free trade and an end to serfdom, but in a subsequent confrontation at Smithfield, William Walworth, the mayor of London, killed its leader. FTP, the end to increases in the poll tax was the only lasting accomplishment of what 1381 uprising led by Wat Tyler?;;(The) Peasants(') (Re(volt|bellion)){1}? (of 1381)|English Peasants(') War;;Wat Tyler's War|Peasants(') War
Physics;;In 2001, researchers at Lawrence Berkeley Labs discovered it in an aluminum matrix doped with molten lead. A mathematical description of this Wiener process typically begins with the Langevin equation and the Stokes flow for a sphere. Jean Perrin provided evidence for the most famous formulation of this process, for which, in the limit of small times, the rms displacement is proportional to the time squared. In the large time limit, it is a diffusive process which can be described by the Fokker-Planck equation and it has a diffusive constant proportional to the temperature. Observed by its namesake in pollen grains suspended in water, and explained by Einstein using the kinetic theory of gases. FTP name this random motion of small particles in a fluid.;;Brownian motion
Art;;The latest novel by Gioia Diliberto is a fictional memoir of this painting’s subject. A flash of gold above the central character’s head represents a tiara, the only jewelry the central character wears as she leans against a table. Two ornate silver stars mark the spots on her dress where the silver straps that come up her shoulders attach. Her only visible ear is bright pink, which contrasts with the stark paleness of her body and the redness of her hair. FTP name this monumental portrait of Virginie Gautreau by John Singer Sargent.;;(Portrait of) Madame X
Literature;;In one of this man’s works, the title character is charged with deleting the word God from 2 hours worth of radio programs, only to reinsert them into a later broadcast of an atheist. His stories include one about a professional laugher and another in which Grabowski recalls life before World War II, "Across the Bridge". His better known novels include The Safety Net and Group Portrait with Lady along with a novel about Hans Schneier, who after injuring his knee can no longer work as the title performer. FTP, name this German Nobel Laureate, the author of The Clown who also wrote a novel about the Faehmel family, Billiards at Half-Past Nine.;;(Heinrich) B(o|ö){1}?(e)ll
Religion/Mythology;;According to Zoroastrian legend, a garland of five of them surrounds the fire temple near the Caspian sea, while the one associated with Ishtar represents the movements of the planet Venus. The Jewish Revolutionary Simon ben Cosiba was called son of one of these by Rabbi Akiva, while along with a crescent one of these makes up the symbol of the Ottoman Empire. In Christianity the "Morning" one can refer to Jesus or more often Lucifer, while the six-pointed one of David is the most prominent symbol of Judaism. FTP name these celestial objects common in religious symbology, of which the sun is one.;;Star(s)
Music;;Works during this man’s Serialist period include the choral work The Dove Descending Breaks the Air and Threni along with a piece commemorating the poet Dylan Thomas. Early in his career he wrote songs such as "The Fairy’s Kiss" and The Faun and the Shepherdess along with a popular concerto for orchestra known as Fireworks. His operatic works include the one-act work Rossignol and an opera about Nick Shadow with a libretto by W.H. Auden, The Rake’s Progress, but he is better known for his Psalm Symphony and ballets like Petruschka. FTP, name this Russian composer of The Rite of Spring and The Firebird.;;(Igor) Stravinsky
World History;;Xenophon mentions it in his Anabasis, stating that its government was run by village herdsmen who paid tribute in horses. Following the Battle of Magnesia, Zariades established himself as king of Sophene, thus helping to found this kingdom together with Artaxias. Tacitus referred to the people of this place as "ambiguous," and it caused strife between Rome and Parthia until the treaty of Rhandeia. Tiridates III converted this kingdom to Christianity, and following Manzikert Alp Arslan conquered most of this land. Most famously ruled in ancient times by Tigranes the Great, FTP, name this kingdom, of which only a small portion is now contained by the Transcaucasian nation with its capital at Yerevan.;;Armenia(n) (Hayastan)|Hayastani Hanrapetut'yun
Miscellaneous;;He claims to keep pretzels in his shotgun and has twice worked as a babysitter, once failing so badly that he was replaced by a robot, and later overseeing Vanessa, Dewey, and Boxy Brown. He has variously attributed his income to "working his ass off twenty hours a week" and "working out of the home". His car, which was once crushed by the Rabbot, has "2 Wycked" painted on it, and he later acquires a belt that gives the wearer all the powers of Foreigner. A devotee of gold chains, green flip-flops, and blue sweatpants, he often has to evict his neighbors from his above-ground pool. FTP, name this Dave Willis-voiced neighbor of Master Shake, Frylock, and Meatwad on Aqua Teen Hunger Force.;;Carl (Brutananadilewski)
Chemistry;;This material has the lowest coefficient of friction of any known solid material, and is thus used industrially in gears and bearings to increase efficiency. Also an excellent electrical insulator, it was known as K146 during its use on the Manhattan Project. Accidentally discovered by Roy Plunkett in 1938, this material actually emits fumes upon heating, which probably makes it bad for its best-known use. FTP, name this polymer alternatively known as PTFE, known for containing relatively unreactive carbon-fluorine bonds, which make it effective as a non-stick coating for cookware.;;Teflon;;P(oly)T(etra)F(luoro)E(thylene)
United States History;;Andrew Jackson dispatched him to South Carolina during the nullification crisis in case open hostilities broke out. He was captured during the Battle of Queenston Heights and later led the Americna forces at Lundy’s Lane, but he became embroiled in a discipline controversy after winning at Molino del Rey, Churubusco, Cerro Gordo, and Chapultepec. He later became the first lieutenant general since Washington and joined Henry Clay as the only major-party nominees born in Virginia to lose a Presidential race. FTP, name this officer called "Old Fuss and Feathers" who was defeated by Franklin Pierce in the 1852 election.;;(Winfield) Scott
Geography;;Tourist attractions in this city include the Waring Street banks, rose bushes in Dixon Park, the Crown Liquor Saloon, and the Linen Hall Library. It is built around the twelfth-century castle of John de Courci and was revived in the early seventeenth century by Arthur Chichester. One translation of its name is "crossing of the river," referring to its position on the Lagan. It is serviced by the Aldergrove airport, while riskier transportation here included the Harland and Wolff shipyards, builders of the Titanic. Its suburb of Stormont is home to the provincial legislature, and it also hosts the University of Ulster. FTP, name this capital of Northern Ireland.;;Belfast|Beal Feirste
Literature;;One character in this play claims that he was prevented from entering the military due to "eye disease" and is thus forced to walk around a lake while his companion takes the ferry. That character’s name refers to his blond hair and indicates his foreign ancestry, while the title figures make themselves known by chanting "Brekekekex ko-ax ko-ax". In order to imitate Heracles, the protagonist dresses in a lion’s skin and carries a club and joins the Eleusianian initiates to view a contest in which verses are weighed on a scale. Eventually, Dionysus and Xanthias select Aeschylus to come back to the word of the living, dismissing Euripides (yurr IPP eh deez). FTP, name this play by Aristophanes (err est OFF uh neez), featuring a chorus of marsh-dwelling amphibians.;;(The) Frogs|Batrachoi
Religion/Mytholgy;;The group responsible for the chief example of these was founded by the Teacher of Righteousness and called itself The Union. They include The Rule of the Community, The War of the Sons of Light Against the Sons of Darkness, and The Song of the Sage, while the "Copper" volume indicates the hiding-places of certain relics. First publicized by Athanasius Samuel, they are responsible for moving the accepted date of standardization of the Old Testament to around 70 CE. The oldest were found at the site of a massacre of Samarians under Alexander, and the first were found at the Qumran caves. FTP, name this collection of nearly two thousand fragmentary documents written by Essene Jews hiding from the Romans.;;(the) Dead Sea Scrolls
World History;;Her daughter of the same name was married to Manuel the Fortunate of Portugal on the condition that Manuel expel Jews from his kingdom. She had earlier ended Portugal’s involvement in her succession with the Treaty of Alcacovas, made necessary when her niece Joan la Beltraneja fought a civil war after Henry IV revoked the Accord of Toros de Guisando. The mother of Juana the Mad, she oversaw the completion of the Reconquista by the taking of Granada and collaborated with her confessor Torquemada to established the Inquisition. FTP, name this queen whose marriage to Ferdinand of Aragon created a unified Spain and led to the patronage of Columbus.;;Isabel(la) (I|the First|of Castile);;Isabel(la) (the Catholic|la Catolica){1}?
Biology;;Optical purity is maintained as a result of this kind of reaction, which also results in an inversion of configuration arising from trigonal bipyramid transition state, which indicates its concerted mechanism. Its rate is greatly accelerated through the use of polar and aprotic solvents, and this reaction requires the presence of a good leaving group. Nearly impossible to perform with a trisubstituted compound due to steric factors, its mechanism is often an attack by a negatively-charged species on the backside of a carbon attached to a halide. FTP, give the alphanumeric designation for this type of organic reaction, known as a bimolecular nucleophilic substitution.;;Sn2;;(bimolecular) nucleophilic substitution|SN
Music;;Performer Vladimir von Pachmann devoted his entire career to playing this man’s pieces, while John Field was one inspiration for his works and Cornel Wilde was nominated for an Oscar after portraying him in A Song to Remember. After studying music theory under Joseph Elsner, his notable works included the Berceuse, the Ballade in G Minor and the Fantaisie-Impromptu. His Barcarolle and Ballade in A-flat Major were written at Nohant after leaving Majorca. FTP, name this composer of 21 nocturnes, 55 mazurkas, and 6 polonaises, a prolific French-dwelling piano composer from Poland.;;(Frederic) Chopin|(Fryderyk) (Franciszek) Szopen
Literature;;Sheridan La Fanu wrote about the ghost of one which pursues Reverend Jennings in "The Green Tea". Leading Filipino writer Nick Joaquin wrote about four of them who went to Eden. Octavio Paz wrote about one who is a grammarian, a white one appears in the title of one of Galsworthy’s Forsyte Saga volumes, and a mountain named for another is dreamt of in the title of a Derek Walcott play. Their king, Sun Wukong, is a leading character in Journey to the West, and an army of them is led by Hanuman in the Ramayana. FTP, name this type of animal whose "house" you are welcomed to in a Kurt Vonnegut collection, and whose paw, according to W.W. Jacobs, brings three perilous wishes.;;monkey(s)
United States History;;The prohibition on hearsay testimony was ruled to arise out of this amendment in Hickory v. U.S and Bridges v. Wixon. The cases of Pointer v. Texas, Beavers v. Henkel, and Klopfer v. North Carolina respectively addressed its guarantees of confronting witnesses, being tried in the district where the crime was committed, and receiving a "speedy and public" trial, while perhaps the most adjudicated provision of this amendment was addressed in Powell v. Alabama, Betts v. Brady, and Gideon v. Wainwright. FTP, name this amendment which guarantees the assistance of counsel in all criminal prosecutions.;;(Sixth|6th){1}? (Amendment)
Geography;;From 260 to 273, this province was the namesake of an independent empire centered on Trier. Narbo Martius was founded here, while its native religious center of Lugdunum became the capital. It was the home of the Insubres and the Cenomani, who allied with Carthage, while the help of Aedui helped conquer the Allobroges and the Arverni here. After the Suevi and Helvetii settled here and Vercingetorix launched a revolt, a series of wars in the 50s BCE under the command of Julius Caesar brought the whole region under Roman control. FTP, name this ancient land, divided into Cisalpine and Transalpine portions, which corresponds to present-day France.;;Gaul|Gallia
Physics;;In molecular spectra, an analogue of this phenomenon causes a mixing between the rotational and vibrational levels of a molecule, and in electrodynamics, an analogous quantity appears as a compensatory factor known as the Christoffel voltage. Its interaction with pressure gradients is the cause of geostrophic motion, and an object moving only under its influence will describe an "inertial circle". The reason why cyclones can’t form at the equator, it directs the direction of rotation of hurricanes. For ten points, identify this force seen in a non-inertial reference frame which is proportional to the cross product of the angular frequency and the velocity.;;Coriolis (force|effect)
Literature;;Mark van Doren dubs him a "commonplace cad" and blames his stubbornness for audience coldness towards the play in which he appears. Before undertaking a journey to France, his mother advises him to "Love all, trust a few, do wrong to none". He considers marrying the daughter of his compatriot Lafeu after his admirer takes advantage of his tryst with Diana to fulfill his challenge of bearing a child and retrieving his ring without his knowledge. The Count of Rousillon, he struggles to choose between the treachery of his sidekick Parolles and the nobility of his eventual wife, Helena. FTP, name this leading male role in Shakespeare’s All’s Well That Ends Well.;;Bertram
Religion/Mythology;;The Mongolian deity Aigiarm bet this against horses in wrestling contests and won ten thousand horses without ever losing. During peacetime, Math ap Mathonwy was required to put his feet in the lap of someone who possessed it. Islam’s Houris can reclaim it at any time, while Hera bathes in Canathus to acquire it and Sita and Shakti are sometimes given this property under the title of "Kumari". Hypermnestra was the only Danaid to retain this, as a result of which she declined to kill Lynceus, and Rhea Silvia was a member of a Roman devotional order required to keep this and known as "Vestal". FTP, the Pleiades, Hestia, Artemis, and Athena zealously guarded their possession of what quality, also the source of an honorific given to St. Mary?;;virginity|maidenhood
Art;;One of them simply depicts a plain coastal landscape on which two men are fighting with sticks. Ethereal figures sit behind several real women and a laurel-wreathed horned animal standing on its hind legs in The Witches’ Sabbath, and other subjects include a drowning dog, old people eating, and Judith and Holofernes. Created in the "Quinta del sordo" or "Country-house of the Deaf-Man," this series that also depicts Saturn Devouring His Children reflects similar themes to the earlier Caprichios and Disasters of War. FTP, name this series of somber Goya paintings named for a traditionally depressing color.;;Black (Paintings)
Biology;;It is generally divided into three phases, the last two of which are reduction and regeneration. The reduction of thioredoxin to a dithiol by ferredoxin activates several important enzymes that catalyze it, including seduheptulose bisphosphatase, which along with an aldolase results in the conversion of erythrose-6-phosphate. Xylulose-5-phosphate is eventually epimerized to ribulose-5-phosphate within this set of reactions, which also uses NADPH and ATP to produce PGAL. Also preventing photorespiration through use of Rubisco, FTP, name this cycle of reactions that takes place in the stroma of the chloroplast and is part of the so-called "dark reactions".;;Calvin-(Benson) (cycle)|Benson-(Calvin) (cycle);;dark reactions
Miscellaneous;;On suspicion of consorting with Satan, he was attacked by Major Ridge’s Lighthorse Patrol, who cut off his fingertips. He continued working on his controversial invention, demonstrated it in a debate about border placement in Chatooga, and later using it in collaboration with Elias Boudinot to create the Tsalagi Tsu lehisanunh (pronounced phonetically). He got the idea from Charles Hicks and worked with his daughter Ayoka to develop the "Talking Leaves". FTP, name this originator of the syllabic alphabet for Cherokee, which became the first system of writing in a North American Indian language.;;Sequoya(h)|Sikwayi|(George) (Gist|Guess){1}?
Literature;;One of them is a Carthusian priest who gets in trouble for dispensing communion by standing backwards and tossing the wafer over his shoulder. Another is the father of Ramona who died in a stove explosion, and a letter home from summer camp by one of them at age seven was published as "Hapworth 16, 1924". All of them earned their college funds by appearing on the radio program It’s a Wise Child, including one believed to be the unnamed narrator of "The Laughing Man," and another who makes Muriel a widow by shooting himself in "A Perfect Day for Bananafish". FTP, name this group, the subjects of the bulk of Nine Stories as well as all of Raise High The Roof Beam, Carpenters and Franny and Zoey, a recurring family in the works of J.D. Salinger.;;Glass (siblings|family)
Miscellaneous;;Objects crucial to its plot include a crate of oil lamps used to defeat the turncoat Sergeant Barnes; Nancy’s camera, whose flash interrupts a romantic pairing at a club owned by Skillet; and a staircase which the protagonist climbs to kill himself. The coroner Sam contacts Lieutenant Peters after finding a pattern of irregularities while examining taxi driver Juanita Jones and antiques dealer Bobby McCoy, two victims of the title character, who fell in love after noting the resemblance of Tina and Luva. That character was once known as Mamuwalde and encountered disaster while seeking support for an anti-slavery campaign in Romania. FTP, name this film starring William Marshall as a vampire, a highlight of the blaxploitation genre.;;Blacula
Philosophy;;A doctor named Eustochius published an edition of this man’s works, and his first major pupil was a man named Amelius, who was later supplanted by the man who wrote the first biography of this thinker. He was supported by a rich widow named Gemina, through whom he met such notables as a senator named Sabinillus, the man who probably introduced him to the emperor Gallienus. His work includes discussions of "the impassivity of the unembodied" and "intellectual beauty," which are among the "tractates" collected in a book compiled by his disciple Porphyry. FTP, name this philosopher from the 3rd century AD, a mystic best-known for his Enneads.;;Plotinus
Earth Science;;Roll-front uranium deposits can form in these structures when their contents meet reducing zones. In cases where the phreatic surface coincides with their upper boundary, they are termed unconfined, while the confined type lie entirely below the vadose or unsaturated zone. Flow in these structures is generally described by the porosity of the material, and by Darcy’s law, which involves the hydraulic gradient. Candidates are generally layers of unconsolidated material or permeable rock lying at or below the water table. Artesian wells are drilled down into, FTP what water-bearing rock layers?;;aquifer(s)
World History;;This present-day country was the site of the Battle of the Three Kings, securing its independence for centuries, and later, its independence was controversially supported by Kaiser Wilhelm II, leading to a settlement of its status at the Algeciras conference. Five years later, the "Panther’s Leap" incident off its shores resulted in the internationalization of Tangier. In 1936, it was where Francisco Franco pronounced his war on the Spanish Republic, and the consequences of Spain’s departure from here included the Green March against the Polisario Front. FTP, name this country presently ruled by Mohammed VI which is engaged in an independence dispute with Western Sahara.;;(Kingdom of) Morocco|(Al) (Mamlakah al) Maghrib(iyah)
United States History;;Decrying the "era of official evasion and posturing," its preamble declares that its intent is to "restore the bonds of trust between the people and their elected representatives". It pledges to accomplish eight items within a single day, including beginning an audit, banning proxy voting, and opening committee meetings to the public. The next 100 days were to include the Family Reinforcement Act, Taking Back Our Streets Act, and Citizen Legislature Act, creating term limits. Introduced six weeks before the 1994 midterm elections, it is credited with changing control of the House of Representatives. FTP, name this list of Republican legislative priorities devised by Newt Gingrich.;;(Republican) Contract With America
Computer Science;;They typically reach conclusions by the method of confidences, and they can either reason from data to goals or from goals to data, processes known as backward and forward chaining. The first one, known as Dendral, was built in 1965 at Stanford in order to analyze chemical compounds, and the things they know are typically represented as "if-then" production rules. Gavin Riley developed one for NASA called CLIPS, which also includes an object-oriented language called COOL for writing more of them. Frequently incorporating heuristics and comprising a knowledge base and an inference engine. for ten points, identify these artificial intelligence programs which make decisions based on the analysis of information and take their name from their similarity to human specialists.;;expert systems
Physics;;It can generated in periodic materials via the Smith-Purcell effect. This phenomenon is exploited in the Sudbury and Super-Kamiokande detectors, where it is generated by interactions with passing neutrinos. The cosine of its opening angle is given by one over the refractive index times the beta factor. It produces an intensity proportional to frequency, explaining its characteristic blue color seen in water, which is often used as the medium for this effect. For ten points, identify this electromagnetic analogue of the sonic boom which results when a particle passes through a medium faster than the local speed of light.;;Cherenkov (radiation)
United States History;;One person by this surname wrote a history of American scientific knowledge called An Introductory Discourse and was the mayor of New York City who removed restrictions on voting by Catholics and proposed the Erie Canal. Another was a colonial governor of Newfoundland, whose son was Commander-in-Chief of the British forces during the Revolutionary War. Another person of this last name was the first governor of the independent State of New York and served as Vice-President under both Jefferson and Madison. A family by this name today includes pardoned half-brother Roger and daughter Chelsea. FTP, identify this name borne by the most recent Democratic president.;;Clinton
Religion/Mythology;;When the king ordered Arioch to execute him, he ate vegetables and water for ten days to convince his supervisor Ashpenaz to allow him to forego eating royal food. He had several notable dreams, including one of four beasts coming up from the sea and a vision of a ram and goat. Taken from Judah in the deportation to Babylon in the third year of Jehoiakim's reign, he was renamed Belteshazzar and he assisted King Belshazzar by reading and interpreting the words Mene, Mene, Tekel, Parsin. Author of an Old Testament book found between Ezekiel and Hosea, FTP, name this biblical character who wrote about the fiery furnace and survived the lions' den.;;Daniel
Literature;;One character in this book breaks his window after seeing a woman in the nude. That character, Reverend Curtis Hartman, is so impressed by this vision of naked flesh that he concludes that Kate Swift is the instrument of his salvation. Another character, the farm girl Louise Trunnion, doesn't mind having sex with the main character, who also has an intimate moment with Helen White. Louise Bentley marries John Hardy after he knocks her up, while the central character of the book is a reporter whose father owned the town's hotel. FTP, name this 1919 book which centers on George Willard, a book by Sherwood Anderson.;;Winesburg(,) Ohio
Chemistry;;The Keyes equation modifies this cubic equation for the effects of surrounding molecules, while the Dieterici equation modifies it for density variations due to higher potential energies near boundaries. The Berthelot equation corrects its "attractive force" term by making it temperature dependent. Inaccurate especially around the first-order phase transition, its "a" term corrects for intermolecular forces and its "b" term corrects for the real volume of gas molecules. FTP, name this equation of state, the first correction to the ideal gas law which is named for a Dutch scientist also known for some namesake intermolecular forces.;;van der Waals (equation) (of state)
World History;;He married Elizabeth of Valois as a consequence of the Peace of Cateau-CambrÃ©sis. Later, he sent his half brother Don John of Austria to win the Battle of Lepanto after losing the succession of the Holy Roman Empire to Ferdinand I. Though he had a son with Princess Maria who became Don Carlos of Spain, his most ambitious marriage was childless, and announcement of it sparked Thomas Wyatt's rebellion in his wife's country. FTP, name this son of Charles I of Spain, whose marriage to Mary Tudor proved as fruitless to his ambitions on England as his later effort, the Spanish Armada.;;Philip (II|2nd|the Second){1}?;;Philip
Religion/Mythology;;According to Hesiod's Catalogues of Women, she had a granddaughter of the same name who became the the mother, by Zeus, of Graecus and Latinus. Her husband was warned against marrying her by his brother, who tricked Zeus into accepting bones and fat as his share of sacrifices. Her daughter took refuge on Mount Parnassus after floating for nine days in a chest or ark. This mother of Pyrrha was given a dowry and the gift of persuasion by Hermes before marrying Epimetheus. FTP, name this first mortal woman, fashioned from clay by Hephaestus, who unleashed a host of evils into the world by opening her box.;;Pandora
Music;;His Petite Messe Solennelle for twelve voices was written shortly before his death and other works of his include The Sins of Old Age, a collection of thirteen volumes of vocal and instrumental music. Known primarily for opera, he achieved wide acclaim for an opera based on a Voltaire work, Tancredi. Because of public demand, he wrote an alternative "happy ending" for his Otello and his writing style gained him the nickname "Monsieur Crescendo". Other successes included Elisabetta and The Italian Girl in Algiers. A later visit to Vienna ended with a benefit where he joined the crowd in singing his "Largo al factotum" from his most famous opera. FTP, identify this opera composer who stopped writing opera at the age of 37 after completing William Tell and who is best known for The Barber of Seville.;;(Gioacchino) Rossini
Literature;;He gained the king's favor with a satirical attack on the Jesuits entitled Ignatius His Conclave. He fell out of favor with his first patron, Sir Thomas Egerton, after marrying a young girl who was Egerton's ward, Ann Moore. The death of the daughter of another of his patrons, Robert Drury, led to the writing of "The Progress of the Soul" and "The First Anniversary,".? though he is better known for early poems such as "The Bait" and "The Good Morrow," which appear in his volume Songs and Sonnets. FTP, name this poet of "The Canonization" whose Holy Sonnets include the injunction "Death be not proud".?;;(John) Donne
Astronomy;;An important technique for probing the free electron density of the interstellar medium makes use of the dispersion measure associated with observations of these objects. A binary system containing one of these objects was discovered by Taylor and Hulse, who shared a Nobel for the discovery. The lighthouse model is sometimes used to illustrate the effects of the misalignment of their rotational and magnetic axes, including the generation of beamed synchrotron radiation which appears to blink at a very steady frequency. The central object of the Crab Nebula and LGM-1, discovered by Jocelyn Bell, are examples of, FTP, these magnetized, rapidly rotating neutron stars.;;pulsar(s)
World History;;As it declined, it suffered invasions by the Takrur people and the opening of its Bure mineral fields in the south. Founded by a Mande-speaking king, its power was broken by a struggle with Abdullah ibn Yasin and the Almoravids, leading to its ultimate defeat by the Susu and the capture of its capital by Abu Bakr in 1076. It is mentioned in The Book of Routes and Kingdoms by the eleventh-century geographer Abu Ubayd al-Bakri, who noted its rulers' hospitality to Saharan traders. Also called "Wagadou," this empire, which grew rich on the gold trade, was named for the title given to its hereditary kings. Its last capital, Kumbi Saleh, was destroyed by Sundiata in 1240. FTP, name this West African empire which gives its name to the modern African country formerly called the Gold Coast.;;Ghana (Empire)
Psychology;;He left the seminary after going to Beijing for the World Student Christian Federation Conference. He was the director of the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children and combined that experience with his academic work to write The Clinical Treatment of the Problem Child. He described "An Unusual Science Course in a University" in his book Freedom to Learn for the 80's, and he later discussed "organismic valuing" in Psychotherapy and Personality Change and On Becoming a Person. FTP, name this describer of "conditional positive self-regard" who seeked to create a "fully functioning" person through "nondirected" and "client-centered" therapy.;;(Carl) (Ransom) Rogers
United States History;;The Supreme Court declined to hear the case of Boehner v. Anderson, questioning the validity of the process by which this law was adopted, and leaving open the question of whether such questioning is even actionable by a court. The loophole allowing Congress to bypass it was upheld in Schaffer v. O'Neill. Proposed alongside the Congressional Apportionment Amendment by James Madison in 1789, it failed to pass, was ratified by Ohio in 1873, and was revived by University of Texas student Gregory Watson, who saw it pass in 1996. FTP name this most recent constitutional amendment, preventing Congress from raising its own pay within a single election cycle.;;(Twenty-Seventh|27th){1}? (Amendment)
Biology;;Disorders associated with their performance include Bernard-Soulier syndrome and Scott's syndrome. They contain RNA, a canalicular system, and alpha granules containing vitronectin and von Willebrand factor. Their inhibitors include prostacyclin and nitric oxide, while their activators include human neutrophil elastase, convulxin, and thromboxane A2. Produced in the bone marrow, they carry serotonin and L-tryptophan and originate in cells called megakaryocytes. Individuals with ITP have a shortage of them, and the function of activating fibrin from its zymogen form inside them is performed by thrombin, which gives these cells their alternate name. FTP, name these cells also called thrombocytes, a crucial component of blood clotting.;;platelet(s)
Literature;;One character keeps her mother Nivea's decapitated head in a hatbox and later predicts the earthquake that destroys Tres Marias. Another character befriends Transito Soto at the Red Lantern brothel and has twin boys, Jaime and Nicolas. After becoming pregnant, Blanca is forced to marry Jean de Satigny, but she returns to her lover Pedro Tecero after the birth of her daughter Alba. Alba is later arrested and tortured by Esteban Garcia, but the ghost of her grandmother Clara helps her endure the torture. Telling the story of Esteban and his clairvoyant wife Clara, FTP, name this novel about the Trueba family by Isabel Allende.;;(The) House of the Spirits|(La) Casa de los espiritus
Art;;This movement was promoted through the magazine Ver Sacrum, and was advocated in Belgium by Les Vingt, including Ensor and Horta, but it did not survive World War I. Known as Stile Liberty in Italy and as Floreale in Spain, this movement took its name from an interior design gallery in Paris. A reaction against the historical art of the mid-19th century, this richly ornamented and asymmetrical style often included plant tendrils and other erotic nature. Seen in the architecture of Rennie Mackintosh, the glassware of Lalique, and the works of Klimt, FTP, identify this art movement embraced by designers like Tiffany whose name literally translates as "new art".;;Art Nouveau
Physics;;When dispersion takes place in a traveling wave, this quantity must satisfy the Kronig-Kramers relations. The imaginary part of this quantity yields the radio absorption coefficient, and this quantity can also be calculated from the Clausius-Mossotti equation. For a plasma, it is given by one minus the plasma frequency over the wave frequency, and for continuous macroscopic bodies this quantity is given by one plus the electric succeptibility. Its real part gives the Fresnel reflection coefficients, and it relates the displacement field to the electric field. Also called the relative permeability, for ten points, identify this constant whose namesake materials are often inserted between the plates of capacitors.;;dielectric constant
World History;;Twenty-four of them were killed in the Newport Rising by troops garrisoned at the Westgate Hotel while another, Samuel Holberry, was imprisoned after discovery of the Sheffield Plot. Generally advocating "moral force," their original demands were presented by Thomas Attwood. The Northampton Debate demonstrated enmity between their leader Feargus O'Connor and the Anti-Corn Law League's Richard Cobden, and they were associated with the London Working Men's Association. Advocating equal electoral districts, the payment of members of Parliament, and universal manhood suffrage was, FTP, what British reform movement of the 1800s named for the types of petitions they presented to Parliament?;;Chartist(s)
Literature;;Its second volume includes "Chippings with a Chisel" and "The Lily's Quest" before ending with "The Threefold Destiny". That volume opens with such stories as "Old Esther Dudley" and "Howe's Masquerade," two of the "Legends of the Province House," and also includes a story about a family which is wiped out by an avalanche, "The Ambitious Guest". Better known is the first volume, which features a story which Borges thought was the finest ever written, "Wakefield," as well as "The May-Pole of Mary Mount" and "Mr. Higginbotham's Catastrophe". Also including "Dr. Heidegger's Experiment" and "The Minister's Black Veil,". FTP, name this collection of short stories by Nathaniel Hawthorne, whose title implies that each story had previously been published in a periodical.;;Twice-Told Tales
Philosophy;;He analyzed an essay asking if "Technological Civilization" is a "Civilization in Decline" which was written by Jan Patocka in "Secrets of European Responsibility," the first essay in his book The Gift of Death. He wrote about the phrase "I have forgotten my umbrella" as well as such topics as "the gaze of Oedipus" and "veils" in a book entitled Spurs which considers "Nietzsche's styles". He got into a fractious debate with John Searle after publishing his peculiar take on J. L. Austin in the essay "Signature Event Context," which appeared in Margins of Philosophy. More famously, a chapter on "The End of the Book and the Beginning of Writing" appears at the start of a book he wrote in 1967, Of Grammatology. FTP, name this French author of The Postcard, a recently-deceased philosopher who is considered the founder of deconstruction.;;(Jacques) Derrida
Geography;;Bordered on the southeast by the Manzano Mountains and on the south by the Isleta Pueblo, this city is home to the Petroglyph National Monument and the Elena Gallegos Open Space. The La Luz Trail in the Cibola National Forest extends from the northeast of this city to the top of the Sandia Peak, which is also reachable via the world's longest tramway. Known as the Duke City because it was named for a Spanish viceroy, this city has an annual balloon fiesta and is the home of Kirtland Air Force Base. FTP, identify this western city on the Rio Grande River, the home to Sandia and Los Alamos laboratories and the most populated city in New Mexico.;;Albuquerque
Miscellaneous;;When Lisa Simpson asked Marge whether it would be better to "attack the roots of social problems instead of jamming people into overcrowded prisons," Marge responded by operating a puppet of this figure saying his catchphrase. Named by New Orleans police officer John Isbell, he appeared on Webster in 1986 to denounce school bullying, and he has now branched out into discussing bike safety, cultural diversity, and identity theft. He always wears jeans and a gray trench coat and has recently been assisted by his nephew Scruff. FTP, name this mascot who encourages you to "take a bite out of crime".?;;McGruff (the Crime Dog)
Literature;;Moliere based part of his The Cheats of Scapin on this man's The Pedant Imitated. While studying under the mathematician Gassendi, he began to write fantastical stories of trips to the moon, and that extraterrestrial theme was continued in his Other Worlds, a satire based on Lucian's A True Story. In Other Worlds, he is escorted on the Moon by the Demon of Socrates. His poetic works included a harsh poem on Mazarin, but he is better know nas a fictional character who helps his rival Christian win the beautiful Roxanne. FTP, name this French playwright, satirist, and poet who is the title character of an Edmond Rostand play.;;Cyrano (de Bergerac)
Music;;The opening theme of Brahms' 3rd symphony derives from this work's opening theme, which itself was adapted from the beginning of Beethoven's Seventh. Its second movement is a scherzo containing a gentle Landler whose chief theme is announced by bassoons and cellos. The work's title refers to an area around Dusseldorf where the composer worked as a conductor and the fourth movement, which adds three trombones, was inspired by a trip to see the Archbishop of Geissel's installation at Cologne Cathedral. Containing five movements as opposed to the usual four and composed almost ten years after the Spring Symphony, FTP, identify this E-flat symphony, Schumann's third symphony whose title refers to the Rhine river.;;Rhenish (Symphony)
World History;;During this period, a councilor named Wang An-shih promulgated fiscal reforms that benefitted the poor. It was constantly beset by the Jurchen, and was forced to re-establish itself in the south at Hangchow after the Jurchen took their capital of Kaifeng. This period saw a literary resurgence, as such novels as All Men Are Brothers were written, as well as a revival of Confucian philosophy through thinkers such as Chu Hsi. Its first ruler, Chao K'uang-yin, established it in the 960s. FTP, name this Chinese dynasty which succeeded the Tang and which was finally ended in 1279 when the Mongols conquered China and set up the Yuan dynasty.;;(the) Song (dynasty)
Chemistry;;The Beckmann differential thermometer is based on this principle, whose namesake was memorialized in a speech by van't Hoff in 1902. A mixture of ethanol and water will positively deviate from it, while a mixture of trichloromethane and ethoxyethane will result in a negative deviation. It serves as one of the theoretical bases for fractional distillation, and solutions that obey it are said to be ideal. FTP, name this law which can be stated as P equals X times P-sub-zero, indicating that the vapor pressure of a solution is lowered by the addition of solutes to a solvent.;;Raoult(') (s) (Law)
Economics-;;A 1947 study by George Stigler analyzed this type of situation and called into question the curve primarily associated with this entity. That hypothesis was introduced in 1939 by Paul Sweezy in a paper about demand under this condition, which suggests that any participant in one of these envisions two different demand schedules for its output. Edward Chamberlin proposed a model to understand these situations, which was a revision of the solution outlined by the French economost Antoine Cournot. FTP, name this market situation in economics in which there are a few non-collusive, independent sellers.;;oligopoly
Literature;;The main female character of this novel is sleeping with Bump Bailey until he sets up a practical joke whereby she ends up in bed with this novelÂ?fs protagonist. Later, that female character dates a bookie named Gus Sands, but after the protagonist gets a Mercedes she agrees to go out with him, though she causes an accident when she insists on driving without the lights on. At the end of the novel, Memo Paris tries to shoot the protagonist after visiting him with Judge Goodwill Banner, who owns the Knights. FTP, name this 1952 novel which features Roy Hobbs, a star baseball player, and which was written by Bernard Malamud.;;(The) Natural
Art;;He loved to work with wood, as seen in woodcuts like Be in Love and You Will Be Happy and a wooden sculpture of the Birth of Venus, while his Still Life with Ham represents his flirtation with Divisionism. During his time in Le Pouldo he worked with the Dutch painter Jacob Meyer de Haan, after which he went to Paris, where he produced controversial canvases such as The Loss of Virginity. It was earlier, though, while staying with Emile Bernard at Pont-Aven, that he produced one of his better known works, a painting of a contest between god and man set in front of a blood red background, and The Yellow Christ while at Arles with Vincent van Gogh. FTP name this painter of Vision After the Sermon: Jacob Wrestling the Angel, who later in life went to Tahiti.;;(Paul) Gauguin
Biology;;It binds close to M2 alpha helices with aspartate residues that repel negative charges, at alpha-gamma and alpha-delta junctions of an alpha-2-beta-gamma-delta pentamer. Botulin acts by blocking its release, while atropine does so by blocking its receptors, and the disease known as myasthenia gravis occurs when the body produces antibodies against its receptors. The first neurotransmitter to be identified, it is also the only one broken down by its namesake esterase. FTP, name this compound that binds to both nicotinic and muscarinic receptors, crucial for acting in neuromuscular junctions to generate muscle contractions.;;acetylcholine
United States History;;Here, Samuel Tillman read about tender mercies and Ansel Bascom spoke about the property bill. Initiated at Richard Hunt's tea-table at Waterloo, it took place in a Wesleyan church, and led to unanimous passage of all but the 9th resolution, which narrowly passed thanks in part to Frederick Douglass's insistence. Organized by Mary Ann McClintock as well as two leaders excluded from the World Anti-Slavery Convention in London in 1840, it met to pass a document substituting "all men" for "King George," titled the Declaration of Sentiments. FTP, Lucretia Coffin Mott and Elizabeth Cady Stanton launched what women's rights convention that took place in New York?;;Seneca Falls (convention)
Philosophy;;The sequel to this book points out the similarity of its author's views to those of Carveth Read and Francis Howe Johnson in its preface, and includes essays on "the existence of Julius Caesar" and "the tigers in India". That sequel concludes with a "dialogue" which discusses such questions as whether there is a truth even in cases in which it shall never be known. That book, The Meaning of Truth, appeared in 1909, two years after this book appeared. This book includes a contrast between "tender" and "tough" types of religion in its last chapter, and features chapters on "the one and the many" and on "the present dilemma in philosophy". FTP, name this work which argues that the true is the "good in the way of belief," a work subtitled "a new name for some old ways of thinking" which shares its name with an American philosophical school and was written by William James.;;Pragmatism
Literature;;Stage directions in one of this man's dramas instruct the title character, an aging monarch, to stand up and fall over repeatedly "in the manner of a tragic Punch and Judy show". The title character of that play, Exit the King, is Berenger, which is also the name of the protagonist of this man's play set in the Radiant City, The Killer. Most of this man's plays have barebones sets and few characters, such as one set in a circular room in a circular tower that houses the plays three characters, the Old Man, the Old Woman, and the Orator,and another whose sole characters are the professor, the pupil, and the maid. The Chairs and The Lesson are less known, however, than two other plays, one whose title character "always wears her hair in the same style" and another most of whose characters transform into the title kind of creature. FTP name this absurdist playwright of The Bald Soprano and The Rhinoceros.;;(Eugene) Ionesco
Physics;;Instead of employing the Debye-Hull-Scherrer powder method, its namesakes relied on an array of atomic planes. Its namesakes built a vacuum apparatus and employed a hot filament, an accelerating electrode, and an arc-mounted Faraday box. A leak in the vacuum led its namesakes to heat the target, resulting in crystallized nickel, which gave startling results. A plot of collector current against beam energy was explained by constructive interference, and the results in general could be derived by combining Bragg's equation with the de Broglie wavelength for electrons. FTP name this experiment named for two physicists, which proved that electrons diffract.;;Davisson-Germer (experiment)
Music;;Kurt Schwertsik wrote a "Shrunken" one of these that is under six minutes long for the Eve of the New Millenium concert in Salzburg. Both Alan Hovhaness' 49th one and Krysztof Penderecki's second one are known as "Christmas," and Olivier Messaien only wrote one, called Turangalia. Stravinsky wrote a notable one in C, while Shostakovich's second one, "To October," is in one long movement. "Song of the Night" is the appellation of the seventh of Mahler's, and Tchaikovsky wrote ones named "Manfred," "Winter Dreams" and "Pathetique". FTP name this genre of composition, notable examples of which are Mozart's "Jupiter" one and the fifth one of Beethoven.;;(the) Symphony
World History;;The position for this battle was chosen for proximity to Carystus and Eretria, and one side hoped that Rhamnus to the north would serve as a rallying point for Hippias. The losers sailed around Cape Sounion afterwards, after issuign a shower of arrows from troops recently arrived out of Euboea. The victors were forced to run to their targets, and their flanks were reinforced to trap the enemy in a circle. Leading to defeat of Datis and Artaphernes (ar tuh FURR neez), it saw the Athenians and Plataeans overwhelm the Persians before the cavalry could participate. FTP, name this victory for Miltiades at the plains of Attica, mythically associated with the runner Phidippides.;;(The) (Battle of) Marathon
Noncomputational Math;;Applied to Fourier analysis, this technique minimizes the norm of a function and its Fourier series approximation. Trend analysis is an application of this method, whose general model involves writing the predictions as the sum of the observations matrix times the parameters, plus an error vector. The solution is a set of parameters for a curve assuming the observation matrix is fixed, and the predictions have a Gaussian distribution. Weighted and multiple regression varieties generalize this curve-fitting technique. FTP name this technique which minimizes the magnitude of residuals about a line, a namesake type of fitting.;;least-square(s) (regression|fit(ting))
Literature;;At one point in this novel, while stranded in the north midland moors, the protagonist adopts the surname Elliot after meeting St. John Rivers and his sisters Mary and Diana. The protagonist is initially in the charge of Mrs. Reed, who sends the protagonist to Lowood School after she becomes ill and is nursed back to health by Bessie Leaven. At Lowood she is well-liked by Mrs. Temple, who helps her secure a teaching job, but instead she decides to become a governess working under Mrs. Fairfax. Her only pupil as a governess is an abandoned daughter of a French dancer, Adele Varens, who is the ward of the tenant of Thornfield. Her time at Thornfield ends when she sees a crazy woman rip her bridal veil and finds out that the woman is Bertha Mason, Mr. Rochester's wife. FTP name this book by Charlotte Bronte.;;Jane Eyre
Religion/Mythology;;He once kicked Yama to death, making everyone immortal for a time. He also beheaded his father-in-law Daksha, then gave him a goat's head. At the request of Bhagiratha, he agreed to break the fall of the goddess Ganga with his hair. His wife once saved him by strangling him after he caught the secretions of the serpent Vasuki during the churning of the oceans, turning his throat blue. Cursed by the sage Bhrigu to be worshipped in the form of the phallic lingam, FTP name this father of Ganesha and husband of Parvati, often called the destroyer.;;S(h)iva
United States History;;Elbridge Durbrow filled in for the vacationing Thomas K. Finletter to summon NATO following this event. In an address a day afterwards, the president gave the "four simple propositions" of June 2nd and noted that retaliation "is being given as I speak to you". Wayne Morse and Ernest Gruening were the only ones to vote against its namesake bill, which was justified by citing the SEATO Treaty and attacks on the Maddox, which was assisted by the C. Turner Joy. FTP, name this incident that led to a resolution authorizing Lyndon Johnson to begin air war against North Vietnam, named for the body of water in which it took place.;;(Gulf of Tonkin|Tonkin Gulf){1}? (incident)
Biology;;An overriding one is found in the tetralogy of Fallot, and coarctation of it is common in females with Turner syndrome. Patients with Marfan syndrome may develop aneurysms in its sinuses of Valsalva or suffer from incompetence of it. The left recurrent laryngeal nerve hooks around its arch, next to the ligamentum arteriosum, before it descends with the azygos vein and thoracic duct, through an opening in the diaphragm and next to the inferior vena cava. Major branches of it include the brachiocephalic artery, the celiac artery, and the right and left coronary arteries. FTP identify this major artery in the human body, into which the left ventricle of the heart pumps blood.;;aorta
Geography;;Its eastern area contains Wickham Heights, which rises in Mount Usborne, while its western area is dominated by Hornby Mountains. John Strong named it for a viscount, while Sebald Van Weert called it the Sebalds. Southeast of the Jason islands, it is divided in half by Grantham Sound, and has a lighthouse at Cape Pembroke on its East Island next to Stanley, which was held for 10 weeks by a foreign power in the early 80s. Northwest of South Sandwich Islands and northeast of Tierra del Fuego is, FTP, what this set of islands, a self-governing British dependency invaded by Argentina in 1982?;;Falkland (Islands)|(Islas) Malvinas
Biology;;They include the 4-million year old anamensis and the bahrelghazali of Chad. They had curved feet and hands and ate only fruits and vegetation with their small canines and large molars. A family of them were found by Maurice Taieb, and the robustus species may have had the skills to make stone tools. Aethiopicus were found in Lake Turkana, while boisei were originally called Zinjanthropus and nicknamed "Nutcracker Man" by Mary Leakey. FTP Donald Johanson discovered the afarensis Lucy and Raymond Dart found its descendant africanus, both species of what extinct hominid primates?;;Australopithec(ine(s)|us){1}?
Miscellaneous;;At one point in this movie, Tappy Tibbons walks into the living room with his 1-900-976-JUICE ad, while audiences on the tube yell "feed me, Sara, feed me, Sara". The anti-black warfare launched by Sal the Geep forces Tyrone and Harry to ask Marion for money, and Marion gets it by sleeping with the obnoxious Arnold. Harry pawns off Sara Goldfarb's TV set repeatedly, until his schemes catch up with him, and he gets his blood-stained arm sawed off, while his mom gets addicted to diet pills. FTP name this 2000 film starring Ellen Burstyn and Jennifer Connelly, based on a Hugh Selby novel and made by Darren Aronofsky, which explores why drugs are bad, mmmkay.;;Requiem for a Dream
Music;;In the original production of this ballet, the title character had a solo mad scene at the end of act 1, but in modern productions that scene is omitted. The title role was created by the French poet Theophile Gautier for Carolotta Grisi, although it was out of the repertoire until Daighilev brought it back in 1910. In act 1, the title character falls in love with a prince after he comes to town with his family disguised as a peasant, but he is fought by Hilarion, a hunter that loves the title character. The title character dies at the end of act 1, and in act 2 she becomes one of the Willies, who try to kill her lover Albrecht to avenge her death, but her love for him saves his life. FTP name this romantic ballet set to the music of Adolph Adam.;;Giselle
Literature;;He posits that his followers are distinguished by belief in the maxim "to thyself be enough". He receives a half-penny for tobacco at the end of the play, when he announces that his daughter has married Trond of the Valfjeld. Earlier, he orders that his "Sunday tail" with an orange bow be given to a certain suppliant and proposes cutting that man's eyes in order to change his understanding of beauty. He laments the decline in numbers of his three-headed and two-headed followers when the protagonist encounters him after dallying with his daughter, the "Woman in Green". FTP, name this ruler of the Dovre trolls who parleys with Peer Gynt while lording over his hall.;;(The) Mountain King|Dovregubben
Religion/Mythology;;Only two of them appear outside of their group scene, one being Waltraute, who performs "Hore mit Sinn" later in the story. They are derided as "ill-mannered" and "born of the bond of a dissolute love" by their father's wife, who dislikes the presence of the offspring of Erda. Another prominent one is ordered to defend the marriage of Hunding and performs "War es so schmÃ¤hlich" after being disowned near their namesake rock for intervening on behalf of Siegfried. All wear the costume featuring an eight-petalled shield boss and bird-winged helmet. FTP, Bruennhilde is one of what title figures of the second opera in Wagner's Ring cycle, who lend their name to an oft-heard "ride"?;;Valkyries
Music;;This man's A Sentry for Four Years includes a quartet inspired by the aria "I am so wonderful" from Beethoven's Fidelio. Beethoven's influence is also apparent in the first movement of his First Symphony, which quotes Beethoven's The Creatures of Prometheus. He wrote a composition mixing the cantata, oratorio and opera genres entitled Lazarus, number 689 in the Deutsch catalog. His 4th Symphony was his first to be written in a minor key, and is nicknamed "Tragic". His final symphony in C major may have been his 7th, though it is commonly numbered his 9th. FTP name this composer of Lieder such as "Gretchen am Spinnrade" and "Erlkonig" along with the "Great" and Unfinished Symphonies.;;(Franz) Schubert
Chemistry;;For simpler cases, it has an outside term expressed as the product of the transmission coefficient, Boltzmann's constant, the reciprocal of Planck's constant, and temperature, although it is often expressed with a delta-G-plus-plus. Statistical mechanics is necessary to determine the orientation of collisions that allows calculation of its frequency factor, which is usually based on its steric factor z. Taking the logarithm of both sides is also useful, as it illustrates a linear dependence between the natural log of k and the reciprocal of T. FTP, name this equation relating activation energy and thus rate constant to temperature, named for a Swedish chemist.;;Arrhenius (equation)
Social Science;;He wrote an economic history of Roman agrarian society and a tract on the dual roles of idealism and materialism in Economy and Society. His verstehen doctrine said that researchers must interpret people's actions using "ideal types" to understand social and economic phenomena, and his dabblings in positivism signaled his split from Gustav von Schmoller. He also studied the workings of bureaucracy and gave the Freiburg Address. His trademark work describes how Calvinist values, especially dedicating oneself to his duties, resulted in greater economic productivity. FTP name this author of The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism.;;(Max) Weber
Astronomy;;Types of these objects include the Reissner-Nordstrom variety and the most general type, known as the Kerr-Newman variety. Their namesake "no hair" theorem states that they can only posess mass, charge, and angular momentum. A process for extracting rotational energy from these objects by utilizing the properties of their ergospheres was outlined by Roger Penrose, who showed that each of them must contain a singularity. The Schwarzschild radius is associated with, FTP, what class of objects so massive, even light cannot escape?;;black hole(s)
Art;;The artist was comfortable with the nudity in this work, though drapery has been strategically painted in over the years. The figures get progressively larger from the bottom up to the main focus, and then smaller again at the top where angels hold a column on the right and a cross on the left. In the lower right, figures cross the River Sytx near the depiction of Hell-mouth. Famous for its portrayal of the artist's critic Pietro Aretino as St. Bartholomew and the artist himself as dangling skin, FTP name this Michelangelo work in the Sistine Chapel that shows Christ raising figures from their graves for the titular event.;;(The) Last Judgment
Philosophy;;According to one legend, he made possible the crossing of the Halys River by King Croesus when he diverted its waters. Another tradition credits him with discovering the seasons and dividing the year into 365 days, while he is also said to have discovered the source of the moon's light. His namesake geometrical theorem says that any angle inscribed in a semi-circle is always a right angle, and it was probably through travels to Egypt and Babylon that he was able to predict a solar eclipse in 585 BC. He argued that everything in the world is animated and that even stones have psyche, or the principle of self-motion. A member of the Seven Sages who is credited with founding the Ionian school, FTP, name this Milesian thinker who believed that the originating principle of the world was water.;;Thales (of Miletus)
World History;;It reconfirmed an earlier agreement that had been overturned by the Edict of Restitution. Delegates negotiating it included the Marquis de Sablé, the Count d'Avaux, Fabio Chigi, Count Johann von Sayn-Wittgenstein, and John Oxenstiern. Under it, Alsace and Metz went to France, and western Pomerania, Verden, and Wismar went to Sweden. 1624 was deemed the "standard year," and all ownership and religious affiliation was to be returned to the state of that time. The Netherlands and the Swiss Confederation were officially recognized by, FTP, what agreement between Holy Roman Emperor Ferdinand III and most European powers, that ended the Thirty Years War in 1648?;;Peace of Westphalia
Physics;;The Ranque-Hilsch vortex tube operates on a principle similar to it to produce hot air from one end and cold from the other without moving parts. Smoluchowski argued against this concept on the basis of thermal fluctuations, and in a 1929 paper, Leo Szilard presented three different models of it and showed that none of them could work. It was definitively refutated in a 1951 article by Leon Brillouin, who showed that the titular entity would generate an entropy related to the process of memory storage. Supposedly able to sort molecules by speeds and thus violate the second law of thermodynamics, for ten points, identify this "demon" postulated by the formulator of the 4 equations of electromagnetism.;;Maxwell(') (s) (demon)
Literature;;He explained his religious views in the essay "Faith in Search of Understanding," which appeared in his aptly-titled collection Assorted Prose. He wrote three novels inspired by characters from The Scarlet Letter, including A Month of Sundays and S., while another series of novels by this man centers on the fictional author Henry Bech. He won a National Book Award in 1963 for a novel which compares the author's father to the mythical figure Chiron, while his most famous early novel concerns a former high school basketball star who flees his marriage with Janice. FTP, name this author of The Centaur and four novels about Harry Angstrom, including Rabbit, Run.;;(John) Updike
World History;;Augustus II of Poland introduced into Europe a style of music named for this group, which was controlled by the Bektashi mystical order. After supplanting the spahi, they were divided into the cemaat, bölükhalki, and segban, and their mutiny during the Battle of Zenta led to the unfavorable Treaty of Carlowitz. An attempt to replace them with the Nizam I Jedid did not succeed, but they lasted only thirty more years before their failed coup against Mahmud II led to their massacre in the Auspicious Incident. FTP, name these troops recruited under the devishirme system from the Christian provinces of the Ottoman Empire.;;janissaries
Religion/Mythology;;He fought his first duel against an opponent whose heart was a sharp-edged, triangular stone. That opponent carried as his weapon a large hone, and was accompanied by Mist Calf, a man of clay nine leagues tall which pissed itself with fear at the approach of this god, then died quickly at the hands of this god's errand-boy Thialfi. He accepted Hrungnir's challenge after Hrungnir lost a horse-race to this god's father, who rode a stallion with eight legs. Stuck under Hrungnir's leg until he was free by his son Magni, FTP name this Norse god who killed Hrungnir with Mjolnir, his hammer.;;Thor
Miscellaneous;;In one of the many dark scenes in this movie, Rahad Jackson shoots Todd Parker after Todd tries to rob him. Buck and Jessie have a hard time getting a loan to open a stereo shop, and Amber, really Maggie, has a hard time getting visitation rights for her son. Scotty pretends that being drunk made him kiss the main character, and Little Bill, played by William H. Macy, kills his wife, then himself after he gets fed up with her screwing around. FTP name this 1998 movie about Jack Horner, a Golden Globe-winning performance by Burt Reynolds as a producer of porno films starring the likes of Heather Graham's Rollergirl and Mark Wahlberg's Dirk Diggler.;;Boogie Nights
Literature;;In a petition included in the third printing, the author claimed that "the duty of comedy is to correct men by amusing them". Near the beginning of Act Two, the father tries to convince his daughter to marry the title character, who is insulted in the opening scene of the play by Dorine and Damis as Madame Pernelle hurries to leave in exasperation. Of course the daughter, Mariane, actually loves Valere, but Orgon is so taken with the titular character that he deeds all his property to him. Elmire, Orgon's wife, finally exposes the true intentions of the titular character of, FTP, what 1664 comedy by Moliere whose name is now synonymous with religious hypocrisy.;;Tartuffe
Geography;;The central part of its basin is often called the cuvette due to its particular shape. Many lakes, such as Upemba and Bangweulu, are found in its upper regions and early tributaries like the Lualaba. Kisangani, which is just downstream from the formerly named Stanley Falls, marks the beginning of its navigable region, which lasts until its estuary begins at Matadi prior to the port city of Banana. The capital cities of Brazzaville and Kinshasa lie on opposite banks of, FTP, what second-longest river in Africa that lends its name to two of the countries it separates?;;Congo (River)
Literature;;He stated "Two names there are," one of which is "That which the Hebrew reads / With his soul only," the other of which is "Shakespeare," in his sonnet "The Names," while he began the sonnet "Now" with the line "Out of your whole life give but a moment!". Such poems as "The Flight of the Duchess" and "Home Thoughts from Abroad" appear in his Dramatic Romances and Lyrics, which also includes "The Bishop Orders His Tomb in St. Praxed's Church". His first work was a "fragment of a confession" entitled Pauline, and he went on to write works about Sordello, Paracelsus, and such artists as Fra Lippo Lippi and Andrea del Sarto. FTP, name this British poet of The Ring and the Book and the dramatic monologue "My Last Duchess".;;(Robert) Browning
Music;;This man's sole venture into chamber music, his String Quartet in E Minor, was first performed in the foyer of the Hotel delle Crocelle. He was originally lined up to compose the opera Froufrou, with libretto by Meilhac and Halevy. He wrote a number of operas after the works of Friedrich Schiller, including I Masnadieri from The Robbers and Luisa Miller from Cabal and Love, while his Jerusalem was a continuation of his earlier work I Lombardi. After his proposal for an opera based on King Lear failed, he composed A Masked Ball which was shortly followed by The Force of Destiny. Many of his best-known operas feature prominent choral numbers, such as one sung by Hebrew Slaves, two sung by Gypsies and another sung by priestesses of Ptah. FTP name this prolific Italian composer of operas such as Rigoletto, La Traviata and Aida.;;(Giuseppe) Verdi
Biology;;Some of its members play an important role in reducing erosion along streams, and they have a sporophyte generation that has different nutritional requirements than that of the gametophyte. Very common in moist regions like the tropics and temperate locations, some can still withstand prolonged drought in more arid regions. Requiring free water to reproduce sexually, few of them grow to more than two centimeters in length due to this necessity. About 10,000 species total, they can contain slender projective roots called rhizoids to anchor them to their substrates. Containing liverworts, hornworts, and mosses, FTP, name this most primitive division of nonvascular plants.;;Bryophyt(a|es){1}?
Literature;;In Haruki Murakami's novel Hardboiled Wonderland and the End of the World, the protagonist reads a novel by this man about an impoverished nobleman during his convalescence at home. Many of his earlier works, like the autobiographical "First Love," appeared in The Contemporary, for which he served as an editor. Like Hemingway, he wrote a novel called The Torrents of Spring, and his fascination with Shakespeare is evident in his story Hamlet of the Schigrovsky District. His dramas include The Lady from the Provinces and A Month in the Country, but he is better known for novels like Smoke and Virgin Soil. FTP name this Russian author of A Sportsman's Sketches and Diary of a Superfluous Man who is best known for his novel centered around the nihilist Bazarov, Fathers and Sons.;;(Ivan) Turgenev
United States History;;His daughter Kate Sprague was a notable socialite who attempted to win him the presidential nomination on several occasions. His uncle was first Episcopal bishop of Ohio, and he studied law under the most beloved man in America, William Wirt. At the 1860 convention, he conceded the nomination to Lincoln on the third ballot, and Lincoln reciprocated by naming him secretary of the Treasury, a position which earned him a spot on the ten thousand dollar bill. FTP, name this man who also replaced Roger Taney, was succeeded by Morrison Waite, as Chief Justice of the Supreme Court.;;(Salmon) (Portland) Chase
Religion/Mythology;;An attempt to impose this religion in Armenia led to the battle of Avarayr. Much of its modern form developed thanks to the efforts of Kartir, the minister of cults under Shapur I. Shapur's predecessor Ardashir I had made it the state religion of the empire he founded, in a throwback to an earlier empire in the same region. The Vendidad requires extreme ritual purity including sky burial, although more traditional death lore involves a confrontation at the bridge of Cinvat (Chin-vat) and being hanged upon a tower after death to be eaten by birds. The Gathas are the only part of the Avesta written by this religion's eponymous founder. FTP identify this dualist religion of Ancient Persia that worships the god Ahura Mazda.;;Zoroastrianism
United States History;;This affair led to the Supreme Court's decision of McGrain v. Daugherty, which upheld the ability of Congress to compel testimony. Made possible by Edward Denby's transfer of responsibility, it was investigated by Robert La Follette and Thomas Walsh. One facet centered on Edward Doheney's $100,000 interest free "loan" for the administration of land in Elk Hills, California. The investigation uncovered that Harry Sinclair of Mammoth Company gave $300,000 to the Secretary of the Interior, Albert Fall. FTP, name this scandal over Wyoming oil reserves that rocked the Harding administration.;;Teapot Dome
Literature;;During the 1980s he wrote such books as A Memory of Murder and the collection of short stories The Toynbee Convector. His other recent works include the novel Green Shadows, White Whale, which is about writing a screenplay for Moby Dick. His first published work, Dark Carnival, is like many of his later books in that it is set in Green Town, which was based on his home of Waukegan. More famously, he has written such books as The October Country and The Golden Apples of the Sun. FTP, name this author of Something Wicked This Way Comes and Dandelion Wine,. perhaps best known for the story of fireman Guy Montag in Fahrenheit 451.;;(Ray) Bradbury
Physics;;Application of this effect to cycles of sunspots allowed George Hale to determine the law of sunspot polarities. In its general form, the electron charge times the vector potential over the speed of light must be subtracted from the momentum. Spherical symmetry is destroyed in its strong variety, known as the Paschen-Back limit. It breaks the degeneracy of the Coulomb potential, and the weak limit yields energy spacings proportional to the magnetic quantum number. First observed as the broadening of the D-lines in the solar spectrum, for ten points, identify this effect in which spectral lines are split by the application of a magnetic field.;;Zeeman (Effect)
World History;;He tried to start a newspaper called The Representative to further the cause of mines, but the mining bubble burst, and the paper failed, which was the basis for his novel Vivian Grey. He contributed to an anti-Whig pamphlet related to the Reform Bill of 1832, and he won his first seat in Parliament in 1837, helping to found the Young England group in 1842. He dueled with Sir Robert Peel over the repeal of the Corn Laws, and Lord Derby first made him Chancellor of the Exchequer in 1852, beginning his rise through the Conservative ranks. FTP, name this Prime Minister of Britain in 1868 and from 1874 to 1880, who had a rivalry with William Gladstone.;;(Benjamin) Disraeli
Chemistry;;The equilibrium value calculated from it is used in the chord-conductance equation, and its namesake is paired with Planck as the creator of a molar flux equation. Derivable from both the equation linking free energy change to reaction quotient and by the assumption that drift and diffusion are equal and opposite in its namesake's current density equation, it can be obtained from the Goldman-Hodgkin-Katz voltage equation in the case of only one ion. Useful in concentration cells, its importance comes in the case of nonstandard cell potentials. Including Faraday's constant and the charge of the ions involved, FTP, name this central equation of electrochemistry, named for the winner of the 1920 Nobel Prize in Chemistry.;;Nernst (equation)
Literature;;This poet wrote "Without a name or history I wake / Between my body and the day" in his poem "Prime," and asked "What does the song hope for" in his poem "Orpheus". He noted that the "crack in the tea-cup opens / A lane to the land of the dead" in "As I Walked Out One Evening," while his "Lullaby" begins with the lines "Lay your sleeping head, my love / Human on my faithless arm". One of his most famous works features four "bucolics" from various countries who meet in a bar during World War II, whlie another begins by noting that "About suffering they were never wrong, / The Old Masters" in the course of describing a painting about the fall of Icarus. FTP, name this British poet of "Musée des Beaux Arts" and The Age of Anxiety.;;((Wystan) (Hugh) |W(.)H(.)) Auden
United States History;;His administration created the National Weather Service and helped put down Dorr's Rebellion, and the first override of a presidential veto occurred during his presidency. He lost his Secretary of the Navy, Secretary of State, and the father of his future wife during an explosion of the largest naval gun in the world, the Peacemaker. His Secretary of State was one of the few to remain loyal to him, possibly because he was negotiating an end to the Aroostook War. Sometime after the end of his term, this man known as "His Accidency," served in the Confederate House of Representatives. FTP, name this afterthought to Tippecanoe in William Henry Harrison's campaign slogan.;;(John) Tyler
Miscellaneous;;Steve Cauthen was the last to win it, and among the other nine champions are Willie Saunders, Charley Kurtsinger, and Johnny Loftus, who became the first to win it, with the aid of Sir Barton. Eddie Arcaro is its only two-time winner, taking both Whirlaway and Citation all the way, and its last two champions came consecutively in Seattle Slew and Affirmed. In 2005, Visa withdrew the sponsorship of this title and in 2004, its broadcastwas split between ABC and NBC. FTP, give this collective name for the Belmont Stakes, the Preakness Stakes, and the Kentucky Derby.;;(United States) Triple Crown
Physics;;For a charged particle, this function includes the square of the difference of the momentum and e over c times the vector potential. Any quantity whose Poisson bracket or commutator with it is zero is also a constant of the motion, and in quantum mechanics, the eigenvalues of this operator are the allowed energies. Equal to the Legendre transform of the Lagrangian, FTP name this function named for the inventor of quaternions, who also lends his name to closed circuits that touch each node of a graph once.;;Hamiltonian
Literature;;In Chapter 7 of this novel, the protagonist meets Mr. Crenshaw and a vet who is being transferred to St. Elizabeth's. In a later chapter, the protagonist witnesses the death of Tod Clifton, who has abandoned his idealist cause to sell paper dolls. Earlier, the narrator is turned away by Mr. Emerson and gets a job mixing Optic White paint under the supervision of Lucius Brockway. As the novel begins, we learn that the narrator has disguised himself to escape a riot led by Ras the Destroyer, after which he reminisces about a blindfolded wrestling match and his time at a nameless, segregated Southern university. FTP, name this novel by Ralph Ellison.;;Invisible Man
Religion/Mythology;;After he defeated the Solymians by dropping boulders on them, he overcame a group of Carian pirates led by Cheimarrhus. After completing these missions, he killed an ambush group sent by a king of Lycia, who later gave his daughter Philonoe in marriage to this man. After this son of Glaucus of Corinth was falsely accused of trying to seduce Stheneboea or Anteia, he was sent on a mission to kill a daughter of Echidna. He was given the task because Proetus had asked Iobates to kill him, but he won through with the help of a piece of lead attached to a spear, and a flying mount. FTP, name this hero who killed the Chimera while riding on Pegasus.;;Bellerophon
Miscellaneous;;In the XS-Form, XO-Form, A-Form and M-Form of this ISA's opcodes, the highest bit is considered the record (pron. ree-cord) bit, which specifies whether to set the condition register. It was first prototyped in the 801 chip, although the 604e would later prove to popularize it for IBM. Its first version required an emulator to run the native 68K code that had not been rewritten for it. Motorola eventually added a vector processor to it, named VMX by IBM, the AltiVec by Motorola itself, and the Velocity Engine by Apple. For ten points, name this RISC-based CPU architecture used by the G3, G4, and G5 Macintosh computers.;;P(ower) PC
Miscellaneous;;His most notorious publication is likely the article "Distortions at Fourth Hand," in which he apologized for the Khmer Rouge, and he also wrote the preface to a book by Holocaust denier Robert Faurisson, claiming that he was defending the principle of free speech. His assault on B.F. Skinner's theories helped to initiate the cognitive revolution in psychology, and his namesake hierarchy ranks the expressive power of formal languages, a concept important in automata theory. His "principles and parameters" approach to language acquisition posits the existence of a universal grammar, and he believes that grammar is transformational and generative. FTP, name this linguist and polemicist, author of the scientific Syntactic Structures and political Imperial Ambitions.;;(Noam) Chomsky
Literature;;The protagonist of this novel gains favor with the emperor after dancing the "Waves of the Blue Sea" and reciting some of his poetry,. but is almost ruined when he impregnates Fujitsubo, the emperor's concubine. The protagonist also messes around with Utsusemi and Yugao, much to the dismay of his wife, Princess Aoi. Fortunately, she dies at the end of the novel, so that the title character can marry his young ward who shares her name with the novel's author. FTP, name this 11th-century Japanese novel by Lady Murasaki Shikibu.;;(The) Tale of Genji|Genji monogatari
Geography;;This term is also used as part of a two-tiered system in New Brunswick, but in its American application, the northeastern ones include East Caroll, Madison, and Tensas, while the southwest is made up of Cameron and Calcisseau. The use of this term reflects the area's French heritage, and more notable ones include St. Charles, Jefferson, Caddo, and Nachitoches, while Vernon, Catahoula, St. Tammany and Caldwell were among those declared disaster areas in 2005 by Kathleen Blanco. FTP, name this equivalent to counties in Louisiana.;;parish(es)
Biology;;Structurally, its transporter is unique among secondary transporters due to the presence of eight membrane-spanning alpha-helices and two pore-loop structures. Following a rise in calcium concentration, astrocytes release this compound to help communication. This compound activates AMPA and NMDA receptors that depolarize cell membranes, one of the reasons it is suspected of causing epileptic seizures. FTP, name this primary excitatory neurotransmitter in the central nervous system, which is also a negatively charged amino acid with side chain CH2CH2COO minus, and which may best known for its monosodium variety.;;glutamat(e|ic acid){1}?
United States History;;Nine days after this battle, Anthony Wayne's troops were slaughtered at night by Major General Charles Grey in the Paoli Massacre. In this battle, General Cornwallis led the attack on General Sullivan's American right flank, while General Wilhelm Knyphausen feinted an attack on Maxwell and Greene's troops at Chadd's The Patriot side, which included the wounded Marquis de Lafayette, went to Chester, near Germantown, while the British occupied Philadelphia. FTP, name this September 11, 1777 victory by General William Howe over General George Washington, named for the small Pennsylvania waterway near the battle site.;;(Battle of) (the) Brandywine (Creek)
Literature;;This poem mentions some hunters who are intent on having "the rabbit out of hiding / To please the yelping dogs". Later, the speaker makes the accurate observation "But here there are no cows" before having a vision of another man who "moves in darkness" and appears to be a "savage armed". The speaker resists the temptation to say the word "Elves," and confesses that "Spring is the mischief in me" after noting that his apple trees will never eat his neighbor's pine cones. FTP, name this poem about two people who meet annually to perform the titular activity on the line between their two properties, the first poem in North of Boston by Robert Frost which includes the statement "Good fences make good neighbors".;;Mending Wall
Music;;This man composed a series of preludes for piano whose titles include "Wind over the Plains," "Homage to Samuel Pickwick," and "The Girl with the Flaxen Hair". His works for piano include Estampes, In Black and White, and The Children's Corner, and he composed an opera set in the mythical kingdom of Allemonde, based on Maurice Maeterlinck's Pélleas and Méllisande. FTP, name this French Impressionist composer, best known for his orchestral works La Mer and Prelude to the Afternoon of a Faun, as well as his Suite Bergamasque, which contains "Clair de lune".;;(Claude) Debussy
Religion/Mythology;;In Chapter 20 of this book, the narrator removes his sandals and sackcloth "as a sign of portent against Egypt and Cush". In Chapter 23, the narrator compares the city of Tyre to a forgotten prostitute, while the book moves on to prophesy Hezekiah's defeat of Sennacherib and the end of the Babylonian captivity. Chapter 9 verse 6, which appears in Handel's Messiah, prophesies the birth of a child of the line of David who will be called "Everlasting Father" and "Prince of Peace". FTP, name this book of the Bible, a work in 66 chapters which was written by the first of the Major Prophets.;;(the) (book of) Isaiah
World History;;This collaborater of Colonel Seves achieved a great triumph in the Citadel massacre. This man's ambissions led Mahmud II to accept Russian mediation which led to the Peace of Kutahia, but he finally achieved virtual independence from his sovereign following the Battle of Nizip in 1839. His son Ibrahim won a great victory at Konya but was defeated at by a combined Russian, British, and French force at Navarino. Famous for destroying the Mamelukes, FTP, name this Albanian-born viceroy of Egypt, who ruled it from 1805 to 1848.;;(Muhammad|Mehmet){1}? Ali (Pasha)
Physics;;They are divided into two classes based on the ratio of the penetration depth to the coherence length, a quantity known as the Ginsburg-Landau parameter. Alexei Abrikosov discovered his namesake vortex lattice in one type, and the London equation describes a characteristic behavior of these materials similar to perfect diamagnetism. A complete theory of the type I variety of these substances, including the concept of the pairing of opposite-spin electrons over long distances, is known as the BCS theory. Discovered by Heike Kammerlingh-Onnes, FTP, identify these substances which exhibit zero electrical resistivity.;;superconduct(or(s)|ivity)
World History;;His philosophy was shaped by his time in the von Gerlach circle, with whom he collaborated on a column in the Kreuzzeitung. As a representative to the Erfurt Parliament in 1849, he denounced unification as "a putrid brew of sentimentality," and he later negotiated the Three Emperors League, launched the Kulturkampf, and altered the Ems Telegram. He warned that "the great questions of the day will not be setteld by speeches and majority decisions...by by blood and iron". After the success of his realpolitik in the Franco-Prussian War, he was elevated to Chancellor of the new German Empire. FTP, name this Prussian diplomat.;;(Otto) (Eduard Leopold) (von) Bismarck
Literature;;In Woody Allen's short story The Kugelmass Episode, the title character is transported through a cabinet in Brooklyn to the estate of this novel's title character. In Chapter 21, the protagonist buys a riding whip from Lhereux [loo-roo], and presents it to another character along with a scarf and a seal reading "Amor nel cor". At the end of the novel, one character is awarded the Legion of Honor, while Berthe, the daughter of the title character, is sent to live with an aunt who makes her work in a cotton mill. The wily pharmacist Monsieur Homais inadvertently provides the title character with the arsenic she uses to kill herself, after she racks up debts and is spurned by her former lover, Rodolphe Boulanger. FTP name this Gustave Flaubert novel about the wife of Charles, Emma.;;Madame Bovary
Philosophy;;Benedetto Croce wrote a book discussing "what is living and what is dead in the philosophy" of this man, while a book on this man and "the rise of social theory" which appeared in 1941 attacked the idea that his philosophy contained the seeds of fascism. In the 1790s this man wrote essays on "The Positivity of the Christian Religion" and "The Spirit of Christianity and Its Fate," which were influenced by his theological studies at Tübingen. The three terms for which he may be best known were in fact invented by Heinrich Chalybäus in 1837, six years after this man died while working as a professor of philosophy at Berlin. He tried to offer an account of any necessary concept in his Science of Logic, while he considered the relation between human thought and the real world in his Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences. FTP, name this German thinker who wrote the Philosophy of Right and The Phenomenology of Spirit.;;((Georg) (Wilhelm) (Friedrich)|G(.)W(.)F(.)) Hegel
Art;;It was used in wall paintings in ancient Egypt and Babylonia, and during the Mycenaean period in Greece, where a little vinegar was probably added. One must first fill all the cracks and crevices in the panel with a mixture of size, glue or sawdust. The panel is then covered with cloth and the surface is coated with heavy gesso. The painter had to work with great rapidity and sureness, because correcting errors was nearly impossible and it dried very quickly. FTP, name this oldest method of painting, which usually used egg yolk and was practiced by such painters as Giotto and Cimabue.;;Tempera
Music;;In the first scene of this opera, the protagonist comes onstage with a bear that pesters his surrogate father, who responds with his "Starling Song". After he bathes in the blood of the antagonist in Act Two, the protagonist is able to see through the lies of that surrogate father, and proceeds to kill him. The blood also enables him to talk to a wood-bird, who explains how he can use the Tarnhelm to transport himself to Valkyrie Rock, where, at the beginning of Act Three, he must break the spear of Wotan with his newly-forged sword Notung. FTP, name this third opera in Richard Wagner's Ring Cycle, in which the title character awakens Brunnhilde.;;Siegfried
World History;;He came to power by killing the usurper Gautama, also known as Smerdis, in a coup which he recounted in the Behistun Inscription. He divided his empire into twenty provinces, each under the command of a satrap. He also built a road from Susa to his new capital, which replaced the former dynastic capital at Pasargadae. During his rule, he successfully put down rebellions in Sugartia and Susiana and waged war against the Scythians, but he was defeated in 490 B.C. by revolting Ionian city-states in the Battle of Marathon. FTP, name this Persian king who was succeeded by Xerxes I.;;Darius (I|1st|the First|the Great){1}?;;Darius
Religion/Mythology;;This god's eyes were the sun and the moon, and thus at the new moon he was blind. This caused problems at a battle where he started indiscriminately cutting off people's heads without knowing whose side they were on. This god's four sons were depicted on the lids of canopic jars, protecting the viscera after mummification. In one form, he was associated with the horizon, and syncretized with Ra as Ra-Harakhte. He engaged in a protracted struggle to avenge his father against his uncle, the evil god Set. FTP, name this Egyptian god of war often depicted as the falcon-headed son of Isis and Osiris.;;H(orus|eru){1}?
Music;;In a 1981 recording of this work, Christopher Hogwood replaced the lost second movement with a similar one written by the work's composer and his pupil, Thomas Atwood, while a recording by Nimbus exists with a transplanted Minuet from the composer's Piano Sonata in B flat. The second movement is an andante romanze in C major, which contrasts to the more lyrical third movement, a minuet and trio in G major. The first and most famous movement is in Sonata-allegro form and begins with the so-called "Rocket Theme".? FTP name this Serenade for Strings in G major, 525 in the Köchel [KERR-kuhl] numbering system used to classify works of Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart.;;Eine Kleine Nachtmusik|(A) Little Night Music
Literature;;His son Hilary wrote about him in the memoir Last Stands. Some of his best-known works were originally published in Reedy's Mirror under the pseudonym Webster Ford. His collections of poetry include The Serpent in the Wilderness and Starved Rock, while his longer works include the dramatic poem Jack Kelso and the novel Skeeters Kirby. He wrote about the 16th president in the unpleasant Lincoln the Man, but is better known for a work which features 245 characters from a small town in Illinois. FTP, name this author of a collection of poetic epitaphs about the inhabitants of Spoon River.;;(Edgar) (Lee) Masters
Physics;;In the isentropic response of an isotropic material, the fractional change in this quantity is typically less than one percent. In solids, the square of this quantity plus four thirds eta over the density gives the speed of sound in that medium, while in liquids the addition of eta is omitted. The difference between heat capacity at constant pressure and heat capacity at constant volume is inversely proportional to its isothermal form, while for a gas, its adiabatic form is given by the adiabatic index times the pressure. Derivable from the trace of the strain tensor, for ten points, identify this elastic constant which is proportional to the change in pressure over the change in volume and is the inverse of compressibility.;;bulk modulus
United States History;;This party's vice-presidential candidates included George Julian and Charles Francis Adams. Nearly a third of supporters in its best year came from New York State, which prevented that state from going Democratic. Many of its backers were New York Democrats who quarreled with the Hunkers and started this party at a convention in Buffalo. Its slogan combined its eponymous concept with "labor," "speech" and "men" under the same one-syllable adjective. It helped Zachary Taylor beat Lewis Cass in the 1848 election by swinging votes to Martin Van Buren under the banner of, FTP, what third party founded in 1848, the precursor to the Republicans, that favored excluding slavery from new states?;;Free-Soil (Party)
Philosophy;;During his lifetime, this man withdrew essays he had written on "impudence and modesty" and "the immortality of the soul" while allowing such essays as "Of the Dignity or Meanness of Human Nature" and "Of the Populousness of Ancient Nations" to remain in print. Better known are such essays as "Of Superstition and Enthusiasm" and "Of the Standard of Taste" which appear in his Essays Moral, Political, and Literary. In his autobiographical "My Own Life" he describes his "retreat in France" which was spent at Reims and La Fleche, where he composed his first major work, a book whose three parts consider the understanding, the passions, and the morals. That book "fell dead-born from the press" according to this man, though he had more success with later works like An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding. FTP, name this British thinker who wrote A Treatise of Human Nature.;;(David) Hume
Pop Culture;;The lead singer of this band has written a book called Adult Head, and he, along with his band's drummer Kevin Coomer and bassist John Stirratt, used to be in a band with Jay Farrar of Son Volt. Their 2003 EP More Like the Moon is probably their least known effort. They scored a minor hit with "Box Full of Letters" from 1995's A.M. and gained critical acclaim from a 1998 collaboration with Billy Bragg. They are the subjects of the Sam Jones film documentary I am Trying to Break Your Heart, and the book Learning How to Die. The album Summerteeth emerged in 1999, but the 2002 album Yankee Hotel Foxtrot is widely considered their best effort to date. Their most recent effort was 2004's A Ghost is Born. FTP, name this Jeff-Tweedy-led alternative country band.;;Wilco
Literature;;At one point in this novel a woman is comforted by hearing her husband recite "The Charge of the Light Brigade".? At another stage of the work, the slicing of a fish's flesh to provide bait creates a metaphor for the cruelness of the world. Mrs. McNab appears to restore an abandoned house and young James loves cutting pictures out of the Army-Navy catalogue. Minta Doyle marries Paul Rayley, and Prue dies from complications related to childbirth. William Bankes is a botanist on the Isle of Skye who never does marry Lily Briscoe. FTP, name this work about the Ramsey family, some of whom eventually journey to the title location in this novel by Virginia Woolf.;;To The Lighthouse
Earth Science;;Deposits of this rock can be commercially important as raw material for pyrolysis if they contain enough of the bituminous material kerogen. The "Bright Angel" stratum of the Grand Canyon consists of the non oil-bearing variety of this rock, which typically forms in quiescent marine environments from deposits of mud and silt. This most abundant type of sedimentary rock is often found associated with layers of limestone and sandstone, and can metamorphose to produce slate. FTP, name this rock which forms a deposit full of fossils in Yoho Park, British Columbia, named for nearby Mt. Burgess.;;shale
World History;;The death of Philibert de Chalon and subsequent rise of René joined the two branches of this house. The man known oddly as King William I of this dynasty ruled from 1815 to 1844 and his reign was chiefly notable for the revolt and secession of the newly acquired southern half of his kingdom. Previous members had been princes of its namesake city as well as staathalters. An earlier William was murdered in 1584, sixteen years into his country's war for independence from Spain, while another William became king of England in 1688 by marrying Mary II. FTP, name this family which long ruled in the Netherlands.;;(The) (House of) Orange-(Nassau)
Art;;This man's woodcuts include a procession of ten blocks known as The Triumph of Christ and the enormous Crossing of the Red Sea, and his woodcut of St. Jerome is one of the first examples of chiaroscuro. He was commissioned by Mary, Queen of Hungary, to paint a series of four mythological portraits known as the Furias which resembled his earlier ceiling frescoes for the Santo Spirito in his hometown. One of his first commissions was for the two altarpieces of St. Maria Gloriosa dei Frari, one of which is known as the Pesaro Madonna. While in Ferrara he painted mythological works such as Bacchas and Ariadne, while he later traveled to Urbino and did a portrait of a reclining nude. Perhaps best known for a painting done in honor of a 1514 wedding, FTP name this Venetian painter of Venus of Urbino and Sacred and Profane Love.;;Titian|Tiziano Vecellio
Literature;;After his friend Henry Thrale died, this man was outraged when Thrale's widow Hester married an Italian music teacher named Piozzi. In that same year, 1781, a collection of 52 lives of British poets written by this man was published. Earlier, this man had written a life of his friend Richard Savage, as well as two long poems inspired by works of Juvenal, "London" and "The Vanity of Human Wishes".? In 1759, he was supposedly so desperate to pay for his mother's funeral that in two weeks he wrote a novel about a prince of Abysinnia, Rasselas. FTP, name this man who compiled a famous Dictionary of the English Language, a lexicographer and author whose life was written about by his friend James Boswell.;;(Samuel) Johnson
Biology;;The inferior angle of this bone is formed by the union of the vertebral and axillary borders and has a dorsal surface that provides attachment to the teres major and the latissimus dorsi. A ridge between the inferior and medial angles provides a point of attachment for the serratus anterior. Its posterior surface contains a projection that joins a forward-pointing hook called the acromion, while a projection off the lateral angle is known as the coracoid process. Near the base of the coracoid process lies the glenoid cavity, and the insertion of the lower trapezius muscle lies over a smooth, triangular area of the bone. FTP, name this bone connecting the humerus to the clavicle, commonly known as the shoulder blade.;;scapula
World History;;Their reign is typically divided into two periods, the earlier Bahri and the later Burji. The latter period is also known as the Circassian, and their first leader of that period was Barquq, who made advancement in the state dependent on race rather than skill. Under Barsbay they conquered Cyprus, but in 1516 and 1517 they lost their independence, though they were able to infiltrate the Ottoman ruling class when the rule against warriors' sons becoming warriors was repealed. Following the death of Salih Ayyub, they revolted and secured their empire when Qutuz won a decisive victory in 1260 at the Spring of Goliath. Most famously led by Baybars, FTP, identify this group which took its name from the Arabic for "slave" and which ruled Egypt until their last remnants were massacred at the Al-Azab gate in 1811.;;Mam(luks|elukes){1}?
Economics;;Walter Nicholls joined this group after being persecuted for his statements about margarine. Its distinct character is considered to have begun with Frank Knight and Jacob Viner, as well as the "Mathematical Trio" of Lange, Schultz and Douglas who imitated work done at Lausanne. Mathematically, they prefer results-oriented partial equilibrium analysis to more math-dependent general equilibrium. George Stigler is the lesser-known cofounder of its second iteration and the creator of search theory, while this group also invented human capital theory and transaction cost theory, under Ronald Coase. FTP, Milton Friedman is one of eight economics Nobel prize winners from what school, associated in ideological terms with neoclassicism and in physical terms with the actual economics department of its Midwestern university?;;(The) (University of) Chicago (school (of economics))
Noncomputational Math;;Ingham proved it using Ramanujan's identity, and it is equivalent to the statement that the limit as x goes to infinity of theta of x over x or psi of x over x is one, where theta and psi are the Chebyshev functions. Hadamard's proof depends on the fact that the quantity one plus cosine theta squared is greater than or equal to zero, and follows from the fact that the Riemann zeta function has no roots of the form one plus i times t, where i is the square root of minus one. FTP, name this theorem which gives x over natural log x as an approximation to the number of non-composite integers less than or equal to x, which takes its name from those non-compposite integers.;;prime number (theorem)
Religion/Mythology;;The tenth section of this work notes that "dead flies make the perfumer's ointment give off a foul odor" and that the "heart of the wise inclines to the right, but the heart of a fool to the left".? The whole work is spoken in the first person until the end, when a third-person narrator says that the moral of the work is "Fear God and keep his commandments, for that is the whole duty of man". The narrator had tried both learning and hedonism and found them equally pointless, as he explains with such aphorisms as "the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong" and that "that which is done is that which shall be done, and there is no new thing under the sun". King Solomon of Israel is the supposed author of, FTP, what meditation on futility that follows Proverbs in the Old Testament and includes verses about there being a time for every purpose under heaven?;;(The book of) (Ecclesiastes|(the) Preacher|Qoheleth){1}?
World History;;Their terms could receive the prorogatio, extending them for a year, and the prefix "pro" appended to this title identifies the governor of a Senatorial province. Cambacères [kahm-ba-SEHR] and Lebrun were two of the three men who held it during the five years when it was an executive office in Republican France. Under the Empire, twelve or more men a year could hold it, mostly on a "suffect" rather than "ordinary" basis. Caesar in 59 BC and Marius consecutively from 104 to 100 had the year named in their honor as holders of, FTP, what principal executive magistracy of the Roman Republic, held by two persons at one time?;;consul
Music;;An opera of this name by Ferruccio Busoni shares the same basic plot as the more famous one, although it includes a part for Truffaldino as chief eunuch. The chorus of peasants is very prominent in the better-known version, in which they sing "Gira la Cote" in the first act. Toward the beginning of Act Two, courtiers sing about their country estates in "Ho una casa nell'Honan" then lament the need to prepare simultaneously for weddings and funerals. Act One ends with "A, Per l'ultima volta!" in which the peasants attempt to warn the protagonist, who rings a gong three times. The protagonist is then asked three riddles after the title character sings "In Questa Reggia" and having solved them, in Act Three he sings the triumphant "Nessun Dorma" in defiance of the title character. FTP name this opera about Calaf and a Chinese princess, the last opera by Puccini.;;Turandot
Literature;;This author asked "wouldn''t it be simpler if the government simply dissolved the people and elected another" in "The Solution" and followed up a major success with the sub-par Happy End. He worked on the Hollywood screenplay for Hangmen Also Die, while other works include the poetry collection Hauspostille. He achieved some popularity with The Measures Taken and Drums in the Night, but he had even more success with works like Saint Joan of the Stockyards, The Good Person of Setzuan and The Caucasian Chalk Circle. Known for a notable collaboration with Kurt Weill and for Mother Courage and Her Children, FTP name this German father of Epic Theater and author of The Threepenny Opera.;;(Bertolt) Brecht
Chemistry;;This element can be prepared commercially by reducing its pentoxide with calcium or its pentachloride with magnesium. Used extensively in the steel industry, it has good structural strength and a low fission neutron cross-section, making it useful in nuclear applications. Its atomic mass is about 51 grams per mole, and its common oxidation states are plus-2, plus-3, plus-4, and plus-5. It is often alloyed with titanium, its neighbor on the periodic table. Discovered by Nils Stenstrom, FTP, name this transition metal with atomic number 23, whose symbol is the fifth-to-last letter of the alphabet.;;vanadium
Physics;;When applied to turbulence, this term refers to the method of following fluid particles by means of a substantive derivative, giving rise to chaotic advection. For the electromagnetic field it can be written as minus one over 16 pi times the 4-product of the field tensor minus one over c times the 4-product of the 4-current and the 4-potential. If it is subtracted from the time-derivative of the generalized position times the generalized momentum, it gives the Hamiltonian. FTP, identify this quantity, defined for a system to be the kinetic energy minus the potential energy.;;Lagrangian
World History;;Pius V issued Regnans in excelsis officially excommunicating this monarch, who a year earlier had put down the Northern Rebellion.  The duke of Alba was party to an assassination attempt against this monarch which was led by Roberto di Ridolfo, but its failure resulted in the execution of the duke of Norfolk.  She was advised throughout her reign by William Cecil and Francis Walsingham, the latter of whom uncovered the Babington plot to take her life, after which she executed her cousin.  FTP, name this Tudor queen, under whose rule the Spanish Armada was defeated, and who executed Mary, Queen of Scots.;;(Queen) Elizabeth (I|the First){1}?;;(Queen) Elizabeth
Literature;;Accompanied by an accordion played by Piney Woods, a group of people in this short story sing a song with the refrain, "I’m proud to live in the service of the Lord, and I’m bound to die in his Army".  The grave of one of the title characters is discovered in the end, with the epitaph reading that he struck some bad luck on the 23rd of November, 1850, and handed in his checks on December 7th.  Beginning with the titular town’s loss of "several thousand dollars, two valuable horses, and a prominent citizen," FTP, identify this story about the Duchess, Uncle Billy, Tom Simson, and John Oakhurst, a tale by Bret Harte.;;(The) Outcasts of Poker Flat
Philosophy;;In Chapter 67 of Of Human Bondage, Philip Carey dismisses this concept as "perfect nonsense".  One of the major criticisms of it was Benjamin Constant’s example of the "Enquiring Murderer".  Failing to use it drives us into a state of heteronomy rather than autonomy and it is often defined in terms of treating others as ends in themselves.  Originally expressed in Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals, it is usually stated as a dictum to act only according to those maxims which you can simultaneously will to become universal laws.  FTP, name this concept central to the moral philosophy of Kant.;;categorical imperative
Miscellaneous;;Dr. Einstein is constantly drunk, and, as a result of his drunkenness, Jonathon returns home bearing a striking resemblance to Boris Karloff.  Theodore thinks he’s Teddy Roosevelt and is moving people sent by his aunts, who claim to be working on charity cases, to the Panama Canal.  He moves a "yellow fever patient" in the window seat, whom his cousin Mortimer later discovers is really just dead.  In fact, Mortimer Brewster’s relatives are all involved in serial killings in, FTP, what 1944 Frank Capra comedy starring Cary Grant about a family employing the titular poison?;;Arsenic and Old Lace
Noncomputational Math;;Used to prove that there is no general method for solving Diophantine equations, methods for computing them include Cassini’s identity,. Binet’s formula, and determining how many ways there are to tile a 2-by-n strip with 1-by-2 rectangles.  One may also expand their generating function: f-of-x equals x divided by 1 minus x minus x-squared, or sum the shallow diagonals of Pascal’s triangle to compute, FTP, what sequence of numbers, whose first five members are 1, 1, 2, 3, 5?;;Fibonacci (number(s)|sequence)
United States History;;One of them resulted in the arrest of both Vermont congressman Matthew Lyon and Benjamin Bache.  Two of them expired within three years, leading to angry debates over their political motivation.  Allegedly a response to a possible war with France sparked by the XYZ affair, one of them increased the naturalization period and another empowered the President to deport persons considered a threat to the national government.  Opposition to this series of four acts prompted the passage of the Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions.  FTP, name this Federalist legislation aimed at curbing Democratic criticisms of John Adams’s presidency.;;Alien and Sedition Acts (of 1798)
Literature;;According to this poem when you "Come to the window" to smell the sweet night air, "Listen! you hear the grating roar" of pebbles that "bring the eternal note of sadness in".  "Sophocles long ago" heard what the speaker hears, and thought similar thoughts.  The view is also like "The Sea of Faith," which now also ebbs.  FTP, name this poem in which the speaker finds neither joy, nor love, nor light, Nor certitude, nor peace, nor help for pain;" but only "ignorant armies clash[ing] by night," a poem by Matthew Arnold.;;Dover Beach
Art;;A prior painting of the same subject includes two lovers in the foreground and a reflection of city lights on the Rhône River.  The buildings in the foreground are created with straight strokes, with a church spire just breaking the sky.  Venus is created with spiraling strokes, and located slightly left of the center, which some say resembles a yin-yang.  To the left of them, cypress trees extend to the heavens.  FTP, name this nocturnal portrait of the village of Saint-Remy by Vincent Van Gogh.;;(The) Starry Night
Mythology;;Azeban, the dog of the Dawn Land people, has this distinction in Abenaki myth, also shared by the fertility god of the Hopi, Kokopelli.  Chinese myth considers the monkey king San Wukong one, while the Ashanti consider the spider Anansi as one.   The coyote to some Native Americans, Puck and other faeries to the Celts, and Prometheus to the Greeks, are also examples.  FTP, identify these archetypal beings which defy the laws of the gods or nature, of whom the Norse Loki may be the best-known?;;trickster(s)
Biology;;Whether this unit is repressible or inducible is determined by whether the product or reactant is the regulatory metabolite.  Its components include two attachment sites located between the regulatory gene and the structural gene.  The promoter site on the gene is where polymerase is attached while repressor proteins are attached to the site next to it.  FTP, name this theory proposed by Jacob and Monod, used to explain how cells control the production of enzymes.;;operon(s)
Literature;;Because he couldn’t bear to work as a janitor to pay his tuition, he dropped out of St. Olaf’s College.  After the war, he studied at Oxford in an attempt to get as far away from his impoverished North Dakota childhood.  He returned to Louisville heartbroken, as his love had married someone else.  He soon took up selling stolen securities and made his fortune bootlegging, along with Meyer Wolfsheim.  That fortune is partly invested in a lavish West Egg mansion, where he is shot and killed in his pool by Tom Wilson.  FTP, name this neighbor of Nick Carraway and former love of Daisy Buchanan, the title character of an F. Scott Fitzgerald novel.;;(Ja(y|mes){1}?|(The) Great) Gatsby|(James) Gatz
World History;;In the 19th century Vincenzo Gioberti’s "On the Moral and Civil Primacy of the Italians," was an exposition of a group that appropriated the name of this faction.  Its name originated as a rallying cry during the Battle of Weinsberg, and this group later supported French king Charles VIII.  By 1300 its members had split into "white" and "black" factions over the influence of Pope Boniface VIII in Florence.  Traditionally referring to supporters of the Papacy, FTP, give this term which was most likely an Italian corruption of a German family name and rival to the Ghibellines.;;Guelphs
Psychology;;Tim Crow argues for an evolutionary origin and links it to the development of language.  Studies link it to a gene known as COMT, and a prevalent theory claims that overactivity of dopamine receptors in the mesolimbic pathway result in the main symptoms associated with it.  The term for it was coined by Eugen Bleuler in 1911, replacing Emile Kraepelin’s term "dementia Praecox".  FTP, name this psychiatric disorder, which may be classified as undifferentiated, disorganized, catatonic, or paranoid.;;schizophrenia
Music;;This opera was a dud on opening night because of the extremely obese soprano, who was dying of an unknown disease.  In the complete version, the lead tenor rushes to Paris in Act II, responding to news that the title character has been selling her possessions so they can live in the country in "O mio rimoroso!"   While he is away, his father Giorgio initiates a dialogue with "Pura siccome un angelo," in which he explains that young Mr. Germont’s relationship with the title character may jeopardize the chances of his sister marrying.  Despite admitting that she suffers from consumption, FTP, Violetta Valery leaves her lover Alfredo and later dies in what Verdi opera?;;La Traviata
Chemistry;;The Diels-Alder reaction involving 1,3-butadiene and this class’s simplest compound produces 1,4-cyclohexadiene.  Adding ozone to them and then water produces carboxylic acids, while adding water in the presence of a mercury salt produces an enol which tautomerizes to form a ketone, and adding hydrogen in the presence of Lindlar’s catalyst partially reduces them to alkenes.  FTP, name this class of compounds with formula CnH2n-2 [C-n-H-2n minus 2] whose simplest member is acetylene and which is characterized by a carbon triple bonded to a carbon.;;alkyne(s)
Literature;;The protagonist of this novel is forever changed when he is told by a slave in the master’s livery to go around to the back of the house to deliver a message.  The novel depicts his ruthlessness in leaving his first wife and cheating a Chickasaw Indian out of a hundred square miles of land.  His second son, Henry, kills his first son, Charles Bon, to prevent Charles from marrying their sister, Judith. By the end, his Mississippi plantation, the Hundred, is in ruins and he is killed by the father of a poor white girl that he impregnated.  FTP, identify this tale of Thomas Sutpen, a novel by William Faulkner with a repetitive title.;;Absalom(,) Absalom
United States History;;He wrote the book Walls and Bars, a critique of prisons, partly from his own experience in one.  He had his citizenship revoked, only restored posthumously in 1976, and was sentenced to ten years in prison for criticism of the Espionage Act of 1917 although he was released by Harding’s order in 1921.  A native of Terre Haute, he was earlier unsuccessfully defended by Clarence Darrow for his leadership in the Pullman Strike.  He may be most notable, however, for running as a third party candidate in the presidential elections of 1900, 1904, 1908, 1912, and 1920.  FTP identify this longtime Socialist Party leader.;;(Eugene) (Victor) Debs
Geography;;Inland towns in this nation, including Yobokhi and Dikhil, are separated from the coast by a series of plateaus including Moussi Ali, its highest point.  It shares the lake Abhe Bad with its neighbor to the west.  Coastal towns include Khor Angar, which lies on the western banks of the Bab El Mandeb, and Obock, which, like its namesake capital, lies on the Gulf of Tadjoura, an inlet of the Gulf of Aden.  FTP, name this small African nation bordered by Eritrea, Ethiopia, and Somalia.;;Djibouti
Miscellaneous;;The double data rate version of this technology achieves greater bandwidth by transferring data on both the rising and falling edges of the clock signal. The current synchronous model uses an internal finite state machine to pipeline incoming commands and the speed of its operation is associated with the pipelining latency. By nature the device is volatile and the in the past its types include both single and dual in-line. With a most basic set-up storing each bit on a unique capacitor, FTP, name this type of memory which is one aspect associated with a computer’s speed.;;(SD)RAM|(Synchronous Dynamic) Random Access Memory
World History;;A final attack mounted by the Counts Marle and Fauquembergues and an earlier attack on the baggage train likely combined to explain the victorious commander’s order to execute prisoners.  The victor’s flanks were protected by long stakes driven into the ground while the losers attack was so funneled that they couldn’t wield their weapons when they reached the enemy line.  The French commander, d’Albret, blocked the road to Calais and in the resultant battle the masses of English longbows proved devastating to the clumsy French knights.  FTP, name this battle of the Hundred Years’ War fought in 1415, a resounding victory of Henry V.;;(Battle of) Agincourt
Biology;;This amino acid has been used as an appetite suppressant as it stimulates the production of cholecystokinin and as a mood enhancer as its d-type stimulates endorphins.  Metabolic pathways in the liver can convert it to norepinephrine, but more commonly it is converted by the enzyme PAH into tyrosine.  FTP, name this amino acid that, with aspartic acid, makes up NutraSweet and which can not be process properly in people with PKU, or phenylketonuria.;;phenylalanine
Literature;;Philip José Farmer wrote his biography Venus on the Half-shell.  In a 1987 interview, his creator admitted that he was inspired by the science fiction writer Theodore Sturgeon.  Mentioned in Jailbird, his son Leon narrates Galapagos while he himself makes his first appearance in God Bless You, Mr. Rosewater.  FTP, who is this creation of Kurt Vonnegut, the main character of Timequake and Breakfast of Champions?;;(Kilgore) Trout|Kilgore
Biology;;Cleaving its hinge with papain separates its Fc [eff-cee] and Fab [eff-ay-bee] portions.  Its structure was established by Gerald Edelman and Rodney Porter, who found a characteristic beta fold in each of its 8 constant domains.  The A type is found in saliva and milk, the G type activates macrophages, and the M type is made by B cells early in immune response.  Consisting of two heavy chains and two kappa or lambda light chains and variable regions, FTP, name this immune protein produced in response to the presence of a specific antigen.;;antibod(y|ies){1}?|immunoglobulin(s)
United States History;;He defended his administration in Presidential Problems, and authored the Olney Corollary along with his secretary of state in response to the Venezuela and British Guiana boundary dispute.  Earlier, he had vetoed the Five Cent Fare Bill for violating the transit company charter as governor of NY.  Reverend Samuel D. Burchard propelled him to office by calling Democrats the party of "rum, Romanism, and rebellion," causing his opponent James G. Blaine to lose the Irish vote.  FTP name this president first elected in 1884, the only man to serve served two non-consecutive terms in that office.;;(Grover) Cleveland
Literature;;Among the images decorating it are a young man lying with his lover beneath a glade of trees while playing a pipe and a group of villagers leading a heifer to sacrifice.  It is initially addressed as the "foster child of silence and slow time" and the "still unravish’d bride of quietness," and like Eternity, it "doth tease us out of thought".  The speaker concludes about its enigmatic lesson, "that is all / Ye know on earth, and all ye need to know".  FTP, name this object that teaches us "Beauty is truth, truth beauty," in an ode by John Keats.;;(the|Ode on a) Grecian Urn
Miscellaneous;;Near the end of this film, Luke Plummer is shown holding a pair of black aces and a pair of black eights, the so-called "dead man's hand".  The film is an adaptation of an Ernest Haycox story, itself based on Guy de Maupassant’s "Boule de suif".  In the movie, the enemies are not Prussians, but Apaches, who famously don’t simply shoot the horses that pull the titular conveyance, "Because that would have been the end of the movie," according to director John Ford.  FTP name this 1939 movie starring John Wayne as the Ringo Kid.;;Stagecoach
Religion/Mythology;;He was caught with the head of the ox Sky-Bellower, but got away when one of the anglers cut the line.  In another episode, his greatest antagonist, mistaking him for a cat, is humiliated when unable to lift him completely from the ground.  The offspring of Angerboda and Loki, when not in cat-form in the home of Utgard-Loki, he circles the Earth with his tail in his mouth.  FTP, name this monster, who, in his death throes at Ragnarok, kills mighty Thor with his venom.;;Midgard Serpent|Midgardsorm|Jormungand(r)
Chemistry;;In cyclic systems, this type of reaction interconverts cis and trans stereochemical relations.  Branching at or near the reacting carbon slows it down, because of steric hindrance and the energy required to attain a gauche methyl-halide conformation.  It is impeded by solvation and proceeds by the backside attack of an electrophilic carbon, with the nucleophile replacing the weak base for a leaving group.  FTP name this stereospecific, concerted, one-step displacement reaction mechanism following a second-order rate law.;;SN2|substitution nucleophilic second order|(bimolecular) nucleophilic substitution
World History;;In 1948, by officially including it in his platform, Daniel F. Malan was able to bring his party to power for the first time.  Put in place with the Population Registration and Group Areas Acts of 1950 its initial focus was on urban areas.  It became harsher during Hendrik Verwoerd’s prime ministership with the creation of ten Bantustan "homelands".  It resulted in the Soweto riots, the massacre at Sharpeville, and the life sentence of Nelson Mandela.  FTP, identify this policy of racial segregation in South Africa.;;apartheid
Literature;;This play features a minor role for the nanny Anne-Marie, who had to give up her own child to take her current job.  The central figure has three children, Bob, Emmy, and Ivar and is contrasted to some degree with her childhood friend Kristine Linde.  Often referred to as "little starling" or "squirrel" throughout the work, she is forced into a life-changing decision after being blackmailed by Nils Krogstad and finally abandoning the overbearing nature of Torvald.  FTP, identify this play about the soon to be independent Nora Helmer, a work by Henrik Ibsen.;;(A) Doll('s) House
Art;;Among his early drawings, he shows a fascination with the necks of old people.  His Madonna Litta is the only painting of his in Russia, while his portrait of Ginevra de’ Benci is the only painting of his in America.  Most of his paintings date from the fifteen years after he left the workshop of Andrea del Verrocchio to settle in Milan.  The lone exception is his Madonna of the Rocks.  FTP, name this painter, draftsman, sculptor, architect, and engineer perhaps best known for his Last Supper and portrait of Mona Lisa.;;(Leonardo) da Vinci|Leonardo
Philosophy;;He developed one of the first versions of compatibilism in his The Questions Concerning Liberty, Necessity, and Chance, and claimed that the cause of all things is the diversity of motion in his first work A Short Tract on First Principles.  Doing proofs in Euclid’s Elements inspired a trilogy that deduces organization of society from bodily motion and cognition and which includes the works De Cive, De Corpore, and De Homine.  He tutored an exiled Prince Charles in France, but he is best known for his ideas that a sovereign entity is created to avoid a life which is "solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short".  FTP, name this author of Leviathan.;;(Thomas) Hobbes
Physics;;His books have been translated as Matter and Light and Revolution in Physics.  He was so impressed by his brother Maurice’s work on the nature of radiation that he changed his career from history to physics.  His doctoral thesis, ignored due to lack of light-wavelength-comparable instrumentation, was recognized by Einstein, and later confirmed by electron diffraction studies.  His relation equates Planck’s constant over momentum to the wavelength of a matter wave.  First noting that wave-particle nature of radiation applies to matter, FTP, name this Frenchman who won the 1929 Nobel Prize.;;(Louis) (Victor) de Broglie
World History;;It was a result of the revolt of Maurice of Saxony and the subsequent Treaty of Passau which provided for the meeting that produced it.  The emperor was not present and he empowered his brother, who later became Ferdinand I, with his authority.  It provided for movement into different states and allowed certain imperial cities freedom of worship but did not recognize the Anabaptists or Calvinists. FTP, identify this 1555 accord which declared that a state’s religion would be that of the princes and allowed toleration of Lutheranism in Germany.;;(Peace|Treaty) (of) Augsburg
Literature;;In her essay "22 Hyde Park Gate," also the address of her childhood home, she alludes to the sexual abuse of her half-brother Gerald Duckworth upon both her and her sister, Vanessa.  She parodies her own devotion to Vanessa in the novel Flush, written almost twenty years after her first novel The Voyage Out.  It was with The Waves and Orlando that she established her modernist credentials, though both pale in comparison to Mrs. Dalloway.  FTP, name this member of the Bloomsbury Group and author of the novel To the Lighthouse and the essay "A Room of One’s Own".;;(Virginia) Woolf
Music;;The first of them calls for three oboes, a bassoon, continuo strings, and the violino piccolo, though most noticeable is the use of hunting horns.  The last of them was the first composed, but the third might be the most famous as the composer played the viola part, while the viola da gamba was played by the composer’s patron, Prince Leopold.  Written at the height of their creator’s time as Kappelmeister at Cothen in 1721, this set of works was drawn from the innovations of Vivaldi.  FTP, identify this set of six concertos by J.S. Bach named for a region of Germany.;;Brandenburg (Concert(os|i){1}?)
Religion/Mythology;;The earliest known post-Bible reference to this phenomenon is from Ignatius of Antioch’s 106 AD Epistle to the Smyrneans.  Based on Matthew 26:26-28 and John 6:53, in the Eastern Orthodox church, it is known as "metabole" or "metavole".  Officially codified into dogma by the 1215 Fourth Lateran Council and reaffirmed at the Council of Trent in opposition to the Protestant belief of "commemoration," FTP what is this Catholic belief that the Eucharist becomes the body and blood of Christ?;;transubstantiation
World History;;Its central area of control was centered on the Kanto plain and Kihai district and called the tenryo or "heavenly domain".  The country was administered by the Baku-Han system and daimyos, classified as "fudai" or "tozawa," were forced to spend every other year in attendance at the court of Edo.  It was established shortly after the Battle of Sekigahara and was preceded by the period when Nobunaga and Hideyoshi consolidated power.  FTP, identify this Japanese Shogunate established by Ieyasu and overthrown in the Meiji Restoration.;;Tokugawa (Shogunate|bakufu|Period|Era);;Edo Period
Astronomy;;This body is the second densest in the solar system and has the greatest temperature variation in the solar system.  Its surface has "weird terrain", a region hypothesized to have been created by seismic convergence when an asteroid struck the surface creating the Caloris Basin. The MESSENGER mission will start orbiting it in 2011, but up till now only Mariner 10 has visited it.  This planet also has the lowest albedo of any in the solar system.  FTP, name this planet nearest to the Sun.;;Mercury
Literature;;It begins in Scythia, in a locale characterized as "the world’s limit? an untrodden desolation".  The title character doesn’t speak until after Kratus and Bia, or Might and Violence, have left, soon after which he is visited by a Chorus of Ocean Nymphs, who like Hephaestus sympathize with the title character.  It is to Oceanus that the title character recounts his tale, beginning with the war between the Gods and Titans.  FTP, name this Aeschylus play about the tortured Titan whose foresight helped him give hope and fire to Man.;;Prometheus Bound
Miscellaneous;;He flunked out as a freshman at Notre Dame, and later played in Italy for a year before joining the Cavaliers.  Although he averaged only 12.1 points per game during the 1989-90 season, he hit six three-points shots in Game 2 of that year’s finals tying a record.  Despite a nonexistent vertical leap he led the league in rebounding in 1985-86 and amassed a streak of 685 consecutive games played.  Currently he is the coach of the 2003 WNBA champion Detroit Shock.  FTP, name this much maligned center, the head villain of the "Bad Boys" era of the Detroit Pistons.;;(Bill) Laimbeer
United States History;;His political writings include Friends and Enemies and What I Think.  This politician was attacked by McCarthy and Nixon for appearing as a character witness in the Alger Hiss trial.  John F. Kennedy made him the chief U.S. representative to the United Nations and he died holding that position in 1965, fitting as he was instrumental in setting up that organization.  The grandson of the 23rd U.S Vice-President, in 1948 he was elected governor of Illinois.  FTP, identify this Democratic politician who lost presidential elections in 1952 and 1956 to Dwight Eisenhower.;;(Adlai) (Ewing) Stevenson
Psychology;;One of his last works, Mysterium Coniunctionis, dealt with alchemy and symbolism.  He worked with Eugen Bleuler at the Burgholzli Asylum, applying word association tests to find negative, emotional, repressed content he called complexes.   He resigned from the International Psychoanalytic Society in 1914 after breaking with Freud, and differentiated between introverted and extroverted attitudes in Psychological Types.  FTP, name this psychoanalyst who developed the ideas of animus and anima and the collective unconscious.;;(Carl) (Gustav) Jung
Chemistry;;This element’s pure form, which is not found in nature, is used to remove trace gases from vacuum tubes.  Combined with sulfate it is used as a filter for rubber, plastics and resins and since it does not dissolve in water can be ingested to produce X-rays of digestive tract.  It is present in witherite and its salts give a characteristic green color in the flame test.  FTP, name this alkaline earth metal with atomic number 56 and chemical symbol Ba [B-A].;;Barium
Literataure;;A magazine with his name was published by Lewis and Willis Clark from 1833-1865.  As a scholar, his historical researches lay with men, and especially their wives, "rich in that legendary lore so invaluable to true history," which he eventually compiled into a chronicle featuring such men as "Walter the Doubter" and "William the Testy".  That chronicle was his history of New York during the reign of the Dutch governors.  FTP, name this man whose name became synonymous with New Yorkers and the knee breeches they wore, a creation of Washington Irving.;;(Diedrich) Knickerbocker
Geography;;Its cities include Talas, Osh and its chief port Ysyk-Kol.  It has a bicameral Supreme Council known as the Zhogorku Kenesh and its president Askar Akayev has been in office since before it gained its official independence on August 31st  1991.  The Naryn River runs through the middle of the country and Its highest point is at Jengish Chokusu located in the Tien Shan Mountian range in the east of this nation.  FTP, name this mountainous former Soviet Republic that borders China, Kazakhstan, and Uzbekistan and has its capital at Bishkek.;;Kyrgyzstan
Miscellaneous;;The original name of this band was "Tony Flow and the Miraculously Majestic Masters of Mayhem" and, after a name change, they released their first self-titled album in 1984.  They suffered a tragedy in 1988 when original guitarist Hillel Slovak died of a heroin overdose and drummer, Jack Irons, left the band.  After finding a new drummer, Chad Smith, and guitarist, John Frusciante, the band has their first commercial success with their album Mother’s Milk.  They really hit it big with their next album Blood Sugar Sex Majik.  FTP name this quartet whose hit singles include "Scar," "Californication," and "Under the Bridge".;;(The) Red Hot Chili Peppers
Literature;;This author continues to write "The Matchbook of Minerva," a weekly column in one of his country’s major periodicals.  In 1966 he published his monograph on the poetry of Joyce and a summation of Finnegan’s Wake, and two years later he wrote The Absent Structure.  However, he gained worldwide acclaim for a 1980 novel that had such working titles as "Adso of Melk" and "Murder in the Abbey".  FTP, name this leading figure in the field of semiotics, the Italian novelist of Foucault’s Pendulum and The Name of the Rose.;;(Umberto) Eco
United States History;;The capture of Breymann Redoubt and the death of General Simon Fraser were among the occurrences in the last conflict of this larger battle.  Earlier in the campaign the eventual losers had a detachment defeated at Bennington before their march was stopped following the Battle of Freeman’s Farm.  It was part of planned pincer movement in which Barry St. Leger would advance south from Canada and then attack from the west and Howe would come north from Philadelphia.   FTP, name this 1777 victory of Horatio Gates over John Burgoyne, regarded as the turning point in the Revolutionary War.;;(Battle of) Saratoga;;Bemis Heights|Freeman(')s Farm
Physics;;It was proposed in a letter to Peter Tait.  Leo Szilard offered the first major refutation of the theory behind it, and it was Norbert Weiner who gave it the name by which we know it.  Examples of this construct in living systems include ion channels and pumps in the nervous system of it, but the theoretical one can not function as initially proposed.  FTP, identify this thought experiment that would violate the second law of thermodynamics, a creature proposed by its namesake.;;(Maxwell(') s) Demon
Religion/Mythology;;Its authorship is sometimes attributed to Cerinthus although Dionysius of Alexandria, the most learned opponent of its authenticity, attributed it to a certain presbyter.  The author vaguely identifies himself four times and addresses himself to seven Churches in Asia Minor.  Christ’s statement that he is the "Alpha and Omega" is repeated in the first and last chapters. Chapter 12 concerns the Woman and the Dragon, Chapters 17-18 describe the Great Bablyonian Harlot and Chapters 6-7 lay out the Seven Seals.  FTP, identify this eschatological work generally attributed to the Apostle John and which predicts Armageddon.;;((The) Book of) Revelation (of the Apocalypse)
Art;;The subject of this painting was painted twice more, by Gustave Courti and Antonio de la Gandara, seven and fourteen years later, respectively.  In the original, the light source is from the right, accentuating a little jewel in the subject’s red hair and the shoulder straps on her dress.   She stands next to a table with a fan in her left hand, wearing a low cut black dress showing her pale skin.  Perhaps to shield the subject from the foreseen controversy, the artist withheld her real name, Gautreau, from the painting’s title.  FTP who is this woman, subject of an 1884 portrait by John Singer Sargent?;;Madame X
Literature;;The title character’s fate is sealed when Parson Tringham relates news of her father’s ancestry at the beginning of this novel.  Halfway through, we find that title character working at Talbothay’s, having already buried her sickly child Sorrow.  It is at Talbothay’s that she is reunited with her future husband, Angel Clare, who had glimpsed her at the beginning of this novel.  However, the marriage collapses when she reveals the secret of the illegitimate child that resulted from her rape at the hands of her cousin Alec, who she murders at the end.  FTP, name this depressing novel about the title country girl, a work by Thomas Hardy.;;Tess of the d(') Urbervilles
World History;;Early on he gained the enmity of the senate by executing four ex-consuls, including Gaius Avidius Negrinus, for plotting against him.  As a young man he was called "Graeculus" for his Hellenic studies and he was ridiculed for his sexual relationship with the Greek youth Antinous, who was made a god upon his death by drowning.  He put down the revolt of Bar Kokhba in Jerusalem in 135 and chose his Antoninus Pius as his successor.  FTP, identify this Roman emperor who succeeded Trajan and built a namesake wall to protect Britain.;;(Publius Aelius Traianus) Hadrian(us)
Biology;;This anatomical body produces the chemical DMT, a psychedelic drug that has been linked to certain types of dreams.  Also known as the epiphysis, it is known to have a completely different function in ancient amphibians, where it acted as a light receptor in an orifice in the top of the skull, leading to it occasionally being known as the "third eye".  In humans it regulates the circadian rhythm via the secretion of its chief product.  FTP, name this small endocrine gland that produces melatonin.;;pineal (gland)
Miscellaneous;;In 1894 he studied chess players in order to see what traits would be necessary of a Grandmaster.  He blindfolded players and had them play the game from memory, though only top players were able to do this.  Early in his career he worked under Jean-Martin Charcot and became director of the one of the Sorbonne’s laboratories.  In his most famous work subjects were assessed according to whether they could do such things as follow a lit match, repeat 3 digits, and reproduce drawings.  FTP, name this French psychologist thus credited with developing the first intelligence test, and whose name became linked with Stanford in a set of standardized intelligence tests.;;(Alfred) Binet
Geography;;An important moment in this nation’s history was the June 16 1960 "Mueda Massacre".  Ruled by Maoist leader Samora Machel for much of the 1970s and 1980s, in 1992 the U.N. helped end a prolonged Civil War between the resistance movement Renamo and the leading party.  Its current president, Joaquim Chissano, is a member of that party, Frelimo, which earlier had led its fight for independence from Portugal.  FTP, identify this African nation containing the Zambezi delta which is separated from Madagascar by its namesake channel and has its capital at Maputo.;;Mozambique
Literature;;His second wife, Frances Appleton, died when her dress caught fire and he wrote the sonnet "The Cross of Snow" in her honor.  He memorialized the oldest Jewish community in the U.S. with his "The Jewish Cemetery at Newport" and wrote of the "spreading chestnut tree" of Brattle Street in "The Village Blacksmith".  He used a tale related by Nathaniel Hawthorne for his most famous poem and the historical tale of John and Priscilla Alden for another poem.  FTP, name this poet who wrote "This is the forest primeval" in beginning his long verse work of divided lovers, Evangeline.;;(Henry) (Wadsworth) Longfellow
World History;;When it was first written, it dealt primarily with monetary compensations, or wehrgeld.  However it was Clause 6 in title 59 that became the most important part of it, particularly after it was amended by Chilperic.  It was lost until 1328, and in 1410 it was used to weaken the arguments of Henry IV of England.  Doubts about its secret repeal in 1789 in Spain fueled the Carlist agenda and Napoleon would adopt it for ascension to the Imperial Throne.  FTP, name this legal code written in the time of Clovis, whose most important portion became a rule of succession that forbade females from ascending to the throne.;;Salic Law|Lex Salica
Chemistry;;They are most commonly made in completely dry conditions in which the necessary ingredients are added in a flask containing diethyl ether, and the flask is fitted with a reflux condenser and heated over a warm water bath.  They produce an inorganic "basic bromide" when reacted with water and, in a two-step process, result in carboxylic acids when reacted with carbon dioxide.  Also used to produce alcohols from carbonyls, FTP, identify these organometallic compounds produced from a haloalkane and magnesium.;;Grignard (reagent(s))
Music;;Ross Gorman improvised the music that begins this work as a gag, but the composer liked it enough to keep it.  Commissioned by Paul Whiteman for a concert called "An Experiment in Modern Music," it opens with the aforementioned glissando for clarinet that many classical soloists have trouble performing.   There are two orchestrations by Ferde Grofe, a later one for a full orchestra and an original for a jazz band.  FTP, name this work that melds jazz and classical styles, a popular piano concerto by George Gershwin.;;Rhapsody in Blue
Religion/Mythology;;One myth tells of his incestuous love for his daughter Vak, the personification of speech, and one aspect of his more famous consort.  Associated with and often taking the role of Prajapati, he is usually depicted as having four heads although he once had a fifth which was burned off by Shiva in anger.  In one story he is born from a lotus coming from Vishnu’s navel while in another he is born from a Golden Egg.  His mount is the swan Hamsa and his consort is usually Sarasvati.  FTP, identify this Hindu creator god and third member of the Trimurti.;;Brahma
Literature;;Among the characters in this work are the forcefully cross-dressed Commissioner of Public Safety and the foolish clown Kinesias, though, perhaps the biggest fools are the Four Policemen who appear throughout.  It is unclear whether the character of Ismenia is mute, but dialog is spoken by Lampito, Kleonike, and Myrrhine, all of whom are representatives at a meeting called by the title character.  The play ends with appearance of the handmaid Peace, whose naked form quickly results in a truce.  FTP, name this Aristophanes work in which the women of Athens withhold sexual favors to end the Peloponnesian War.;;Lysistrata
United States History;;After losing his fortune in a failed railroad venture he served as governor of the Arizona territory from 1878-1881.  At the beginning of the Civil War he commanded the Western Department based in St. Louis but was later transferred to the Shenandoah where he was defeated by Jackson’s forces at Cross Keys.  He angered Thomas Hart Benton by marrying Benton’s daughter and made his name by helping wrest California from Mexico.  FTP, name this man who, in 1856, became the Republican party’s first candidate for president and who was known as "The Pathfinder" for his exploring exploits.;;(John) (Charles) Fremont
Literature;;When traveling to Germany at the age of 19, the steamer he was on caught fire, an experience that inspired his story "A Fire at Sea".  He wrote several plays, of which A Provincial Lady and A Month in the Country were the most successful.  However, he made his name with politically-themed novels like Rudin and On the Eve.  He left his country shortly after the release of his Sportsmen’s Sketches and resolved to stay abroad after the reviews of his 1862 novel that introduced the character of Bazarov.  FTP, identify this author who gave name to nihilism in his novel Fathers and Sons.;;(Ivan) (Sergeyevich) Turgenev
Philosophy;;He advanced a corpuscularian philosophy in a later work, Siris, which also advocated the medicinal use of tar-water.  His philosophical defense of Christian doctrine, Alciphron, was written during his time spent in Rhode Island waiting for funding for his proposed St. Paul’s college in Bermuda.  He developed a theory to combat the possible skeptical and atheistic tendencies of Locke’s representative realism, which he summarized as "esse est percipi," or "to be is to be perceived".  FTP, name this idealist philosopher and author of Three Dialogues Between Hylas and Philonous.;;(George) Berkeley
United States History;;The most famous person given this name was a UCLA graduate who was granted a full pardon in 1977 by Gerald Ford. She had been jailed for six years after a media outburst demanded she be put on trial upon her return to the United States thirty years before her pardon.  Using the name "Orphan Ann" while doing the program "Zero Hour," she was only convicted on the charge that she "did speak into a microphone concerning the loss of ships".  FTP, identify this name under which Iva Toguri was charged for treason, which American GIs gave to any English-Speaking female broadcasters of Japanese propaganda during WWII.;;Tokyo Rose;;Iva Toguri
Relgion/Mythology;;At a festival to her at the Cypriot city of Amathus a young man would pretend to go through birth pains probably because one myth holds that she died in childbirth on Cyprus.  Another myth says she was killed by Artemis for infidelity.  Having her origins as a nature goddess, she was a daughter of Pasiphae and Minos and ended up joining in "marriage" with the god Dionysus on Naxos.  FTP, identify this woman who was abandoned after she helped Theseus survive the Labyrinth and kill the Minotaur.;;Ariadne
Literature;;In her essay "A Bolter and the Invincible Summer" she admits to frequently skipping classes at convent school.  Her more recent novels, The Pickup and The House Gun, are much less political than her first work, the story collection The Soft Voice of the Serpent.  She furthered her political views in The Conservationist and July’s People.  However, it was The Burger’s Daughter that was banned in her country for its stark portrayal of an entrenched discriminatory system.  FTP, name this South African winner of the 1991 Nobel in Literature.;;(Nadine) Gordimer
Geography;;Until 1813 when Gregory Blaxland, William Lawson, and William Wentworth passed over it, it was a major barrier against westward colonization.  It is not in fact a single unit as it includes many chains, including the Carnarvon Range, the Blue Mountains, and the Snowy Mountains.  Containing the headwaters of rivers such as the Darling, it splits the watershed between the Murray-Darling Basin and the Pacific Ocean.  Stretching from Cape York Peninsula in Queensland to Victoria in the south, FTP, what is this mountain range in the eastern part of Australia?;;Great Dividing (Range)
World History;;Notable setbacks in this long-term movement were defeats at Alarcos and Rueda. Its beginning is dated to the Battle of Cavadonga, a victory of Pelayo, a Visigothic ruler in 718 and its acceleration was helped by the collapsing of the Umayyad rulers.  Its climactic event was the 1212 Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa and it ended with the expulsion of Boabdil as ruler of Granada.  FTP what is this process in which Christian kingdoms pushed Muslim states out of Iberia?;;(La) Reconquista|(The) Christian Reconquest;;(The) Reconquest
Literature;;This poem is set on the winter solstice, "The darkest evening of the year," in a place that is "lovely, dark and deep".  The only sound beside "the sweep/ Of easy wind and downy flake" is the sound of the harness bells, as the narrator’s horse expresses its confusion at pausing "without a farmhouse near".  FTP name this poem in which the narrator remembers, "I have promises to keep,/ And miles to go before I sleep," written by Robert Frost.;;Stopping By Woods On A Snowy Evening
Chemistry;;The first term in the virial expansion for it is RT times the natural logarithm of pressure.  At constant temperature and pressure, chemical equilibrium requires that this quantity is at a minimum.  The change in this quantity is proportional to the natural logarithm of the equilibrium constant and it is defined as enthalpy minus temperature multiplied by entropy.   FTP, identify this thermodynamic state function named for its American formulator.;;Gibbs free energy;;Gibbs
World History;;In Plato’s Timaeus, Critias acknowledges this man as the ultimate Greek source for the Atlantis myth having heard it while in Egypt.  Among his accomplishments was the seisachtheia or the "shaking off of burdens" which cancelled debt and he was also responsible for ending debt-slavery as well as dividing his fellow citizens into four property classes.  He wrote several poems about his life and works and a story in Herodotus has him rebuking Croesus for assuming that wealth equates with happiness.  FTP identify this early 6th century Athenian reformer and one of the Seven Sages who revised Draco’s harsh laws and paved the way for future democracy.;;Solon
Psychology;;His autobiography, written in the year of his death, is entitled Erlebtes and Enkanntes.  Originally trained as a physician, he worked with Helmholtz at the University of Heidelberg, where he wrote Contributions to the Theory of Sense Perception.  He founded the journal Philosophical Studies in 1881, eight years after publishing his landmark Principles of Physiological Psychology, which stressed the investigation of the immediate experiences of consciousness.  FTP, name this man, who in Leipzig in 1875, set up the first experimental psychology lab.;;(Wilhelm) Wundt
Religion/Mythology;;Thrud is sometimes included in their number. They are described weaving entrails on a loom weighted with severed heads in Njal’s Saga, but they are more often associated with the Einherjar [ine-HEAR-yar].  They also serve as messengers, and as they ride, their armor produces the Aurora Borealis.  Their name means "Choosers of the Slain". Brynhild [BRIN-hild] is, FTP, one of what group of beautiful women sent by Odin to escort the bravest warriors who fall in battle to Valhalla?;;Valkyrie(s)
Literature;;This author once held diplomatic posts in Genoa, Nice, Lisbon, and Madrid, thanks in part to a Spanish, Basque, and Indian descent.  Doris Dana and Langston Hughes translated portions of this writer’s work writing into English, and works like "Tenderness," "Destruction," and "The Wine Press" highlight her common themes of children and the downtrodden. After releasing the 1922 collection Desolation, she ditched the name Lucila Godoy Alcayaga and went on to write her "Sonnets of Death".  FTP name this Chilean writer, the first Latin American author to win the Nobel Prize.;;(Gabriela) Mistral;;(Lucila) (Godoy) Alcayaga
Chemistry;;Mercury cadmium telluride is frequently used in its detection because it has a smaller band gap than silicon.  Samples are often made into pellets with potassium bromide or deposited on sodium chloride disks.  Requiring a net change in a molecule’s dipole moment for a vibration to be active, FTP, identify this type of spectroscopy that measures absorbances between 400 and 4000 wave numbers.;;(infrared|IR){1}? (spectroscopy)
World History;;His first contact with Europeans came during treatment for jigger infections at age 10.  In 1928 he became general secretary of the Kikuyu Central Association, and after a brief foray into the Communist Party in the 1930’s, he helped organize the 5th Pan-African Conference in 1945.  He organized a mass nationalist party, but suffered a bit of a setback with a seven year prison sentence after the Mau Mau Rebellion.  While still in detainment, he was elected president of the latest nationalist union, and after his release finally negotiated independence from Britain in 1962.  FTP, name this man who was elected the first prime minister of Kenya.;;(Jomo) Kenyatta|Kamau (Ngengi)|(Johnstone) Kamau
Art;;This painting inspired 27 oil paintings and over 100 drawings by Picasso, and an unfinished painting by Monet, set in the forest of Fontainebleau. It was itself indebted to Raimondi’s engraving of Raphael’s The Judgement of Paris, Courbet’s Young Ladies on the Banks of the Seine, and the Concert Champetre of Giorgione and/or Titian.  A young woman stands in the stream in the rear, and the figure modeled by Victorine Meurent sits at the left, on her discarded blue dress.  Two dressed men and a nude woman appear in, FTP, what picnic scene by Edouard Manet?;;(The) Luncheon on the Grass|(Le) Déjeuner sur l(') Herbe;;(The) Bath|(Le) Bain
Miscellaneous;;In one episode from this past season, Mrs. Grubman fails to disclose her use of anti-depressants, which results in her having a stroke.  Others featured a woman claiming to have the stigmata, Siamese twins joined at the head, and a serial rapist known as "The Carver".  It features John Hensley as Matt and Joely Richardson as Julia, the son and wife, respectively, of one of the main characters.  That character is Sean McNamara, who is played by Dylan Walsh and is in business with Christian Troy, played by Julian McMahon.  FTP, name this drama seen on F/X and featuring two Miami plastic surgeons.;;Nip (/) Tuck
Literature;;Its fourth section introduces us to two women, the latter of whom, Vera, was a former mistress of this novel’s protagonist.  Another woman, whom the narrator acquired in exchange for stealing a horse, is the subject of the first section, "Bela".  The aforementioned fourth section, "Princess Mary," ends with the protagonist’s duel with Grushnisky, an eerie foreshadowing of the author’s own death.  The first two sections involve Maksim Maksimych, but all of the five tales in this novel feature the Byronic officer in the Caucasus, Pechorin.  FTP, name this novel by Mikhail Lermontov.;;(A) Hero of Our Time|Gero(y|i){1}? nashevo vremeni
Biology;;This process is enhanced by proteins such as AP-1 and NFkappaB  The sigma factor is required for it to be efficient in prokaryotes, and it can be inhibited by alpha-amanitin, and in eukaryotes it is followed by a processing step that includes cap synthesis and splicing.  In eukaryotes that step removes introns and links the remaining exons together in the resultant molecule.  FTP, identify this biological process by which messenger RNA is generated.;;transcription
United States History;;This battle’s end featured a little known skirmish that involved George Custer’s cavalry forces on Cress Ridge.  It included the mortal wounding of General Barksdale and began when Harry Heth’s troops stumbled onto those of John Buford.  Oddly, the corps of Confederate general Richard Ewell had to march south to reach the battlefield.  The second day saw a fight for the Peach Orchard but more famously, Longstreet’s delaying on the right combined with Joshua Chamberlain’s stout defense allowed Little Round Top to hold.  FTP, name this victory for George Meade over Robert E. Lee, a three-day battle in July 1863 that saw Pickett’s charge and was the turning point of the Civil War.;;(Battle of) Gettysburg
Music;;The middle section may feature stretto, augmentation, or inversion in a series of episodes.  The ricercare and canzone are derived from this form whose notable examples include twelve alternating with interludes in Hindemith’s Ludus Tonalis, the final section of Brahms Variations on a Theme by Handel, and the 95 for the organ written by Pachelbel.  FTP, identify this musical form that begins with a subject followed by an answer in a different voice, a form mastered by JS Bach in his Musical Offering and Well-Tempered Clavier.;;fugue(s)
Geography;;It might contain over 6 billion barrels of oil in the Spratly Islands region, but so far exploration has proved too costly.  Other islands in it include the Paracel Islands and Pagasa Island, and its sea floor ranges from 100 meters deep on the Sunda continental shelf to over 5000 meters deep in the Philippine basin.  More than half of the supertanker traffic in the world passes through this body of water, largely via the Strait of Malacca.  It is bordered by the Strait of Taiwan, the Karimata Straits, and the Gulf of Tonkin.  FTP, name this sea that is claimed in part by Taiwan, Malaysia, Vietnam, the Philippines, and its namesake country.;;South China Sea
Literature;;Shortly before his death this writer wrote "Give me the moon at my feet / Put my feet upon the crescent, like a Lord!" At the end of his life, he was admired by several women who called him Lorenzo and considered themselves his disciples. His The Plumed Serpent is set in Mexico, whereas Kangaroo is not surprisingly set in Australia.  Among his famous short stories are "Odor of Chrysanthemums" and "The Prussian Officer".  FTP, name this novelist who wrote of the Brangwen sisters in Women in Love, Paul Morel in Sons and Lovers, and the gamekeeper Mellors in Lady Chatterley’s Lover.;;((D) (.) (avid) (H) (.) (erbert) ) Lawrence
Chemistry;;This quantity can be used to determine the molar mass of large molecules such as proteins, whose solubilities tend to be low, and it is the reason glucose is stored as glycogen in cells.  If the kidneys fail and start excreting protein, the lowering of this quantity in the capillaries can lead to pulmonary edema.  A colligative property, van’t Hoff discovered that it was equal to cRT.  FTP name this quantity that is more commonly expressed as nRT/V, and is the pressure exerted by the flow of water through a semipermeable membrane separating two solutions with different concentrations of solute.;;osmotic pressure;;pressure
World History;;He was the secretary to G.F. Sacchetti, Milan’s papal legate and a highpoint in his early career was the arrangement of the Treaty of Cherasco.  In his most famous office he organized the League of the Rhine as a check on Austrian powers and also worked to conclude the Treaty of the Pyrenees and the Peace of Westphalia.  He twice had to leave Paris due to the actions of the Fronde and his relationship with Anne of Austria has been a great historical mystery.  FTP, identify this protégé of Richelieu the chief minister for the young Louis XIV (14th).;;(Cardinal) (Jules) Mazarin|(Goulio) (Raimondo) Mazzarino
Philosophy;;Its epistemology holds that concepts are formed by measurement-omission.  Its metaphysics is based on three axioms: existence exists, one is conscious, and the law of identity, which are discussed in the first chapter of Leonard Peikoff's treatment of the philosophy.  Its ethics states that there are three supreme values: reason, purpose, and self-esteem, which are discussed at length in The Virtue of Selfishness.  FTP, what is this "philosophy" first promulgated in John Galt’s speech in Atlas Shrugged, a philosophy created by Ayn Rand?;;objectivism
Religion/Mythology;;The name’s the same.  One appears in the Apocrypha as the daughter of Raguel and Edna whose seven husbands were killed by the demon Asmodeus.   The other was buried in the cave of Machpelah by her husband after she died in Kiriath Arba at the age of 127.   She was for a brief time a captive of the Egyptian Pharoah and later King Abimelech of Gerar when her husband claimed she was his sister.  She twice forced her handmaid to leave the family although earlier, because of her barrenness, she had offered Hagar to her husband.  FTP, identify this name shared by the wife of Tobit as well as the mother of Isaac and wife of Abraham.;;Sarah
Miscellaneous;;It typically uses load and store commands to read and write to memory.  Because of the increase in RAM storage, the fixed instruction length feature of this architecture has become more feasible.  A large number of general purpose registers are found on these types of chips in order to store intermediate results in more complicated operations.  FTP, name this architecture containing a small number of simple operations, an example of which is the PowerPC-based processor in Macintosh computers.;;R(educed) I(nstruction) S(et) C(omputing)
United States History;;He revealed the details of his most traumatic time in his autobiography Go Quietly . . . or Else.  Among the things discussed is his disdain for the man who succeeded him, the then minority leader in the House of Representatives.  His first political office was as Baltimore County Executive and four years later he won the governorship of Maryland.  He was reelected twice more, but resigned the second time to become vice president.  However, within a year Elliot Richardson charged him with accepting bribes and tax evasion.  FTP, name this man who resigned in disgrace in 1973, just like his president Richard Nixon.;;(Spiro) Agnew
Geography;;The nice shopping areas of this city include the mall Sandton City, the intimate Melville Village and multicultural Oriental Plaza.  Museums include the Hector Pieterson Museum, memorializing the namesake student who was killed by police guns, and the Museum Africa that showcases the city’s history.  FTP, what is this capital of Gauteng province, a city that is also home to the Apartheid Museum and Nelson Mandela’s residence and is the most populous city in South Africa?;;Johannesburg
Biology;;Much of this tissue’s extracellular matrix consists of proteoglycans, primarily aggrecan bound to a hyaluronan backbone.  The aggrecan core protein is heavily glycosylated by keratin sulfate and chondroitin sulfate, making it very negatively charged and extremely hydrated, properties which lead to its cushioning effect.  Collagen fibrils give the matrix tensile strength, while the chondrocytes make up only a small percentage of tissue volume.  FTP, name this non-vascular tissue that is found in the trachea, ear lobes, at the tip of the nose, and in joints.;;cartilage
World History;;It was completed in part by the desire to facilitate the Treaty of Hubertusburg between Austria and Prussia.  In exchange for their removal of troops from Hanover, Hesse, and Brunswick the French were granted, among other possessions, the islands of St. Pierre and Miquelon off Newfoundland and Guadeloupe and Martinique in the West Indies.  However, Grenada, Saint Vincent, and Tobago went to Britain while Havana was restored and Louisiana given to Spain. FTP, this describes the terms of what 1763 treaty resolving the Seven Years War and signed in the namesake European city?;;(Treaty of) Paris
Literature;;He turned away from novels for several years, publishing East, West, a book of short stories, and his travel narrative in a dangerous Nicaragua, The Jaguar Smile. Professor Malik Solanka travels the globe in his novel Fury, and he chronicles Flapping Eagle’s quest to regain his mortality in Grimus.  The world of rock and roll provides the frame for The Ground Beneath her Feet, but is for a novel about Shiva and Saleem Sinai that he first received acclaim.  FTP, name this Indian author of Midnight’s Children and the much more controversial The Satanic Verses.;;(Salman) Rushdie
Physics;;In Carbon 13 NMR, it is responsible for the splitting of resonance peaks, causing magnetic interactions between hydrogen atoms and carbon-13 isotopes.  Electrons can have a magnitude of it equal only to plus or minus Planck’s constant divided by 4 times pi.  Electrons with the same kind of it are forbidden to share the same orbital, as defined by the Pauli exclusion principle.  FTP, name this concept, the angular momentum associated with microscopic particles, and synonymous with the motion you would associate with a top.;;spin
Religion/Mythology;;One myth has it that he was a product of an orgy in which Penelope gave her sexual favors to all 129 suitors.  Commonly said to be the son of Hermes and Dryops, his ugliness horrified his mother but when taken to Olympus he delighted all the gods, hence his name.  He so loved his afternoon nap that if disturbed he would let loose a shout that inspired an intense fear and mental disorder named for him. FTP name this Greek god of shepherds, nature, and rustic revelry depicted as half-man and half-goat playing on his namesake pipes.;;Pan|Faunus
Geography;;In a former swampland, once called Lake Merom, in the Hula valley this river is formed from the combination of the Hasbani, Dan, and Baniyas streams of Mount Hermon. En route to its terminus it receives the tributaries Yabis and Harod and spreads out in a plain known as Ghor.  Earlier in its course it had received its principal tributaries the Jabbok and Yarmuk after flowing out of the Sea of Galilee. FTP name this river which empties into the Dead Sea and forms part of the boundaries of Syria, Lebanon, and Israel, who currently occupies its West Bank.;;Jordan (River)
United States History;;Although he was a judge in his state’s circuit court he enlisted in the Marines during WWII.  He lost his first senatorial campaign to Alexander Wiley but two years later defeated Howard McMurray to gain a seat.  In his early senatorial career he was suspected of taking bribes from the Pepsi-Cola company but it was for the campaign that began with a statement he made to the Republican Women’s Club of Wheeling, West Virgina that he received a condemnation for conduct "contrary to Senate traditions".  FTP, identify this Wisconsin senator known for his claim that that there were 205 Communists in the state department and the "red scare" that he created.;;(Joseph) McCarthy
Literature;;One character in this work frequently displays tricky billiard shots and then launches into long rhetorical speeches, and when he is stopped, always mutters, "I am silent".  His nephew had drowned and was close friends with Peter Trofimov, who is very close with his niece Anya.  Anya is the daughter of Madame Ranevsky, who is finally forced to sell her estate to Lopahkin, a former servant.  It is a symbolic portion of that estate that gives this work its title.  FTP, name this play by Anton Chekhov.;;(The) Cherry Orchard
Physics;;It can be derived from Fermat’s Principle by differentiation. In a special case, it can describe pure reflection, and it also explains the action of a prism on white light. It can be stated as a direct proportion, in which case the constant of proportionality is calculated by dividing the indices of refraction of the two media. FTP, name this physical law, which describes the relationship between angle of incidence and angle of refraction.;;Snell(') s Law
Psychology;;People who are either in a state of "cognitive load" or live in so-called "individualist" societies are more likely to commit it.  Coined by Lee Ross, it was studied in a classic 1967 study by Edward Jones and Victor Harris in which subjects were asked to assess the pro- or anti-Castro sentiments of various speakers.  Resulting largely from a misunderstanding of perspective and rarely occurring in analysis of one’s own behavior, it is also known as the actor-observer bias.  FTP, name this psychological phenomenon, the tendency of people to overemphasize personality-based explanations for behavior in others.;;f(undamental) a(ttribution) e(rror);;actor-observer bias
Art;;The depiction of the main figure in this painting is based on the same figure’s depiction in Giotto’s Rising of Drusiana scene in the Peruzzi chapel, even down to the identical dress.  The theme of the work is taken from Matthew 17:24-26 and was intended to be "read" by starting in the middle, which showed how to satisfy the request, then to the left, where a fish is caught with a coin in its mouth, finally to the right, where a tax collector is paid.  FTP, name this painting in the Brancacci Chapel of the Santa Maria del Carmine in Florence, a masterwork by Masaccio.;;(The) Tribute Money
World History;;He led a number of mildly successful campaigns in Wales but was more successful in Scotland where he compelled Malcolm IV to give up Northumberland.  He was interested in judicial reforms as evident by The Assize of Clarendon and he also attempted to reassert rights over the church in his Constitutions of Clarendon.  He fought intermittently with French monarchs Louis VII and Philip Augustus although the most notable event in the reign of this successor to Stephen was likely the murder of Thomas a Becket.  FTP, name this English king who married Eleanor of Aquitaine and fathered John Lackland and Richard the Lionheart.;;Henry (II|the Second){1}?;;Henry
Literature;;The title character of this novel eventually gets cuckolded when his former rival, a local inn-keeper, comes into a large inheritance.  He enters into a marriage against the wishes of his mother after having left behind a life as a diamond merchant in Paris.  The author changed the ending to allow for good fortune to befall Diggory Venn, who weds his true love Thomasin,.  The novel had initially concluded with the drowning deaths of the vain pair of Damon Wildeve and Eustachia Vye.  FTP, identify this novel whose ending also sees a blind Clym Yeobright become a wandering preacher, a work by Thomas Hardy named for Yeobright’s homecoming to Egdon Heath.;;Return of the Native
Biology;;They were first identified by Roger Guillemin in the 1970s. They are associated with appetite control and the release of sex hormones, and many researchers believe that the rapid secretion of the beta- type, which is found almost exclusively in the pituitary gland, occurs immediately after a severe trauma like a gunshot wound or an amputation. The effects of acupuncture have also been attributed to these compounds. FTP, name these neurochemicals, the body’s natural painkillers.;;endorphin(s)
Religion/Mythology;;In the Inferno Dante places him in the ninth bolgia of the eighth circle of Hell where he is constantly cleft in two.  His father, Abdallah, died before he was born and when his mother died when he was six he was cared for by his uncle, the leader of the Hashim clan.  Eventually marrying the wealthy widow Khadijah, he was forced to flee his home city due to Abu Jahl’s opposition to his new views, eventually leading to his hegira to Medina.  FTP, identify this man who, in 612, began being visited by the angel Gabriel and went on to become the chief prophet of Islam.;;(Abu) (al-Qasim) (M(u|a){1}?hamm(a|e){1}?d|Mahomet){1}? (ibn) (Abd) (Allah)
Philosophy;;In a portion of its third section the author muses on the accidental arson committed by his temporary roommate.  In the second section the author attacks the majority by asking why it "crucifies Christ, and excommunicates Copernicus".  It ends by encouraging a State that respects the individual, preparing the way for an even more "perfect and glorious State" and begins with the author using the Mexican-American War to illustrate why government is inefficient.  FTP, name this work in which the author claims "That government is best which governs least" and which was inspired by a night in jail, a long essay by Henry David Thoreau.;;Civil Disobedience
World History;;This empire had its paper currency devalued seventy-fold within sixty years of its founding, so it turned to copper coins, which were quickly counterfeited.  This faulty policy was in part due to the peasant man who founded it, the Hongwu emperor.  In its early years the eunuch admiral Cheng Ho began a series of seven naval expeditions, but a gradual decline over the next 250 years, spurred on by ever increasing Manchu raids, stunted this empire’s growth.  FTP, name this Chinese dynasty in power from AD 1368 to 1644, which is now famed for its porcelain.;;Ming (Dynasty)
Literature;;The magistrate Othon proves to be an obstructive force in this novel but his tune changes upon the death of his son Jacques.  Another change overcomes Cottard, who goes crazy as a result of the titular situation.  It features two sermons by Father Paneloux, the first of which blames the sins of Oran for the problem facing the town.  Among those who persevere are Joseph Grand and this novel’s narrator Dr. Bernard Rieux.  FTP, name this work about the title epidemic, a work by Albert Camus.;;(The) Plague|(La) Peste
Chemistry;;Primary ones can be made from phthalimide anions without danger of overalkylation, a convenient synthesis discovered by Siegmund Gabriel. They can also be made by reducing alkyl azides via either catalytic hydrogenation or treatment with lithium aluminum hydride. They can be converted to alkenes via the Hoffmann elimination, or acylated to form amides. Most of their chemistry is due to the reactivity of a lone pair, which makes them function as bases, and the simplest one is ammonia. FTP, name this class of compounds characterized by the presence of a nitrogen atom.;;amine(s)
Music;;The premiere of this opera was delayed for eleven months because the set designs and costumes were trapped in Paris during the Franco-Prussian War.  The Triumphal March and ballet that open Act II are central to the returning army’s celebrations, but it is the solo pieces that drive this work.  Among those are a baritone role for Amonasro and a mezzo-soprano role for the jealous Amneris.  FTP, name this opera that ends with the Egyptian officer Radames buried alive with the titular Ethiopian slave, a work by Giuseppe Verdi.;;Aida
Miscellaneous;;After one in 1698, which exempted the poor, England stopped the practice for several hundred years. 1990’s "Community Charge," one led to massive protests and the fall of Margaret Thatcher.  Wat Tyler’s Peasant Revolt came in response to the one that John of Gaunt passed to finance the Hundred Years War.  In the United States, the term has a more specific meaning, and Harper vs. Virginia Board of Elections and the 24th Amendment effectively outlawed them.  FTP, give the term for any tax levied on individuals instead of property or merchandise, or as a prerequisite to voting.;;poll tax
Miscellaneous;;This film long claimed to have been the first American movie in which a fight using karate was presented.  Janet Leigh is very hot as a minor character and Laurence Harvey gives an under-rated performance as an "unloveable" main character.  However, only the actress playing the scheming and sinister senator’s wife earned an Academy Award nomination.  Starring Angela Lansbury and Frank Sinatra, this 1962 film was recently remade by Jonathan Demme.  FTP, name this film about a man brainwashed during the Korean War to become an assassin, whose 2004 version starred Denzel Washington.;;(The) Manchurian Candidate
Biology;;It is a hereditary, autosomal dominant disorder caused by a defective gene involved in the production of fibrillin. The most dangerous effect of this disorder is a proclivity towards aortic aneurysms, as the aorta is weak and tends to bulge. More common symptoms include a concave chest cavity and long, spindly limbs and torso. FTP, name this genetic disease of which many believe Abraham Lincoln was a victim?;;Marfan(') s Syndrome
Economics;;Karl Marx distinguished between its appearance in society as a whole among autonomous parties, and its appearance under the authority of a dominant party. Emile Durkheim asserted that it was a prerequisite for the growth of organic solidarity in a modern culture, and wrote about it "in society" in one of his works.  Perhaps the best-known example of it is  the set of 18 separate operations in a pin factory cited in a 1776 work.  FTP, name this sociological concept, the separation of tasks for maximum efficiency.;;division of labor
Religion/Mythology;;Its name is derived from the word for "to receive" or "to accept," and its origins can be traced back to 12th-century France.  Its origins are attributed to Isaac the Blind, who was also the originator of the idea of sephirothic emanation. The origins for the Hermetic, or Christian, version can be traced to Renaissance Italy in the 1490s. For all versions the teachings are drawn from the ancient book known as The Zohar.  FTP, what is this denomination of mystical Judaism which claims several famous adherents including Britney Spears and Madonna?;;Kabbalah
Miscellaneous;;Their record sleeves have featured pictures of Vanessa Redgrave, Truman Capote, and James Dean.  Accused of condoning pedophilia in the songs "Handsome Devil" and "Reel Around the Fountain," their most successful album, The Queen is Dead, featured the classic tearjerker "There is a Light that Never Goes Out".  Famous for the song "How Soon is Now," name, FTP, this Manchester band of the 1980s, whose lead singer Morrissey went on to have a successful solo career.;;(The) Smiths
Literature;;Among the accessory characters are the tax collector Binet and the young assistant Justin who unwittingly assists in the title character’s final act.  This novel features some theological arguments between Bournisien and the town apothecary, but other residents of Yonville are the focus of the central plot.  Among those residents are the law clerk Leon and the wealthy landowner Rodolphe, both of whom have affairs with the title character, who ruins the finances of her doctor husband Charles before committing suicide.  FTP, identify this novel about a French country girl written by Gustave Flaubert.;;Madame Bovary
Literature;;Scenes three through seven of this play are set in the forest at night, while scenes two and eight are set at dusk and dawn at the edge of the Great Forest.  At the beginning an old woman is interrogated by a Cockney trader named Henry Smithers, who goes on to warn the title character that Lem is going to kill him.  FTP, name this play set on an island in the West Indies in which a black ruler is killed by silver bullets, a work of Eugene O’Neill.;;Emperor Jones
United States History;;He was known as "King Coody" when he led a Federalist faction known as the "Coodies" during the War of 1812, after which he was elected to the senate.  The brother-in-law of Francis Scott Key, whom he met while studying law in Annapolis, he became Attorney General under Andrew Jackson, who rewarded him for his service in opposing the National Bank by naming him to the Supreme Court.  FTP, name this successor to John Marshall as Chief Justice who wrote the decision in the Dred Scott case.;;(Roger) Taney
Biology;;The use of this amino acid, in combination with lipotropic combinations or liver-detoxifying products, has been proposed for treatment of endometriosis, a disease of the uterus.  Individuals with high histamine levels are often deficient in it, which leads to the inability to use folic acid.  In eukaryotes it is represented by the codon AUG and in all forms is only one of two essential amino acids that contains sulfur.  FTP, name this amino-acid that is always the first one present in peptide formation.;;methionine
Art;;He started out in his family’s stone-carving business before coming to work with Bruno Paul and then Peter Behrens before opening his own firm.  His work in Europe included the Tugendhat House in the Czech Republic as well as the Weissenhof apartments and Berlin’s New National Gallery.  He went on to design the German Pavillion at the Barcelona exposition during his time as director of the Bauhaus.  FTP, name this designer of the Seagram Building, an architect whose motto was "Less is More".;;(Ludwig) Mies (van der Rohe)
Religion/Mythology;;She was originally a princess of Lydia and daughter of Idmon of Colophon.  Her biggest change occurred when she was doused with aconite after she hanged herself.  She was given a chance to recant her claims by an old woman but hailed insults upon the woman, who was actually her opponent in disguise.  She depicted Europa, Danae, and Leda on a beautiful tapestry so perfect that it led to her demise.  FTP, name this figure who boasted that she was a better weaver than Athena, and for her hubris was turned into a spider.;;Arachne
Literature;;In chapter 8 of this novel, Block the tradesman is introduced to the protagonist by Leni.  In chapter 9, the protagonist is ordered to escort an Italian to the Cathedral, and in the tenth and final chapter, set on the evening before the protagonist’s 31st birthday, he is stabbed to death.  He has conversations with Frau Grubach and Fraulein Burstner after the opening page in which we learn that "without having done anything wrong he was arrested one fine morning".  FTP, name this novel about Josef K., a work by Franz Kafka.;;(The) Trial
Religion/Mythology;;At the end of the 19th-century a division of them known as tertiares, those who lived in secular society, developed.  The papal bull Quo elongati permitted them to have buildings, which led to a schism between the Rigorists led by John of Parma and the Conventuals led by Bonaventure.  This order was approved by Pope Innocent III in 1210, and called for disciples to lead an "apostolic life" like that of Jesus, which included a vow of complete poverty.  Officially known as the "little brothers," this mendicant order was founded by an Italian saint.  FTP, name this religious group created by a mystic from Assisi.;;Franciscan(s) (order)|Friars Minor;;Fratres Minores|Little Brothers
Chemistry;;It is rarely observed in acid catalyzed hydrations and hypohalous additions, but always results in regioselective reactions.  There are several restrictions on its application, including the absence of peroxides.  In addition, an asymmetric reagent, often a hydrogen halide, and an asymmetric alkene must be used.  Stating that the free hydrogen will always add to the double bond carbon that already has a larger number of hydrogen atoms, FTP, identify this rule of organic chemistry named for the Russian who proposed it.;;Markovnikov(') (s) (Rule)
Economics;;Among the situations the author uses to make his points in this book are the plight of Irish prostitutes in London and the exploitation of Holland’s fisheries.  Book Five begins with a clarification on the expenses of maintaining both militias and standing armies; Book Two details the "nature, accumulation, and employment of stock;" and Book Four details the "systems of political economy".  Its author advocated that government maintain a laissez-faire attitude and coined the principle of the "invisible hand" to elucidate this point.  FTP, name this magnum opus of Adam Smith.;;(An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of) (the) Wealth of Nations
Music;;Francois Poulenc wrote eight of them, including "Ball of the Young Women" and "Phalenes".  Though it was Irish composer John Field that introduced this type of composition.  A set of three symphonic poems entitled "Clouds," "Festivals" and "Sirens" shares this name, though the work’s title was taken from paintings of Whistler by its composer, Claude Debussy.  The best-known example is a series of 21 pieces for piano by Chopin.  FTP, give this musical term which comes from the French for "of the night".;;(the) nocturne(s)
Literature;;Count Robert de Montesquiou was the original of his homosexual character Baron de Charlus.  He used Laure Hayman, his uncle’s mistress, as the basis for his character Odette, and his lovers Reynaldo Hahn and Lucien Daudet were the model for Albertine.  All of these characters appear in a work published between 1913 and 1927, whose sections include Cities of the Plain and Swann’s Way.  FTP, name this French writer who produced the lengthy novel Remembrance of Things Past.;;(Marcel) Proust
World History;;The Law of Succession that he passed officially declared his nation a state monarchy and was one of the so-called Organic Laws that he passed to legalize his own rule.  He made his name during the Rif War, and his way to the top opened up with the death of General Sanjurjo, and he soon consolidated his power by established his own political party, FET, or the Falange.  In 1969 he named his successor as the grandson of Alfonso XII, the last king.  FTP, name this military leader who ruled for 45 years as dictator of Spain.;;(Francisco) Franco
Physics;;The Barkhausen Effect is a series of minute jumps in this property.  It is believed to be caused by fields generated by electron spins in combination with a mechanism known as exchange coupling.  Substances exhibit this property below the Curie temperature, and most substances that exhibit it are divided into regions known as domains.  FTP, identify this retention of a magnetic moment even when the external magnetic field is reduced to zero, so-named because of its presence in iron.;;ferromagnetism
Philosophy;;Charles Taylor has written two books about this philosopher, one of which considers him "and modern society," and he was also the subject of Herbert Marcuse’s Reason and Revolution.  Walter Kaufmann’s "reinterpretation" of his work argues that he was strongly influenced by Goethe and Schiller and dismisses the view that he thought that Germany was the culmination of world history, a position others have read into his Philosophy of Right.  FTP, name this thinker who wrote The Phenomenology of Spirit, whose notion of the dialectic proved highly influential.;;((G) (.) (eorg) (W) (.) (ilhelm) (F) (.) (riedrich)) Hegel
United States History;;After being assaulted by a Catholic soldier in Italy, he returned to America and used the pseudonym "Brutus" to argue that Catholic immigrants were being deployed by the Church to win control of the West for Europe.  He was in England during the War of 1812 as a student of history painting, and on his return produced an enormous depiction of The Old House of Representatives, though he is better known for his scientific achievements.  FTP, name this man who gave up on art to prove that electricity could be used for long-distance communication, which he did by inventing the electric telegraph.;;(Samuel) Morse
Literature;;It begins with Sir Hugh Evans learning that his cousin, Justice Robert Shallow, refuses to be abused.  It ends with Mr. Brook revealing his true identity after having pretended to be an aspiring lover of his own wife.  In the subplot, Fenton marries Anne, the daughter of one of the title characters, though she is also courted by Dr. Caius and Slender.  FTP, name this comedy by Shakespeare in which Mistresses Ford and Page, the titular women, are ineffectually seduced by Sir John Falstaff.;;(The) Merry Wives of Windsor
World History;;He fought his last battle at Eurymedon, where he led a Seleucid fleet.  He fought to a draw at Crotona, and was recalled after his side’s defeat at Bagbrades, a few years after his brother’s death at Metaurus River.  This was a far cry from such early victories as Trebia and Lake Trasimene.  His greatest victory came when he encircled the forces of Paulus and Varro at Cannae, but utter defeat followed fourteen years later at Zama in 202 BC.  FTP, name this son of Hamilcar Barca and great Carthaginian general of the Second Punic War.;;Hannibal
Biology;;It forms the tubes secreted by phoronids, who live in those tubes.  It makes up the setae, or bristles, protruding from annelids such as the clam worm and sandworm.  Taking its name from the Greek for "tunic," it is composed of acetylglucosamines linked in beta-1,4 manner.  FTP, name this natural polymer that is found in the beak-like mouth of a squid, the cell walls of fungi, and the exoskeletons of insects and arthropods.;;chitin
Literature;;The poet invokes memories of the recently ended French Revolution with the question "Dare its deadly terrors clasp," one of the few references in this poem not directly relating to the title figure.  Images of that title figure are depicted within the twelve questions posed in this poem and "the sinews of thy heart" and "the fire of thine eyes".  The last of those questions, "What immortal hand or eye / Dare frame thy fearful symmetry," ends this short work that first appeared in Songs of Experience.  FTP, name this companion piece to "The Lamb," a poem by William Blake.;;(The) Tyger
Geography;;It used to be known as the Atil, meaning "big river," and among the cities it serves are Saratov and Tver’.  Along with such tributaries as the Oka, Vetluga, and Kama, it forms the largest river system in its continent.  After rising in the Valdai Hills, it flows east past Kazan before turning south, passing Samara, and emptying into the Caspian Sea.  FTP, name this 2,300-mile-long river, which starts northwest of Moscow.;;Volga (River)
Literature;;He wrote two novels, one about the "friends and acquaintances" of Sister Jane, the other a "story of Reconstruction" that depicts Gabriel Tolliver.  His Mingo was the first volume in his series of sketches about the people of Georgia, though he is better known for a character who first appeared in the Atlanta Constitution and whose "songs and sayings" first appeared in book form in 1880.  FTP, name this Southern writer, who wrote about the Tar-Baby, Br’er Rabbit, and other plantation characters in his stories of Uncle Remus.;;(Joel) (Chandler) Harris
Music;;Among his compositions are "Heart Wounds" and "The Last Spring," melodies after a popular poem of his nation.  His piano works include the Humoresques and 66 Lyric Pieces, among which are the "Cradle Song" and "Wedding Day at Troldhaugen".  His first major work was the Piano Concerto in A minor, which was first sight-read by Franz Liszt, but he gained widespread fame with a piece of incidental music he was asked to write in 1876.  FTP, name this author of the Holberg Suite and two suites for Peer Gynt, the greatest Norwegian composer.;;(Edvard) Grieg
Miscellaneous;;Their first manager was Rene Lachemann, and they used their first expansion draft pick on Nigel Wilson.  They used their first real draft pick on catcher Charles Johnson, and Brian Harvey and Gary Sheffield were the team’s first All-Stars, in their inaugural season of 1993.  FTP, name this National League baseball team, which became the first wild card team to win the World Series in 1997, and then won again in 2003.;;(Florida) Marlins|Florida
Literature;;He concluded that "This Jack, joke, poor potsherd, patch, matchwood, immortal diamond, is immortal diamond" in "That Nature is a Heraclitean Fire".  In a poem "to a young child," he asked Márgarét if she was "grieving over Goldengrove unleaving," while he wrote that "there lives the dearest freshness deep down things" in "God’s Grandeur".  FTP, name this British poet who also praised God for dappled things in "Pied Beauty" and caught this morning morning’s minion in "The Windhover".;;(Gerard) (Manley) Hopkins
World History;;Among the battles in the later part of this war were Cynosemma and Cyzicus.  The eventual losers reached a high point after Sphacteria but following defeats at Delium and Amphipolis signed a peace ending the first phase, called the Archidamian War.  Beginning with a fight between Corcyra and Corinth, it ended with crushing defeat at Aegospotami, though the climax had occurred nearly a decade earlier with the disastrous Sicilian Expedition.  FTP, name this long war recorded by Thucydides in which a Spartan coalition defeated Athens.;;(The) (2nd|Second) Peloponnesian (War)
Literature;;The sensitive Balthasar sings the song "Sigh no more, ladies, sigh no more," but it is Conrad who has been portrayed as the possible homosexual lover of the villain in recent productions of this play.  That villain is part of a group that comes to Messina and stays at the house of Leonato.  Such characters as the sheriff Dogberry are more memorable than the young lovers Claudio and Hero, who are able to overcome the schemes of Don John.  FTP, name this Shakespeare play that also features the interplay between Beatrice and Benedick.;;Much Ado About Nothing
Biology;;This compound is used in the manufacture of levothyroxine, a thyroid deficiency drug.  Its two subunits are joined by an acetal oxygen bridge in the beta orientation and it is dextro-rotatory.  On a scale of relative sweetness, where sucrose is 100, it ranks below maltose and galactose at 15.  When undigested, it ferments in the colon and causes abdominal pain, bloating, gas, and diarrhea.  Consisting of glucose and galactose this is, FTP, what disaccharide that comprises 4-6% of cow’s milk.;;lactose
Philosophy;;A "Prophetic" version of this philosophy has been attributed to Cornell West, while Richard Rorty has developed a modified version and wrote a 1982 book about the "Consequences" of it.  Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr. wrote a book applying this philosophical "ism" to the law.  Revived in the 1950s by Quine’s Two Dogmas of Empiricism, its first major proponent was Charles Sanders Peirce.  FTP, identify this theory arguing that practical use is the test of truth and which is associated with John Dewey and William James.;;pragmatism
Art;;In commissioning a portrait of himself on the imperial throne Napoleon instructed Jean Ingres to make him reminiscent of God in this artwork, which the emperor had plundered and moved to the Louvre.  At the very bottom we learn that the work was completed for Jodicus Vyd, but more noticeable are the depictions of Adam and Eve at either end, particularly Eve’s almost pregnant belly.  Even more famous is the Adoration of the Lamb portion at the bottom.  Begun by the artist’s brother Hubert and completed in 1432, FTP, name this large altarpiece painted by Jan van Eyck.;;Ghent altarpiece
United States History;;It was adopted by the London Conference and was accepted in the nation in question largely due to the efforts of Wilhelm Marx.  Among its stipulations was the introduction of new excise, transportation, and custom taxes.  Named for the chair of the committee which proposed it, who would become the 30th U.S. Vice President, it also called for the evacuation of Belgian and French troops from the Ruhr, provided for massive U.S. loans, and arranged that payments would begin at one billion marks per year and increase over four years to 2.5 billion marks per annum.  FTP, identify this 1924 plan for German war-reparations eventually replaced by the Young Plan.;;Dawes (Plan)
Literature;;During the latter part of his life he received much criticism for organizing a club solely for schoolgirls, the Angelfish Club.  His disastrous investment in the Paige typesetting machine was the end of a business career started well when his Charles L. Webster Company published Ulysses Grant’s memoirs.  Thus he was forced to continue writing, releasing such works as Personal Recollections of Joan of Arc, The American Claimant, and a tale of mixed identity in Dawson’s Landing, Pudd’nhead Wilson.  FTP, name this American who also wrote the travelogues Innocents Abroad and Roughing It and novels about Tom Sawyer and Huck Finn.;;(Mark) Twain|(Samuel) Clemens
Biology;;Cytotoxic T cells secrete of perforin from these structures and melanocytes secrete melanin from a modified form of them.  In addition, their exocytosis provides the additional membrane needed to quickly seal wounds in the plasma membrane.  I-cell disease is caused by a failure to phosphorylate all enzymes that are supposed to be transported to them.  FTP, name these organelles that contain lipases, nucleases, proteases, and other digestive enzymes that break down complex molecules in the body.;;lysosome(s)
Religion/Mythology;;In the Iliad they strike dumb Xanthus, Achilles’ talking horse, when he prophesizes his master’s death.  According to Hesiod they were one of the many entities formed when the blood of the castrated Ouranos fell upon the Earth, while Aeschylus asserts that they are the offspring of Night.  In the most famous story regarding them they are appeased when given the name "kindly ones" after they pursue Orestes to Athens.  Although their number is often indeterminate, many ancient writers numbered them at three: Alecto, Megaera, and Tisiphone.  FTP, identify these appalling and avenging spirits of Greek myth.;;Erinyes|Fur(y|ies){1}?|Eumenides
Geography;;About two-thirds of the way through its course it receives the Meta River on its left and joins the Apure River.  Early on it divides at La Esmeralda, and one of its arms, the Casiquiare River, flows southward.  After it rises in the Parima Mountains, it follows a course resembling a reverse C and goes through the plains known as the Llanos [YA-nose] before entering the Atlantic Ocean.  FTP, name this South American river that flows mostly through Venezuela.;;Orinoco (River)
United States History;;In its most famous engagement Samuel Greene had to take over command when John L. Worden was blinded. It was lost at sea on route to Cape Hatteras and had nearly sunk while being pulled to its first action by the tug Seth Low.  So skeptical were officials about the seaworthiness of this vessel that all development costs were to be returned by its designer, John Ericsson, if it failed.  Critics were silenced when this long, low, maneuverable steam boat with a rotating turret famously described at a "cheesbox on a raft" defended the Minnesota in the Battle of Hampton Roads.  FTP, name this first ironclad, a Union ship that fought to a standstill with the Merrimack.;;(USS) Monitor
Literature;;He spoke of the "Champak odours" that fail "like sweet thoughts in a dream" and experimented with an Orientalist theme in the love poem "The Indian Serenade".  He wrote of the life of the man who is bound by the titular "Spirit" to "fear himself , and love all humankind" in his "Hymn to Intellectual Beauty".  The "old, mad, blind, despised, and dying" king symbolizes the times in his "England in 1819" and he employs terza rima to praise the titular weather phenomenon in his "Ode to the West Wind".  FTP, name this poet who also refers to a "Blithe Spirit" and a traveler from an "antique land" in his "To a Skylark" and "Ozymandias".;;(Percy) (Bysshe) Shelley
Astronomy;;Though they happen several times a day, it was not until 1999 that ROTS-1 at Los Alamos was able to make a visible-light observation of one.  After the initial event, an x-ray afterglow often persists for several days. They were first observed by US Vela nuclear test detection satellites in the 1960’s, and since then black holes, colliding neutron stars, and ordinary supernovae have all been hypothesized as their source.  FTP, name these cosmic events marked by a sudden, intense increase in high-energy radiation, and often referred to as GRBs.;;gamma-ray burst(er|s);;GRB
Religion/Mythology;;Among the important writings of this religious group was the Letter to Flora  A large number of their writings were discovered in 1945 near Naj’ Hammadi and include the Gospel of Truth which was attributed to one of their most important leaders, Valentinus, and the Gospel of Thomas.  Their cosmogony included a hierarchy of thirty Aeons one of whom, Sophia, formed the material world through her transgressions which was then shaped by the Demiurge.  Believing that certain mystical wisdom was the key to salvation, FTP, what was this early heresy whose names comes from the Greek for "knowing"?;;Gnostic(ism|s)
Music;;Do not give its number.  It was first performed after Joseph Huttenbrunner’s persistent badgering of conductor Johann Herbeck.  The 14-minute first movement begins by laying down a cornerstone in the basses and was part of the portion sent to the Styrian Music Society for an award given to its composer.  Set aside when its composer had contracted syphilis in 1822, it is numbered before the composer’s so-called "Great" Symphony.  FTP, name this 8th symphony written by Franz Schubert of which only two movements are complete.;;Unfinished (Symphony);;Schubert(')s (Eighth|8th){1}? (Symphony)
World History;;He was the first to equip his knights with Percheron horses, explaining their military effectiveness.  His great-grandfather the "Elder of Landen" first served in the post that became hereditary for his family, though he would step out of that post after defeating the Neustrians.  His greatest victory however came over Abd-ar-Rahman, the emir of Spain, but it was his "Short" son who would found a new dynasty.  FTP, name this mayor of the palace and grandfather of Charlemagne, who earned his nickname of "hammer" for his victory over Arab forces at Tours in 732.;;(Charles) Martel
Literature;;For a six-year period the New York Times had a standing policy not to review any of his books because of the fallout from his novel The City and the Pillar, which had a homosexual protagonist.  In the next decade, the 1950s, he wrote three detective novels under the pseudonym of Edward Box.  He would also co-write the script for Ben-Hur, but he is better known for such historical novels as Hollywood and Burr.  FTP, name this American novelist of Julian and Empire, who also wrote a satire focusing on a transsexual in his Myra Breckenridge.;;(Gore) Vidal
Physics;;This effect allows a very accurate measurement of the ratio of electron charge to Planck’s constant, as the ratio is related to the frequency of an alternating current created by the application of a steady potential difference across a certain device.  It can involve the application of a magnetic field which, as it increases, causes a current that cycles from zero to a maximum and back to zero again, although after the field reaches a certain value, there is no more superconductivity across a thin insulating barrier between two normal conductors.  FTP, name this effect that makes use of tunneling across superconductors.;;Josephson (effect|junction)
Miscellaneous;;After he was rejected by his love Nephri, he turned against mankind.  He came to power by overthrowing the pharaoh Rama-Tut and would take a new name, forever abandoning En Sabah Nur.  In an alternate future he had planned to transfer his essence to his heir, Strye, before he died in combat, but in all worlds of the Marvel Universe he is a metamorph, capable of altering his shape at will.  It was he who transformed Angel into Archangel.  FTP, name this immortal super mutant enemy of the X-Men, who is served by Death, Famine, War, and Pestilence – his so-called "Four Horseman".;;Apocalypse;;En Sabah Nur
Literature;;He had to yet to find his mature form in the novel Armance.  He wrote of his own life at length in his Memoirs of Egotism and the autobiographical novel The Life of Henry Brulard.  An influential analysis of love is given in his essay "On Love" and the Romantic movement is given a voice in his essay "Racine and Shakespeare".  He is best-known however for two novels that follow the lives of the flawed protagonists Fabrice del Dongo and Julien Sorel.  FTP, name this writer who served in the army of Napoleon, an experience he drew on in The Charterhouse of Parma and The Red and the Black.;;Stendhal|(Marie-Henri) Beyle
World History;;In the last years of his reign he put down the usurper Eugenius defeating him at the River Frigidus while earlier he had defeated the usurper Magnus Maximus.  Although he had gone into retirement following the execution of his father, two years later he was recalled to service by Gratian after the death of Valens at Adrianople in 378.  In response to a riot he massacred much of the populace of Thessalonica but was forced to do penance by Ambrose of Milan. Upon his death the Roman Empire was split into Eastern and Western halves by his sons Arcadius and Honorius.  FTP, name this emperor who made Christianity the official religion of the Roman state.;;Theodosius (the Great|I|the First)
Earth Science;;If the block opposite an observer moves to the right, it is termed right lateral and in the opposite case, left lateral.  Examples include Astypalaea Linea on Europa, and the Altyn Tagh, in the Tibetan plateau.  Also known as wrench, transcurrent, or wrench types, their best example might be the San Andreas.  FTP, name this kind of fault in which there exists a vertical fissure between two tectonic plates moving in opposite directions.;;strike-slip (fault);;fault
World History;;He served as minister of Indian Affairs and Northern Development from 1968-1974 and was deputy Prime Minister in 1984 but lost to John Turner in his bid to become head of the Liberal Party.  Known as "the little guy from Shawinigan," he came to his biggest post by succeeding Kim Campbell.  Due to the inefficacy of the policies of the Mulroney government, he had to deal with a nearly successful secessionist bid from Quebec.  Succeeded last year by Paul Martin, FTP who is this former Prime-Minister of Canada?;;(Jean) Chretien
Economics;;He had an early interest in psychology and later in his life discovered, contemporaneously with Donald Hebb, the synaptic connection model of the mind which he put forth in his 1952 work The Sensory Order.  He is more famous in another field for which he developed his idea of a "spontaneous order" and wrote such works as The Pure Theory of Capital.  His most famous work argues that state control of the economy leads to totalitarianism.  FTP, name this man who shared the 1974 Nobel in Economics with Gunnar Myrdal and wrote The Road to Serfdom.;;(Friedrich) (August) (von) Hayek
United States History;;Its first two presidents were William Jones and Langdon Cheeves while Alexander Dallas was instrumental in its set-up and Stephen Girard in its financing.  After its demise it continued for five years under a Pennsylvania State Charter.  It came under heavy criticism for its supposed role in the Panic of 1819 but its legality was upheld in McCulluch v Maryland where a state law taxing one of its branches was ruled unconstitutional.  FTP, identify this financial institution headed by Nicholas Biddle whose charter was not renewed because of Andrew Jackson’s vetoes.;;(Second|2nd){1}? Bank of the U(.) (nited) S(.) (tates);;Bank of the U(.)(nited) S(.)(tates)
Literature;;Along with his future executor Owen Barfield and J.R.R. Tolkien he was a member of a group of Oxford Medievalists called the Inklings and wrote a number of works on the Middle Ages including Allegory of Love and The Discarded Image.  Dr. Ransom is the hero of Out of the Silent Planet, the first book of his Space Trilogy while another famous work is a series of communiqués between a demon and his nephew, Wormwood, entitled The Screwtape Letters.  Digory Kirke, Eustace Scrubb, Aslan [ASS-lan], and Edmund are all characters which appear in his most famous series.  FTP, identify this author of the Chronicles of Narnia.;;(C(.) (live)) (S(.) (taples)) Lewis
Biology;;Uncouplers of this process include 2,4-dinitrophenol and cyanide.  Resulting from the conversion of succinate to fumarate and the hydrogen ions delivered by NADH, intermediates in it include the cytochromes and coenzyme Q, also known as ubiquinone.  Several iron ions along it are repeatedly oxidized and reduced, and it provides the gradient for ATP synthase, which then completes the process of chemiosmosis.  Oxygen serves as the final acceptor of, FTP, what energy-producing pathway in the inner mitochondrial membrane involving negatively-charged particles?;;electron transport (chain|system);;chemiosmosis
Miscellaneous;;Among the packet author’s favorite episodes were "Full Moon" and "The Gas Man" although it was for "Three Men and Adena" that creator Tom Fontana won a best-writing Emmy in 1993.  Among the more interesting characters were cameraman J.H. Brodie played by Max Perlich and Mike Kellerman played by Reed Diamond.  Actors Yaphet Kotto, Kyle Secor and Richard Belzer were around for the whole run although the most notable performance was the portrayal of Detective Frank Pembleton by Andre Braugher.  FTP, identify this artsy 1990’s NBC cop-show set in Baltimore.;;Homicide(:) (Life on the Street)
Religion/Mythology;;Among her possessions in visual art is the head of the head of the demon Raktabija.  Regarded as the greatest reality in Tantrism her name comes from the feminine form of the Sanskrit word for time.  Sharing her name with the fourth and last age of the world, she was born from the forehead of Durga and is often depicted standing on top of Shiva because she provides his energy as his Shakti.  FTP, identify this blood-thirsty aspect of the Devi or "Divine Mother" who wears a skull of necklaces and is worshipped by the Thugs.;;Kali
World History;;Although made heir to the throne in the Pact of Guisando this monarch had to fight a Civil War with Juana la Beltraneja in order to secure the throne.  The second child of Juan II and the successor to a half-brother Enrique IV, this monarch was succeeded by her daughter Juana "the Mad" while another daughter became the first wife of Henry VIII.  Together with her spouse she established the Santa Hermandad, instituted the Spanish Inquisition and completed the conquest of Granada.  FTP, name this Spanish monarch who financed Columbus’s voyages and unified the Spanish monarchy with her husband Ferdinand.;;Isabella (of Castile|I|the First|the Catholic){1}?;;Isabella
Literature;;The second stasimon is addressed to Helen calling her "death of ships, death of men and cities".  There is a persistent use of yokes and nets as metaphors, which are finally embodied in the implement used to destroy the title character, who has committed a fatal act of hubris by walking into his palace on a lavish red carpet.  Beginning with a watchmen looking for a beacon light, it ends with Aegisthus and his co-conspirator justifying their actions to the chorus of Argive elders over the body of the title character and his new concubine Cassandra.  FTP, identify this Aeschylus tragedy in which Clytemnestra kills her husband, the first play in the Oresteia.;;Agamemnon
Chemistry;;The first molecules found to exhibit it were discovered in coal tar in the 1860s, and it is prevented by heavy angle or steric strain.  Despite the conjugation of their bonds, linear alkenes do not have this quality because they are not cyclic, and other criteria for it include planarity.  10-annulene has extraordinary stability due to it, although benzene may be the best-known compound displaying it.  FTP, name this resonance-derived lack of reactivity in many hydrocarbons, named for the odor arising from the first of said hydrocarbons.;;aromatic(ity)
Economics;;Assessed as a part of the Hecksher-Ohlin model, one analysis of this phenomenon is based on the labor theory of value, and it was included in the long 1817 work Principles of Political Economy and Taxation.  Providing a strong argument for free international trade and specialization, it is ultimately little more than an analysis of relative opportunity costs.  FTP, name this theory of David Ricardo explaining why trade of some goods may be more favorable for some countries due to production factors.;;comparative advantage
Music;;Only the lament of his Arianna survives.  He created the "excited style" which is displayed in his The Combat of Tancredi and Clorinda, and his most notable example of sacred work was the Vesprodella Beata Virgine.  A longtime maestro di cappella at St. Luke’s, he was employed by Gonzaga family of Mantua during his early career.  His two most noted works concern a Roman emperor’s casting off of his wife Ottavia and marriage to his mistress and a musician descending into the Underworld.  FTP, identify this originator of the opera who composed The Coronation of Poppaea and Orfeo.;;(Claudio) Monteverdi
United States History;;He thanked "the communists of the world for their help in my defense" in his memoir In Battle for Peace about his arrest for being an unregistered agent for a foreign power.  His many works include a biography of John Brown, the Marxist influenced history Black Reconstruction, and the sociological work The Philadelphia Negro.  A longtime teacher at Atlanta University, at the end of his life he became a citizen of Ghana, where he died.  The editor for twenty-five years of the journal Crisis, he developed the idea of the "Talented Tenth".  FTP, identify this author of The Souls of Black Folks and co-founder of the NAACP.;;W(.) (illiam) E(.) (dward) B(.) (urghardt) Du Bois;;Du Bois
Literature;;He was one of the founders of the Liberty Party and wrote the abolitionist track "Justice and Expediency".  His first published book was Legends of New England and in his later life he turned to hymns writing nearly one hundred including "Dear Lord and Father of Mankind".  However, he’s best known for such poems as "The Barefoot Boy" and "Telling the Bees," many of which employed the rural dialect he popularized.  FTP, identify this man known as "The Quaker Poet" who wrote "Snow Bound" and "Barbara Frietchie".;;(John) (Greenleaf) Whittier
Physics;;Though this device was actually invented by Samuel Christie, it was popularized by its namesake.  The Pirani thermal conductivity gauge is basically one of these apparatuses with one part in the form of a heated filament placed in a vacuum system.  Comprised of four arms, its namesake used it to measure resistance by comparing current flowing through one part with a known current flowing through another part. FTP, identify this so-called "bridge".;;Wheatstone (bridge)
Miscellaneous;;Said to be located in the middle of Lake Guatavita, governorship of this location was given to Pedro Ursua, Gonzalo Jimenez de Quesada and finally Antionio de Berrio.  Its "Loss" forms the title for a colonial history of Trinidad by V.S. Naipul and it is located "Over the Mountains of the Moon" and ‘Down the Valley of the Shadows" in a Poe poem.  Walter Ralegh mentioned it in the subtitle of his book about the exploration of Guiana.  It originally referred only to the ruler of Manoa but soon was extended to his whole kingdom.  FTP, identify this city of gold sought by conquistadors in South America.;;El Dorado
Religion/Mythology;;According to the Historiae Augustae Alexander Severus had a statue of this man in his sanctuary.  Porphyry placed him among the sages or divine men although Celsus believed that he was a sorcerer who learned magic in Egypt. He was also discussed in the controversial Testimonium Flavianum passage of The Jewish Antiquities of Josephus.  In modern times he was the subject of a "Critically Examined" life by David Strauss as well as a biography by Hegel.    FTP identify this religious figure, the brother of James "The Righteous," who was crucified during the governorship of Pontius Pilate.;;Jesus (of Nazareth|Christ)
World History;;The victor’s only major losses were suffered by Barrel’s and Munro’s regiments who absorbed the brunt of Lord George Murray’s attack on their left.  On the far left the Athol Brigade was devastated by enfilading fire from the Campbell militia and Wolfe’s regiment.  On the right the MacDonalds were routed before they even reached the victor’s lines.  Starving and outnumbered 2-1 the losers were also tired after a marching for a night attack, - which never materialized - upon the Duke of Cumberland’s Royalist army.  FTP, identify this 1746 battle in Scotland which ended Bonnie Prince Charlie’s claims to the throne of England.;;(Battle of) Culloden (Moor)
Literature;;Omens in this play include a black-footed pig eating part of a newly bought rope and a black knot around a package which has recently been brought by a young priest who never appears on stage.  Two sisters, Cathleen and Nora, realize that the clothes belong to their brother, Michael.  Meanwhile another brother sets off for the fair at Connemara against the wishes of his mother.  Based on the author’s experience in the Aran Islands, the climax occurs when a group of villagers bring in the dead body of that brother, Bentley.  FTP name this work whose main character is Maurya, who has had all six of her sons die by drowning, a short play by J.M. Synge.;;Riders to the Sea
Biology;;Plants in this division usually have gametophytes that are always nutritionally independent of the sporophytes.  They are especially common in moist places like the tropics and temperate regions, although some can withstand prolonged drought.  They require free water to reproduce sexually, and few of them exceed two centimeters in length.  About 10,000 species in number, they often contain slender projective roots called rhizoids to anchor them to their substrates.  FTP, name this phylum of nonvascular plants, consisting of hornworts, liverworts, and mosses.;;Bryophyt(a|es){1}?
Art;;From the drawings of Jacques Carrey done in 1674 we can tell that it once had a minaret on top while at another time it was a Byzantine Church of the Theotokos.  Highlights of its east pediment include Helios driving his chariot and a group of three women - Hestia, Dione, and Aphrodite – watching the birth of a god.  Among other things its metopes show the Battle of the Lapiths and Centaurs while the inner frieze shows a Panathenaic Procession.  Designed by Iktinos and Kallikrates it has eight columns rather than the traditional six.  FTP, identify this temple, the centerpiece of the Athenian Acropolis.;;(the) Parthenon
World History;;His greatest intellectual advocate was Diaz Soto y Gama who represented this man at the Aguascalientes Convention.  The end of his movement was signaled with the infighting among his generals who included Antonio Barona, Felipe Neri, and Genevero de la O.  He was assassinated after a rouse carried out by Jesus Guajardo, a subordinate of Pablo Gonzalez who had earlier driven him to a hideout at the base of Poplecatepotl in Morelos.  This opponent of Diaz, Madero, and finally Carranza put forth his agrarian ideals in the Plan of Ayala.  FTP identify this Mexican Revolutionary who fought for "Tierra y Libertad" and whose name was adopted by a band of rebels in Chiapas.;;(Emiliano) Zapata
Philosophy;;In chapter ten the author discusses the writings of Breton, Stendhal, Paul Claudel, and D.H. Lawrence situating them in the context of the myths they present.  The first chapter of this work discounts any physiological determinism while the second looks at things from the "Psychoanalytic Point of View".  The author’s main argument is that the title group must escape a life of immanence and replace it with a life of transcendence.  Based largely on Hegelian and Existentialist ideas this is FTP, what classic feminist work by Simone de Beauvoir?;;(The) Second Sex|(Le) Deuxieme Sex
Chemistry;;He played a major role in his country’s adoption of the metric system.  His wife Marie-Anne translated his scientific works into English for him while he worked as a gunpowder administrator.  The coiner of the term "oxygen", he also worked as a tax collector prior to his debunking of the phlogiston theory.  The empirically-derived law of conservation of mass is often known as his law, and he wrote the first general textbook on chemistry in 1789.  FTP, name this "father of chemistry" who was guillotined during the French Revolution.;;(Antoine) - (Laurent) Lavoisier
Literature;;This author once attempted to write a biography of Roy Campbell but gave up when, in his words, "I could not bring myself to admire him" due to Campbell’s conservative politics.  He describes his first marriage in Kontakion For You Departed and wrote his own biography in Towards the Mountain and Journey Continued. One of his novels discusses the relationship between Stephanie and Pieter van Vlaanderen, while another, inspired by Laurens van der Post’s In a Province, examines the meeting of James Jarvis and Stephen Kumalo.  FTP, name this leader of the South African Liberal Party and author of Too Late the Phalarope and Cry, the Beloved Country.;;(Alan) (Stewart) Paton
Philosophy;;She gave her name to a race of nymph-like women with goat legs in Umberto Eco’s Baudolino and to the title of a Charles Kingsley novel alternately titled New Foes With an Old Face.  Many of her philosophical views can be gleaned from the writings of her pupil Synesius who became bishop of Ptolemais.  Her only known work is a commentary on Book III of her father, Theon’s, edition of Ptolemy’s Almagest although she may have worked on his edition of Euclid’s Elements as well.  After becoming embroiled in a conflict with Archbishop Cyril she was killed by a mob of monks.  FTP identify this Neoplatonist philosopher and mathematician from Alexandria.;;Hypatia
Chemistry;;Combined with thorium, this element is used in lamps for wavelength calibration. Researchers at the University of Helsinki have gotten it to form a compound with hydrogen and fluorine, and it was discovered in 1894 by Lord Rayleigh and William Ramsay. Its unreactivity is due to the 6 electrons that fill its 3p subshell, and it is an alternative to nitrogen because it will not conduct heat as well from tungsten filaments in light bulbs. FTP, name this noble gas with atomic number 18 and chemical symbol Ar.;;Argon
Literature;;Highlights in this play include the theft of a ring and the reunion of a Neapolitan family thought to be lost at sea. Minor characters include the designing woman Frosine, and the servants La Fleche and Master Jacques who treat the audience to numerous sotto voce [vo-chay] comments throughout the play.  It turns out that Anselme is really Don Thomas and that the steward Valere [va-LARE], who is vying for Elise’s hand is really of noble birth.  As a result, the title character rescinds his demands to marry Mariane, the sweetheart of his son Cleante, in order to find his lost treasure.  FTP, name this Moliere play about Harpagon, the titular skinflint.;;(The) Miser|(L')Avare
World History;;Life among his people was described in the writings of Henry Flynn and Nathaniel Isaacs, two settlers of the Farewell Trading Company that passed through his lands.  After his adoptive Mtetwa father was assassinated he gained power by destroying the Langeni. Though the death of his mother, Nandi, caused him to go insane late in his reign and he was eventually killed by his half-brother Dingane, in the early 1820s his standardization of the "assegai" allowed his regiments known as "impi" to dominate Southern Africa.  FTP identify this legendary Zulu chieftain.;;(S|C){1}?haka (Zulu)
Music;;Chopin wrote one for piano in C major, Glinka composed one for piano in D minor, and Rossini produced a "tartare" version.  Introduced by Sebastian Zerezo, this type of piece features the interplay between the "paseo" or walk portion and the "bien parado" or sudden stop.  The most famous example begins with a snare drum and, with the exception of the shift in harmony from C to E towards the end, features a recurrent rhythmic obbligato throughout.  That piece of music was composed for a namesake ballet in 1928.  FTP, identify this Spanish dance which also titles the most famous piece of orchestral music by Maurice Ravel.;;Bolero
Religion/Mythology;;He was buried by God after dying on Mount Nebo, and his sister got leprosy after she showed her envy of him.  The son of Amram and Jochebed, he was nursed by Yocheved and had a son, Gershom, after becoming a shepherd of Jethro, whose daughter he married.  He took up this occupation for 40 years after he murdered an Egyptian for mistreating a slave, but God eventually revealed himself to this man on Mt. Horeb.  FTP, name this brother of Aaron and husband of Zipporah, a prophet of the Old Testament who led the exodus of the Israelites out of Egypt and received the Ten Commandments on Mt. Sinai.;;Mos(es|he){1}?
Biology;;Lowe syndrome causes a deficiency of an enzyme which affects the metabolic processes that take place in this cell structure.  One of its main functions is the remodeling of oligosaccharides, while other functions include the synthesis of lipids like sphingomyelin and the addition of sulfate groups to tyrosine.  Often located near endoplasmic reticulum exit sites, it uses clathrin-coated vesicles to send certain proteins to lysosomes and other vesicles to secrete proteins from the cell.   FTP, name this organelle divided into stacks of flattened, membrane-bounded cisternae, which packages and sorts newly-created proteins.;;Golgi (Apparatus|Body)
Literature;;The ostensible villain of this work is the heir to the estate Coombe Magnon, and he must marry Sophia Grey to ensure that inheritance.  The heroine briefly becomes the confidant of Lucy Steele, who had entered into a secret engagement with a man the heroine loves.  However, that engagement is broken and the path becomes clear for the two weddings that end the novel, in which Colonel Brandon and Edward Ferrars are the grooms.  FTP, name this novel in which Elinor and Marianne Dashwood represent the title sentiments, a work by Jane Austen.;;Sense and Sensibility
Geography;;The town of Calama and the La Silla and Paranal Observatories are located within this area, but Iquique and Antofagasta are more famous cities. The Escondida Mine exploits the sodium nitrate, gold, and copper resources that led to a series of border wars in the 1800’s. The Pan-American Highway passes through the region, lying south of the Altiplano in an ultra-dry rain shadow zone east of a region of the Andes. FTP, name this incredibly dry desert of northern Chile.;;Atacama (Desert)
United States History;;The majority opinion cites the 1939 English case Rex v. Bourne.  Earlier, it begins by citing Holmes’ dissent in Lochner v. New York, acknowledging that "one’s exposure to the raw edges of human existence" and other things "are all likely to influence" one’s thinking on the subject at hand.  In addition to the main ruling, the court held that Dr. James Hallford did not have standing to sue.  The court also cites the 1971 case U.S. v. Vuitch to infer that the Fourteenth Amendment does not apply prenatally.  Ruling that Article 1196 of the Texas Penal Code "sweeps too broadly," FTP, name this 1973 Supreme Court case which struck down severe state restrictions on abortion.;;Roe (v(.)|versus) (Wade)
Astronomy;;It was once known as the marine star due to its proximity to the river constellation Eridanus.  It has a small B star companion which itself has a C star rotating around it, and its fate may be as a rare oxygen-neon dwarf, although a nova is more likely. Of spectral class B8, it radiates 100 times the energy of its constellations larger and cooler alpha star, and it is losing mass at about 70 trillion tons per second, giving it a relatively short life span of several million years. With a name meaning "left foot" in Arabic, FTP, name this blue-white supergiant, the Beta star to Betelgeuse in the constellation Orion.;;Rigel
Literature;;He briefly associates with Fulton Bemis, Carrie Nork, and Minnie Sontag, a group he refers to as "the Bunch" and a group that he eventually finds not worthwhile.  He learns of an affair between May Arnold and his best friend and later engages in his own affair with Tanis Judique.  This is during the period after he is shaken by his best friend Paul Riesling’s crime and he continues to rebel until his wife Myra falls seriously ill.  FTP, name this middle-aged real estate broker from Zenith, the title character of a novel by Sinclair Lewis.;;(George) (F(.)) Babbitt
World History;;When asked to give a eulogy on the death of the Duke of Wellington, he nearly copied word for word Thiers’s eulogy for marshal St. Cyr.  He served in the government of Lord Derby as Chancellor of the Exchequer but his first budget was torn apart by his chief rival, who replaced him.  His first term as prime minister followed the Tory takeover of the 1867 Reform Bill but only lasted 10 months.  Representing Britain at the Congress of Berlin, FTP, name this Conservative Prime Minister from 1874 to 1880, a longtime opponent of William Gladstone and the first British prime minister of Jewish ancestry.;;(Benjamin) Disraeli|(First|1st) (Earl) Beaconsfield|(Viscount) Hughenden
Art;;The interplay of separately lit spaces, in the foreground versus the background, was anticipated by the artist’s earlier painting The Tapestry Weavers. The pairing of the nun and man-servant on the right of the canvas parallels the shadowy and silvery depiction of the royal couple in the center.  Two large Ruben-like paintings hang above the scene as a young boy threatens to kick a contented looking dog and a painter tries to work in his studio.  But the most enigmatic parts of the painting are the man in the open doorway in the background and the dwarf whose pose echoes that of the Infanta.  FTP, identify this 1656 depiction of "The Maids of Honor" by Velazquez.;;(Las) Meninas
Philosophy;;Early events in this philosopher’s life include his father Icesias involving him in the debasing of the metal in his hometown, for which he was banished, and his subsequent abandonment by his slave Manes. Late in life he was kidnapped by pirates and sold to the nobleman Xeniades.  Famous anecdotes involving him include his plucking of a fowl to demonstrate Plato’s claim of man being a "featherless biped" and his famous anachronistic meeting with Alexander the Great, described by Plutarch.  FTP, identify this philosopher said to have used a lamp in broad daylight to search for an honest man, a man considered to be the founder of Cynicism.;;Diogenes (of Sinope)
Physics;;Particle detectors that utilize this effect can emit pulses with widths as low as 10-10 (read: 10 to the minus 10) seconds and can be used in time-of-flight measurements.  The angle of emission is related to the speed of light and the index of refraction of the medium, and measuring the angle can determine the particle’s speed. Discovered by Frank and Tamm and predicted by its namesake, FTP, identify this effect where a blue light is emitted from a particle when it passes into a medium at a speed greater than the speed of light in that medium.;;Cherenkov (radiation)
Literature;;St. Peter is called upon as "the pilot of the Galilean Lake" who shakes his keys "of metals twain".  This poem’s narrator asks if it would not be better to play with the tangles of Nearea’s hair or sport with Amaryllis in the shade rather than ply his homely trade-- and then rails against unworthy clergy who don’t tend their flocks.  It also tells us "to look homeward, and melt with ruth" and commands dolphins to "waft the helpless youth," from the watery depths.  Introduced as a Monody for a learned friend who drowned "on his passage from Chester on the Irish seas," FTP, identify this elegy written in 1637 for Edward King, a work by John Milton.;;Lycidas
World History;;He began construction on a number of aqueducts including the Anio Novus which were completed under his successor.  Among the casualties of his reign was the joint heir at his succession, Gemellus, and the prefect of the Praetorian Guard Macro. Another prefect, Marcus Clemens, joined a band of conspirators including his assassin Cassius Chaerea.  He dined with and showered gifts upon Incitatus who, unfortunately, was a horse.  With a name meaning "little boots", FTP, name this son of Agrippina the Elder and Germanicus who ruled as Roman emperor from 37-41 A.D. after succeeding Tiberius.;;Caligula|Gaius (Caesar Augustus Germanicus)
Religion/Mythology;;A Jorge Luís Borges short story with this name describes a dream in which figures such as Thoth and Janus are shot with revolvers.  Described in the poem Völuspá, some accounts state that afterward, Lif and Lifthrasir will emerge to repopulate Earth.  Most agree that Hati eats the moon, Skoll or Fenris swallows the sun, Heimdall blows his Gjaller horn, and the gods battle the forces of Surt and Loki to the death.  FTP, name this apocalyptic event of Norse mythology.;;Ragnarok
Chemistry;;In this method, if one molecule is larger than another, its increased mass will cause it to move more slowly toward the cathode or anode. Spraying the end result with ninhydrin will cause previously colorless amino acids to form colored spots. Amino acids with an isoelectric point greater than the buffered solution will move toward the cathode because of their positive charge.  FTP, name this method of separating molecules by applying them to filter paper or gel and subjecting them to an electric field.;;(gel) electrophoresis
Literature;;Critical works of this writer include The Time of the Assassins, a study of Rimbaud, and To Paint is to Love Again, which features many of his own watercolors.  But it was for more earthy works like Black Spring and Big Sur and the Oranges of Hieronymus Bosch for which he is better known. Willing to push the envelope in his depictions of sex, his affair with Anais Nin produced a celebrated set of letters, and his Rosy Crucifixion trilogy was censored for more than a decade in the U.S.  His most famous work was a scatological homage to Parisian bohemian life.  FTP, name this author of the once controversial novel The Tropic of Cancer.;;(Henry) Miller
Art;;Contemporary followers of his included the Scamozzi brothers, but it was the poet Count Trissino who gave this man his nickname.  He had already designed the Godi House by the time he won the commission for the Vicenza town hall  at which point he began to mimic Vitruvius more overtly.  Projects like the Villa Barbaro and the Palazzo Chiericato were designed as he was writing his Four Books of Architecture.  Eventually he settled in Venice where he designed the classically inspired churches Il Redentore and San Giorgio Maggiore.  FTP, identify this architect who sparked a namesake revival in 18th century Britain, the Renaissance creator of the Villa Rotonda.;;(Andrea) (Palladio|Di Pietro Della Gondola){1}?
World History;;Key conflicts in this war were the fall of Abu-Ageila and the capture of Sharm El-Sheikh although the losing side was crippled by a surprise attack on their air-force in the opening minutes of the fighting.  Two controversial events were the execution of POWs at El Arish alleged by Gabby Bron and the attack on the USS Liberty.  Like a war eleven years earlier the major cause was the blockading of the port of Eilat and the closing of the Straits of Tiran.  During the campaign Israel gained control of the West Bank, Gaza Strip and Sinai Peninsula while beating Egypt, Jordan and Syria.  FTP, identify this 1967 war named for the number of days it lasted.;;Six Day(s) (War)
Art;;He studied scientific farming under George Geddes several years after his vision recovered from the sumac poisoning he suffered as a youth.  After heading the U.S. Sanitary Commission during the war, he became chair of Yosemite property for California where he implemented ideas like the "parkway".  An outspoken essayist, works like The Cotton Kingdom expressed his abolitionist politics, while his urban designs, often with Calvert Vaux, were meant to bring nature to the masses.  He planned the terrace of the U.S. Capitol, the Stanford Campus, and Jackson Park in Chicago, but FTP, what engineer and landscape architect remains best known for designing Central Park?;;(Frederick) (Law) Olmsted
Literature;;His behavior reminds the narrator of how the provocation of Samuel Adams drove John Colt to commit murder, especially when he is caught one Sunday morning lodging in the narrator’s office, where he has set up his "hermitage".  The narrator tries unsuccessfully to have Turkey, Nippers, and Ginger Nut confront him, and after moving to a new office, the narrator learns that this character has been arrested for vagrancy and sent to the Tombs.  Quiet except for his repeated, passive refusal to perform certain tasks, this is, FTP, what Herman Melville-created clerk whose catchphrase is "I would prefer not to"?;;Bartleby (the Scrivener)
Biology;;It is connected to the inferior vena cava by Cantlie’s line and positioned at the bottom right side of the falciform ligament.  Located on its walls are tubular structures called the ducts of Luschka, which drain into it, until it eventually contracts and empties upon the release of the hormone CCK by the duodenum.  A common disorder that affects this organ is cholelithiasis [KO-lay-lith-EYE-uh-suss], which occurs when salts or cholesterols build up into crystalline deposits.  FTP, name this small organ that is located next to the liver and has the primary function of storing bile.;;gall bladder
United States History;;The image of Mary Ann Vecchio, then a teenage runaway, kneeling and screaming in horror, was captured after this event in a Pulitzer Prize-winning photo by John Filo.  Glenn Frank was credited with preventing more casualties by rushing in after the violence began and pleading with the crowd to disperse.  The culmination of tensions that began when Governor James Rhodes ordered troops to watch over a demonstration against action in Cambodia, it left nine wounded and four dead.  FTP, name this May 4, 1970, incident that saw the National Guard fire into a crowd of student protestors at an Ohio university.;;Kent State (massacre)
Religion/Mythology;;The relief on the base of Phidias’ Athena Parthenos depicts the origin of this woman, and her story precedes that of the story of the Four Ages in Ovid’s Metamorphoses.  She is not named in Hesiod’s Theogony but referred to as a "beautiful evil".  However according to The Works and the Days she is taught to weave by Athena, given a thieving mind by Hermes and built by Hephaestus.   She was then given in marriage to Epimetheus to punish man’s acceptance of the gift of fire from Prometheus.  FTP name this first mortal woman who unleashes evil onto the world by opening her namesake box.;;Pandora
Music;;Its opening scene begins with an Allegro Giusto movement and shows the protagonist on the eve of his coming-of-age ceremony, celebrating with his friend Benno and his drunk tutor Wolfgang.  To escape the Queen Mother’s reminders of his eventual need to marry, the protagonist goes hunting in the forest and is discovered by the evil wizard Von Rothbart, who plots to have his daughter Odile seduce the hero and prevent him from breaking the curse placed upon Odette.  Such is the story of Prince Sigfried, in, FTP, what Tchaikovsky ballet about a maiden who spends her days in the form of a white bird in the title pond?;;Swan Lake
Literature;;It is prefaced with a quote placing Venus as both Hesperus, the evening star, and the morning star – a quote by Plato.  The thirty-sixth stanza makes an allusion to Leigh Hunt’s mentoring, and the forty-sixth stanza makes reference to Chatterton, Sidney, and Lucan in echoing the poem’s intent.  Its fifty-fifth and final stanza ends with the claim that the soul of the title character, "like a star, / Beacons from the abode where the Eternal are".  Written in 1821, the year of its subject’s death, FTP, name this elegy on the death of John Keats composed by Percy Shelley.;;Adonais
Physics;;One result of these objects is the Tonks-Girardeau gas.  In 2003 teams led by Rudolf Grimm and Deborah Jin showed that they could be formed from molecules.  Two useful methods for creating them are laser cooling and magnetic evaporative cooling.  Often created from () rubidium, they are very similar to lasers, where all the photons are identical, since each compound in it is identical.  First created in 1995 by Cornell and Wieman, this is, FTP, what fifth state of matter in which individual atoms combine into one superatom?;;Bose-Einstein (Condensate(s))|B-E-C
World History;;Pope Martin V named him the head of the Order of Christ, which became the primary source of funding for his ventures.  Made Duke of Viseau by his father, he played a large part in the capture of Ceuta which he briefly governed.  He showed poor leadership in a campaign against Tangier where he was forced to leave his brother Fernao as hostage.  However he had success with Gil Eanes’s rounding of Cape Bojador and the organization of voyages to Cape Verde through his school at Sagres.  FTP, name this Portguese prince remembered as a patron of explorers.;;(Prince) Henry the Navigator
Art;;An oddity in this painting is a scene in the background at the far right, featuring a toga-clad man unrolling a parchment and standing in front of a large unfinished pillar.  The central scene is set against a backdrop of a red curtain, where the title character, clad in flowing brown and blue robes, sits and rests her feet on pillows while a quintet of androgynous youths stare over her shoulder in awe of the unnaturally shaped child that lays in her lap.  FTP, name this Mannerist work painted by Parmigianino and named for an extended feature of Mary’s anatomy.;;Madonna ((of|with){1}? the) Long Neck|Madonna dal Collo Lungo
Geography;;Oscar Eckenstein’s 1902 expedition, Charles Houston’s 1938 expedition, and Fritz Wiessner’s 1939 expedition all marked failed attempts at the first full ascent of this mountain.  Finally, an expedition led by Ardito Desio in 1954 saw the Italians Lacedelli and Compagnoni become the first people to reach its summit.  Today, the most common route for climbers is the Abruzzi Spur on its Pakistan side, though routes also exist on its side in China.  Also known as Godwin-Austen, FTP, name this tallest peak in the Karakorum range and second highest mountain in the world.;;K2|Chogori
Literature;;At the time of his death, his novels Fruitfulness, Labor, and Truth were the completed works in his unfinished Four Gospels series.  An earlier trilogy, which contained works about Rome, Lourdes, and Paris, marked his return to novel writing after his foray into criticism, which produced the treatise The Experimental Novel.  Another set of novels, including The Human Beast, The Dram Shop, and The Belly of Paris, comprises his Rougon-Macquart Cycle, which follows a large family during the decline of France’s Second Empire.  FTP, name this naturalist author of Nana and Germinal, who also penned a defense of Alfred Dreyfus with his "J’Accuse".;;(Emile) Zola
Chemistry;;When reacted with hydroxylamine it forms an oxime and when reduced by a sodium amalgam it is converted into isopropyl alcohol.  Not surprisingly, the chief commercial means of producing this chemical is by catalytic dehydrogenation of isopropanol.  This effective solvent has a chemical formula of CH3COCH3, and is also known as 2-propanone.  FTP, name this organic compound, the active ingredient in nail-polish remover and the simplest of the ketones.;;acetone|dimethyl ketone|propan-2-one|beta-ketopropanone
United States History;;Its Fourth Article promised future talks at St. Andrews to resolve an earlier disagreement.  James Gambier, William Adams, and Henry Goulburn were the British signatories of this document.  Both sides did agree to determine a boundary from the St. Croix River to Lake of the Woods and to eliminate the slave trade and hostilities with Indians.  The impressment of American sailors was not addressed and despite this accord, the Battle of New Orleans was fought the next year.  FTP name this treaty that ended the War of 1812.;;(Treaty of) Ghent
Philosophy;;He accompanied General St. Clair as a judge-advocate on a mission to Vienna and Turin but he would not become famous on the continent till the translation of his Political Discourses into French.  Shortly thereafter the first volume of his six-volume History of Great Britain appeared.  His first success, Essays Moral and Political, was surpassed by a reworking of a portion of his Treatise of Human Nature.  FTP, name this philosopher who wrote Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion and Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding.;;(David) Hume
Miscellaneous;;Their earliest success came with the singles "Arnold Layne" and "See Emily Play" which were followed by an album, The Piper at the Gates of Dawn. 1969 saw their release of the soundtrack for the film More as well as the double album Ummagumma.  They were initially led by Syd Barrett, but he went insane and was replaced by David Gilmour on lead guitar and vocals.  However, it was bassist Roger Waters who really took charge of the band, and led it to such songs as "Eclipse" and "Money".  FTP, name this band whose albums include The Wall and Dark Side of the Moon.;;Pink Floyd
Literature;;She is known for her skill at salting pork, and her name is described as "musical, uncommon, and significant".  When we are first set to meet her, the priest and barber appear and interrupt the delivery of a letter to her.  Though her name is frequently invoked, as before the adventure with the Biscayan, she never physically appears during the course of the novel.  FTP, identify this character, whose real name is Aldonza Lorenzo and who is the sworn love of Don Quixote.;;Dulcinea (del Toboso)
Noncomputational Math;;Purdue University’s Louis De Branges de Bourcia claimed to have a proof for this in June 2004.  It initially began with Euler’s definition of the related function, which he evaluated only at real numbers and which he investigated at Bernoulli numbers to show that the sum of the squares of the inverses of the integers equals pi over two.  Its namesake extended that function, the zeta function, over the complex plane and made, FTP, what hypothesizes that all the non-trivial zeros of this function would lie along the critical line, having real part equal to one half?;;Riemann (hypothesis)
World Hisotry;;Among the lowlights of his reign was the exile and subsequent execution of Helvidius Priscus.  His rise to emperor was due mainly to the military success of Antonius Primus and the support of Mucianus.  His reign saw the re-building of the Capitol, which had been burned during a conflict between his supporters and those of his predecessor Vitellius, whom he rebelled against while commander in Judea.  Succeeded by his son Titus, FTP, name this Roman emperor who began construction of the Colosseum and who founded the Flavian dynasty in 69 AD.;;(Caesar) Vespasian(us) (Augustus)|(Titus) (Flavius) Vespasian(us)
Literature;;In one of this novel’s tragic scenes, a falsely accused character falls into the Old Hell Shaft and dies.  By the end Sleary, the proprietor of a local circus, helps the real culprit Tom flee England.  A related plot thread follows James Harthouse’s seduction of Tom’s sister, Louisa, who is unhappily married to Josiah Bounderby.  Tom and Louisa are the two children of Thomas Gradgrind, a wealthy merchant of Coketown, the industrial setting for this novel.  FTP, name this Charles Dickens work whose title echoes the difficult era depicted.;;Hard Times
Physics;;One recent, and unlikely, method for achieving this was given experimental evidence by Rusi Taleyarkhan, who applied sonoluminescence.  Other methods even less likely to succeed include the muon-catalyzed and anti-matter catalyzed varieties.  An important goal for the useful application of this is the ignition point, but an easier goal is the Lawson Criterion, or break-even point, where a net energy is actually created.  FTP, name this nuclear process in which two atoms combine to create one larger atom, and which takes place in our Sun.;;(nuclear) fusion
Music;;In his earlier years, he was inspired by a visit to Alassio for his overture In the South, and he paid homage to a medieval historian in his Froissart Overture.  Major successes included his Imperial March and a four-part work, whose first part, "Land of Hope and Glory," would become his nation’s unofficial second national anthem.  Another major piece was a fourteen-part collection that depicted numerous friends of his, and contained such cryptically titled movements as "C.A.E". and "Nimrod".  FTP, name this British composer of the Enigma Variations and the Pomp and Circumstance marches.;;(Sir) (Edward) Elgar
Biology;;Argyll-Robertson Pupils, though very rarely seen in Diabetes patients, is often associated with the tertiary form of this disease.  Other signs include Charcot’s Joints and Clutton’s Joints, and a primary sore at the site of initial exposure called a chancre.  Easily detectable via the Wasserman test, it is caused by the bacteria treponema pallidum.  FTP, name this common sexually-transmitted disease.;;syphilis
World History;;One of his earlier purges targeted members of the Lango and Acholi tribes in the army, most of whom supported his main political rival.  During his rise to power, he gained goodwill by dissolving the secret police and ordering a state funeral for King Freddie; though when he ruled, his home at the Nile Mansions hotel became an infamous center of torture and executions.  A 1979 counter-invasion ordered by Julius Nyerere saw the army of Tanzania drive him out, leading to his replacement by the man he had earlier deposed, Milton Obote.  FTP, name this former dictator of Uganda.;;(Idi) Amin (Dada) (Oumee)
Religion/Mythology;;The birth of this mythological figure was met with a chilling prophecy of civil war and rivers of blood from the sage Cathbad, prompting the king’s knights to call for the death of this child of Elva and Felim.  However, the predictions of this child’s beauty aroused the interest of King Conchobar, who spared her with the intent of eventually marrying her.  First, she fell in love with the youth Noisi and ran off with him, prompting Conchobar to have Noisi and his brothers killed, which in turn drove her to kill herself.  FTP, name this woman from Celtic myth known for her "sorrows".;;Deirdre
World History;;This conflict was almost widened to include neutral Britain after the so-called Dogger Bank incident and featured heavy nationalistic activity on one side by the Black Dragon Society. Its climactic land battle was at Mukden and occurred after the fall of Port Arthur.  By then the losing side had already seen its fleet destroyed in the Tsushima Strait.  Its peace acknowledged the surrender of southern Sakhalin Island and was concluded at Portsmouth, New Hampshire.  FTP, identify this 1904-05 war fought in East Asia between the two namesakes.;;Russo-Japanese (War)
Literature;;His political tract, The Conduct of Allies, was instrumental in causing the dismissal of the Duke of Marlborough from command.  By then he had abandoned writing poetry, primarily due to the criticism of his cousin John Dryden.  Among his notable epistles are his Drapier’s Letters and a collection of intimate letters, Journal to Stella.  However he is best known for the biting satire of such works as A Tale of a Tub and The Battle of the Books.  FTP, name this Irish author of A Modest Proposal and Gulliver’s Travels.;;(Jonathan) Swift
Astronomy;;Thomas Gold correctly specified the class to which these objects belonged after their discovery.  That discovery had labeled them LGMs, or Little Green Men, because of an incorrect assumption that they were created by extraterrestrials.  That mistake was made in 1967 by Hewish and Bell, who first observed them.  However, Gold surmised that they were simply rapidly rotating neutron stars.  FTP, identify these astronomical bodies whose name derives from their consistent expulsion of radiation every few seconds or milliseconds.;;pulsar(s)|pulsating radio star(s)
Economics;;It must have a positive slope, and because the factor it measures cannot be negative it must be concave up and cannot rise above the line y = x, known as the line of perfect equality.  The area between it and the line of perfect equality is known as the Gini coefficient, and at each point its y-value shows the cumulative percentage of a given asset owned by the bottom x percent of the sample.  First developed by its namesake American economist during the early-20th century, FTP, identify this construct from welfare economics used to illustrate income inequality.;;Lorenz Curve
Art;;Surviving studies for the work show that two men, a student and a seated sailor, were originally meant to have been included in this painting.  A thin strip of shades of brown appears on the left, but more disconcerting is the wedge of melon, bunch of grapes, and other pieces of fruit that are out of place at the bottom center.  The final word in its title refers, surprisingly, to a red-light district in Barcelona whose prostitutes inspired this 1907 work.  Often considered the earliest Cubist work, FTP, name this depiction of five female nudes and first masterpiece of Pablo Picasso.;;(Les) Demoiselles d' Avignon
United States History;;His first major case was 1935’s Murray v. Pearson, but more important was Shelley v. Kraemer in which he succeeded in abolishing "protective covenants".  In 1965 he became U.S. Solicitor General, a position which acted as a springboard to his most famous post in which he wrote notable dissenting opinions in San Antonio School District v. Rodriguez and 1978’s Bakke case, clearly stating his support of affirmative action.  FTP, name this one-time NAACP lawyer who won Brown v Board of Education and became the first African-American to sit on the Supreme Court.;;(Thurgood) Marshall
Miscellaneous;;It is the profession of Walter Hartwright, the ostensible protagonist of Wilkie Collins’ Woman in White.  It is also the profession of Noemie Nioche in Henry James’ The American and while he is in Paris, Philip Carey attempts this occupation in Somerset Maugham’s Of Human Bondage.  Perhaps more famously it is the eventual vocation of Charles Strickland in another Maugham novel, Moon and Sixpence.  FTP, name this craft in which Basil Hallward briefly engages to create the title of Oscar Wilde’s novel about Dorian Gray.;;painter|draughtsman;;artist
Physics;;Discrete spectra of them are produced by electron transitions between the normally-filled lower electron levels of atoms.  Continuous spectra of them commonly result from bremsstrahlung, or "braking" radiation.  In the work of Laue and Bragg, a beam of them were diffracted by a crystal lattice.  Slightly less energetic than gamma rays, FTP, identify this form of electromagnetic radiation commonly used to provide images of internal body structures and first observed by Wilhelm Roentgen.;;X-ray(s)
Religion/Mythology;;Popular festivals in honor of this god include the Tubilustrium and the Equirria.  His sacred animals were the woodpecker and wolf and his epithets included Gradivus and Ultor.  His consort was the Sabine fertility goddess Nerio, but Ovid relates that he was tricked into sleeping with Anna Perenna.  The chief temple of his sat on the Capitoline hill beside those of Jupiter and Quirinus, the latter of whom is associated with his son Romulus.  FTP, name this Roman god of war often identified with the Greek Ares.;;Ma(rs|vors|mars|ris){1}?
Geography;;Its name is derived from the Turkic for "island", referring to its position as a remote outpost of water in a sea of desert. Its Barsa-Kelmes island houses an important nature reserve and this body of water is now divided into a small northern "lake" and a large southern one, but this was not the case before cotton production began diverting river water in the 1960’s.  It is fed by the Syr Darya and Amu Darya Rivers and is shared by Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan.  FTP, name this rapidly-shrinking Central Asian lake.;;Aral (Sea)
World History;;With the death of the illegitimate prince Enzio, this house became extinct.  Its penultimate king was another illegitimate son, Manfred, who was the uncle of its last ruler Conradin, who was a king of Sicily.  Its founder married Agnes, the daughter of Henry IV, and from their union came a line of kings that included Otto IV and this house’s greatest ruler, Frederick II, who became Holy Roman Emperor in 1215.  FTP, name this German ruling family that arose in the Swabian castle of Staufen.;;Hohenstaufen
Literature;;Ian Fleming induced this writer to interview Lucky Luciano in Naples, resulting in the essay "My Friend Luco".  He died shortly thereafter, leaving Poodle Springs unfinished in the wake of the failure of his last complete novel, Playback.  He skewered Hollywood in The Little Sister and used an upstate California setting in The Lady in the Lake.  All of those works featured his most famous character, who would meet his future wife in The Long Goodbye.  FTP, name this American writer whose novel The Big Sleep introduced the detective Philip Marlowe.;;(Raymond) Chandler
Biology;;Sites that show this species’ later development include Torralba in Spain and Terra Amata in France.  The "baton method" was part of the Acheulean tool tradition which they developed.  And sites such as Swartkans in South Africa suggested their development of the use of fire and cooking made them the first hominid species to do so.  They disappeared sometime around 250,000 years ago and early finds of this species included Java Man and Peking Man.  FTP, name this hominid whose named is Latin for "upright man".;;Homo Erectus
Music;;It opens with a French overture in minuet rhythm, "Fear no danger," though more typical songs follow.  These include "Purse thy conquest, Love" and "Come away, fellow sailors," as well as the aria, "When I am laid in Earth," which is sung by one of the title characters and is known as her "lament".  Nahum Tate wrote the libretto and was present at its first performance at Josias Priest’s School for Young Ladies in Chelsea.  FTP, name this opera about a queen of Carthage and a Trojan prince, the most famous work of Henry Purcell.;;Dido and Aeneas
Philosophy;;This philosophical concept originally applied to a theory which holds that inflected verbs have the same significance as verbs in the present indicative.  In its more famous incarnation it applied to the flatus vocis doctrine of Roscelin.  It was moderated by Abelard’s Conceptualism although later, it became more extreme under William of Ockham who fiercely opposed the idea of Platonic forms.  FTP identify this philosophical doctrine that held abstract concepts to have no reality outside of the mind, and which takes its name from the Latin for "of or pertaining to names".;;Nominalism
World History;;His early successes included the defeat of Domitius Ahenobarbus and King Iarbas in Africa.  He reinforced Caecilius Metellus Pius against Sertorius in Spain and the lex Gabinia gave him a special command against Mediterranean pirates.  He ended the war of Spartacus and the final revolt of Mithridates VI, but his military success came to an end approximately fifteen years later when he fought to a draw at Dyrrachium and was crushed at Pharsalus in 48 BC by his greatest rival.  FTP, name this member of the first triumvirate and chief rival of Julius Caesar.;;Pompey (the Great)|(Gnaeus) Pompeius (Magnus)
Literature;;Among the lesser known works of this series are The Quest for the Absolute and The Village Curate.  It also includes such early novellas as Madame Firmian and Colonel Chabert, but the series is often considered to have begun with a historical novel of counterrevolutionaries entitled Les Chouans [lay shoo-ON].  The more famous works, such as Lost Illusions, feature such recurring characters as the criminal Vautrin who, along with the ambitious Eugene Rastignac, appears in the best-known member of the series, Pere Goriot.  FTP, name this cycle of 90 novels and novellas, the masterwork of Honore Balzac.;;(The) Human Comedy|(La) Comedie humaine
Chemistry;;The most recent scale that assigns values to this property is the Allred-Rochow Scale.  Another method for measuring it was developed by Robert Mulliken, who stated that it is equal to one-half times ionization energy minus electron affinity.  A more useful method of its determination was made by Linus Pauling in 1932.  Pauling set Lithium as the baseline and gave the highest value to Fluorine.  FTP, name this measure of a bonded atom’s ability to attract shared electrons.;;electronegativity
Art;;Highly symmetric, its largest buildings are all located in a north-south line along its center.  Those structures include the u-shaped Meridian Gate and the central-most Hall of Supreme Harmony- which contained the official throne of the emperor for the most important affairs of state.  The majority of it was built during the first two decades of the 15th century under the patronage of Yong-le.  Now referred to as the Palace Museum by its nation’s government, FTP, identify this orange-colored palace complex in Beijing, China.;;Forbidden City
United States History;;Members of this political grouping included former Whigs Lewis Parsons and James Alcorn, but more notorious was Franklin Moses, Jr.  Many of them, unlike William Holden and John Mosby, were from the small planter caste.  General James Longstreet was also regarded as a member of this group, whose name was originally used to designate small animals below the attention of farmers and has now come to refer to allies of carpetbaggers.  FTP, give this term for southerners who joined the Republican Party and supported Reconstruction.;;Scalawag(s)
Literature;;This author helped spread his philosophy by founding a school of thought at his estate of Santiniketan.  One of his philosophical concerns was the concept of "bridal mysticism", which was outlined in his work Sadhana.  However it was for poetry, in such collections as The Gardener and The Crescent Moon, that he became known.  It was another collection, Gitanjali, that featured a poem that became his country’s national anthem.  FTP, name this writer who wrote in Bengali, the first non-European and Indian to win the Nobel Prize in Literature.;;(Sir) (Rabindranath) Tagore
Noncomputational Math;;It can be topologically abstracted as a connected graph with four vertices and seven edges, two pairs of which connect the same two sets of points.  The fact that it had no solution was achieved by proving that no connected graph with more than two "odd" vertices could have a circuit that traverses every edge and concludes at its starting point without crossing any edge twice.  It was the original conundrum that led to Euler’s formulation of graph theory.  FTP, identify this classic problem inspired by the crossings of the Pregel River in the namesake Prussian city.;;(The) (K(ö|o)nigsberg Bridge (Problem)|(Seven) Bridges of Konigsberg (Problem)){1}?
World History;;Its single most enduring image was arguably the self-immolation of Jan Palach. Its leader tried to defend it in the conference at Cierna by making minor compromises.  Facilitated by the resignation of Antonin Novotny as first secretary, it officially came to an end with the appointment of Gustav Hasak although it had practically been ended the previous August by an invasion of Warsaw Pact members.  FTP, identify this period of liberal communist reform in 1969 initiated by Aleksandr Dubcek in Czechoslovakia during the namesake season.;;Prague Spring
Physics;;Its "mutual" variety, symbolized by the letter M, occurs when two circuits or circuit components are linked magnetically.  Its much more prevalent "self" variety, which also involves the creation of an emf, is a consequence of Lenz’s Law and is usually given by the letter L.  Its standard SI measure has units of volt-seconds per ampere, and as an electromagnetic analogue of inertia it basically measures a circuit’s resistance to changes in current.  FTP, identify this physical property measured in Henrys.;;inductance
United States History;;Members of its first council included John Twine, clerk of the General Assembly, and John Pory, who was designated its secretary and speaker.  It initially consisted of 22 members based on a plan drawn up by Governor George Yeardley, who awarded each settlement two representatives.  Eventually its members were only elected by men with fifty acres of land or more, and its seat was moved to Middle Plantation.  FTP, name this group whose later members would include Patrick Henry, and when it was formed in 1619 in Jamestown, was the first elected legislative assembly in the New World.;;House of Burgesses
Literature;;They live in a place with "yellow down / Border’d with palm, and many a winding vale / And meadow, set with a slender galingale," and it is "A land of streams! some, like downward smoke".  They are "mild-eyed and melancholy" and possess "Dark faces" against a "rosy flame".  Before they are encountered a leader says "Courage!" and points toward their land, but the "branches they bare" of an "enchanted stem" prove too powerful for some.  FTP, name these title characters of a Tennyson poem about a race of beings from the Odyssey captivated by the titular flower.;;(The) Lotos-Eaters
Physics;;Its discoverer and namesake initially published this law as a Latin anagram and two centuries later, Cauchy generalized it to three-dimensional bodies.  The two quantities involved are related by the first Lame constant, a constant represented by mu and known as the shear modulus, though in simpler terms this law can be expressed as "F equals negative k x".  FTP, name this law of mechanics that states that stress is directly proportional to strain, and was first used to describe the spring in springs.;;Hooke(') s (Law)
Philosophy;;The third, fourth, and fifth sections all share the dedication "Delivered before the fellowship of the dead".  The first section, "musical interludes," is actually labeled Diapsalmata, the next section on the "Musical-Erotic" examines Don Giovanni, and the entire work is edited by Victor Eremita.  The first part concludes with a section told from the viewpoint of Johannes, "The Seducer’s Diary".  The second part moves on to an examination of the ethical.  FTP, name this work whose title refers to the choice between the human esthetic and ethical on one hand and the religious sphere of existence on the other, a work by Soren Kierkegaard.;;Either(/) Or|Enten(/) Eller
Biology;;Indonesians stuff it in a dish known as Cumi-Cumi Isi and Greeks also stuff it in a recipe known as gemisto.  In Japanese cuisine, particularly sushi, the Loligo and Illex varieties are most often used.  Though in almost all Japanese recipes it is only the body that is served and which is referred to as ika [ee-KA].  Before cooking it must be cleaned and the cellophane bone on its dorsal surface must be removed.  Italians often use its ink to create more decorative pastas.  FTP, name this cephalopod which most commonly appears on restaurant menus as fried calamari.;;squid
World History;;Sometime in the 4th century they encountered the Chauci and Angrivarii, subduing and assimilating both tribes.  By the time they became a settled people they started living in thatched huts known as "tuns".  By then they would also divide into two groups, with the western one being founded by Cerdic, though it was Cerdic’s grandson Egbert who was the first of them to be recognized as a great king.  Yet, the only one of them to resist Danish invasions was Alfred the Great.  FTP, name this Germanic people that invaded and settled England along with the Angles and Jutes.;;Saxons
Literature;;Both Wounds in the Rain and Whilomville Stories appeared after he settled in England, where his numerous extramarital affairs destroyed his reputation back home in America.  The Greco-Turkish War was the subject of his Active Stories and George’s Mother focuses on life in the Bowery, which he also did in a better known short novel.  He also wrote numerous stories, including "The Blue Hotel" and "The Bride Comes to Yellow Sky".  FTP, name this author of Maggie, a Girl of the Streets who also wrote of Henry Fleming in Red Badge of Courage.;;(Stephen) Crane
Biology;;Its two portions are connected by areolar tissue and those two lobes are enclosed in a fibrous capsule.  It contains a few small areas of epithelial tissue known as Hassall’s corpuscles but mostly consists of lymphatic tissue.  It is located in the upper part of the mediastinum behind the sternum and extends into the upper part of the neck, though that size fluctuates based on one’s age.  FTP, name this gland that plays a chief role in the early development of the immune response and which shrinks after puberty.;;thymus
Art;;Its tile floor borrows its design from the mosaic floor of Westminster Abbey.  Sometimes seen as an allusion to Plutarch’s Parallel Lives, which had recently been translated by one of its subjects, it includes Peter Apian’s book on accounting as one of the representatives of the quadrivium on display.  This is on one of the shelves in the back, which also hold a sundial and a globe.  Just below Jean de Dinteville and Georges de Selve is a distorted skull that appears normally if viewed from below.  FTP, name this portrait by Hans Holbein depicting two representatives of Francis I in London.;;(The) (French) Ambassadors
Religion/Mythology;;His main temple, with a name meaning "the house of the exalted head," was the Esagila.  Originally a god of thunderstorms whose consort was Zarpanit, it was later claimed that An and Enlil transferred their powers to him.  Later also known as Bel, he in fact had 50 names.  He was given kingship over the universe and the other gods in the Enuma Elish for his defeat of both Kingu and Tiamat.  FTP, name this chief Babylonian god.;;Marduk
United States History;;It was initially dispatched when news came of riots instigated by forces who supported Weyler y Nicolau.  It was to be reinforced based on the recommendation of Fitzhugh Lee, the local American consul.  In 1976 Hyman Rickover published a book questioning the long-held belief about the cause of its destruction, claiming that Captain Charles Sigsbee’s poor supervision of the coal bunker was the real cause.  Regardless, the incident was greatly magnified by the bellicose "Yellow Press" back home.  FTP, name this vessel whose explosion in Havana harbor in 1898 was a catalyst for the Spanish-American War.;;(U(.)S(.)S(.)) Maine
Literature;;Its penultimate chapter features one character reading aloud from the works of Maine de Biran and Cardinal Newman.  Pope is responsible for this novel’s protagonist having an encyclopedic knowledge of Shakespeare,. as he provided the bard’s Complete Works to Linda, the protagonist’s mother.  That protagonist hangs himself at the end of the novel after briefly reexperiencing desire for Lenina Crowne and after Mustapha Mond and Bernard Marx learn that they will be exiled.  FTP, name this work that focuses on the savage John and which imagines a genetically regulated future, a novel by Aldous Huxley.;;Brave New World
Astronomy;;These stars generally have masses between 5 and 20 times that of the sun.  Smaller varieties of less than one solar mass also exist, but they are population II stars and are known as W Virginis stars.  Photon pressure causes these stars to rapidly expand in size; however, when the star has expanded, the pressure gradient is then too weak to counteract gravity, leading to contraction.  This occurs in a regular cycle dependent on the mass of the star.  FTP, name these stars with variable luminosity, used as a standard candle in making astronomical distance measurements.;;Cepheid (variables)
Geography;;It is situated in its namesake national park and is near Mounts Twynam, North Ramshead, Carruthers, and Townsend. It is primarily accessed via a trek through Charlotte Pass, and its melting snows feed the rivers and reservoirs of the hydroelectric scheme in the Snowy Mountains. First climbed in 1840 by Paul de Strzelecki, FTP, identify this tallest mountain in Australia, which is named for a Polish statesman and American Revolutionary War hero.;;(Mount) Koscius(z)ko
Music;;Among his late works is the string quartet From My Life.  His brief time spent with Wagner led to one opera, Dalibor, which was much less successful than Libuse, an opera about a legendary figure in his nation’s history.  Another opera, The Brandenburgers of Bohemia, like many of his works was created after the deafness that set in as a result of syphilis.  Vyserad and Moldau are just two of the six symphonic poems that make up his Ma Vlast, or My Country.  FTP, name this Czech composer of the opera The Bartered Bride.;;(Bedrich) Smetana
World History;;It began with the capture of Hangzhou, and ended with the rebellion of Zhu Yuanzhang.  During it, a second capital at Khanbalik was established and the project of extending the Great Canal connecting the Yangtze and the Yellow Rivers to that capital was begun.  Its first capital had been at Karakorum and this dynasty’s name was taken when it’s rulers looked outside their own language, taking the Chinese name for "first".  Succeeding the Sung Dynasty and lasting from 1279 to 1368, FTP, identify this period of Mongol rule in China.;;Yuan (Dynasty)
Literature;;By its conclusion the title character’s daughter is married to the governor of Mitylene, and the title character is reunited with his lost wife, the daughter of King Simonides.  He had initially fled his homeland, leaving his government in the hands of Helicanus, because of the treachery of the Emperor Antiochus.  It ends justly with the villains Dionyza and Cleon burned to death and Marina happily married to Lysimachus.  In addition Thaisa is reunited with the title character, the Prince of Tyre, in, FTP, what Shakespeare play?;;Pericles(,) (Prince of Tyre )
Chemistry;;The gamma-effects are useful in cases of geometric isomerism and are typically upfield, while further substituent effects are generally negligible.  Proton-decoupling shows no splitting at all, while proton-coupling allows one to determine the number of attached hydrogens.  Deltas beyond 200 generally indicate aldehydes and ketones, as the chemical shifts are much greater than a similiar technique.  FTP, name this spectroscopic technique often used as in conjunction with proton magnetic resonance.;;CMR (spectroscopy)|Carbon(-13) N(uclear) M(agnetic) R(esonance) (spectroscopy)
World History;;His final ruling stint came after his victory near Mount Hymettus.  He extended influence by recovering Sigeum, thereby controlling the Hellespont, and by acquiring the Thracian Chersonese.  His second time in power came after he married the daughter of Megacles, although he was later forced out by Megacles and Lycurgus.  This son of Hippocrates had first come to power with much difficulty but peacefully passed rule to his son Hippias.  FTP, name this man who unified Attica as the 6th century BC tyrant of Athens.;;P(e)isistrat(u|o){1}?s
Literature;;Among the guises the title character assumes are Sinbad the Sailor; Busoni, whom he pretends to be to find news of father; and Lord Wilmore, as whom he effects various charitable deeds.  He plans on allowing himself to be shot at a duel with Albert, the son of his greatest rival, but the unveiling of his true identity prevents the duel and he does find eventual happiness with his companion, the beautiful Haydee.  After finding the fortune disclosed by Abbe [ah-BAY] Faria, he begins his plan of revenge upon Villefort, Danglars, and Fernand, the last of whom married his former fiancée Mercedes.  FTP, name this adventure novel about Edmond Dantes, a work by Alexander Dumas.;;(The) Count of Monte Cristo
World History;;His first known action was the negotiation of a treaty at Margus that gained his people a sum of 700 pounds of gold a year.  He died during the reign of Marcian and came to power after the death of his uncle Rua and after he killed his intended co-ruler, his brother Bleda.  His rule was already on the decline before Aetius and a confederation of troops defeated him at Catalaunian Plains, or the Battle of Chalons in 451.  FTP, name this so-called "Scourge of God" and feared ruler of the Huns.;;Attila (the Hun)
Biology;;They lack murein, or ester lipids, in their cell walls; rather, they have ether lipids as well as a number of different constituents.  Some of them, such as Pyrodictium are highly thermophilic, while others, such as Sulfolobus, are dependent upon sulfur for their metabolism. The most common varieties employed in research are the Halo- and Methanobacterium. Discovered by Carl Weiss, FTP, identify this group of bacteria that, despite their cytological similarity to prokaryotes, are hypothesized to be the evolutionary precursor to eukaryotes.;;archaea(bacteria)
Art;;He studied under French painters Carle Vernet and Pierre Guerin before traveling to Italy to further his career. His earliest major work, The Charging Chasseur, as well as Wounded Cuirassier and Race of the Riderless Horse, convey one of the chief interests of this avid horseman.  He was a frequent patient at numerous asylums and mental hospitals, which served as the inspirations for paintings like A Mad Woman with a Mania of Envy.  FTP, name this 19th-century French Romantic painter who depicted a recent national tragedy by showing the dying survivors of a shipwreck in his The Raft of the Medusa.;;(Theodore) Gericault
United States History;;As Alien Property Custodian, he presided over the confiscation of German chemical patents.  Promoted to replace Thomas Gregory, he was rebuked by the Senate for his failure to act during the strike of the Seattle General Labor Council. Stung by this criticism, he broke up the Union of Russian Workers and deported several hundred radicals on the Buford.  FTP, name this Fighting Quaker, the attorney general who presided over the Red Scare of 1919 and conducted a series of namesake "Raids".;;(A(.)) (Mitchell) Palmer
World History;;His lesser victories included Lyginus where he defeated the Triballi and the Jaxartes where he defeated the Scythians.  Among his less honorable acts were the destruction of Thebes and the slaying, in a fit of anger, of Cleitus the Black who saved his life at the Granicus.  The commander of the companion cavalry at Chaeronea, his major victories came at the Hydaspes - against Porus - and Issus and Guagamela against Darius III.  After his death, his generals Antigonus, Ptolemy, and Seleucus divided up his kingdom.  FTP, name this Macedonian prince who conquered much of the known world before dying in his 30s.;;Alexander (the Great|(III|the Third){1}? (of Macedon)){1}?;;Alexander
Literature;;At the time of his death he was at work on the tragedy Demetrius, having already completed such works in that genre as Maria Stuart and The Bride from Messina.  His The Defection of Netherlands garnered him a university chair at Jena, though it was after moving to Weimar that he wrote William Tell.  The sympathetic criminal Karl Moor is the subject of his The Robbers and the eldest son of Phillip II is the subject of his Don Carlos.  However, his best known historical drama might be his life of Wallenstein.  FTP, name this German writer who also composed the "Ode to Joy" set to music in Beethoven’s 9th.;;(Friedrich) Schiller
Biology;;In this process the carboxylase combines with phosphoenolpyruvate to create an oxaloacetate.  It stores CO2 in the form of malate and was discovered by Hatch and Slack.  The involved carboxylase is much more efficient than rubisco and even provides enough CO2 to prevent rubisco from undergoing photorespiration.  It was found that in certain plants, like corn and sugar cane, it works in tandem with the Calvin cycle.  FTP, identify this cycle used in plants to continue photosynthesis, even at night, and which was named for the number of carbons in the central molecule.;;C4 (cycle)
Art;;Just to the right of center in this painting rises the tower of the Nieuwe [NOY-va] Kerk, a large church. In the foreground two women speak, and a group of five citizens exit a barge, while clouds loom overhead.  While there is no documentary evidence to suggest the artist used a camera obscura, the slightly unfocused edges of boats and buildings in this cityscape indicate he may have. FTP, name this painting of a Dutch city, the hometown of its artist Jan Vermeer.;;View of Delft
Religion/Mythology;;In punishment for making love in an area sacred to Zeus she and her husband are turned into lions.  In one tradition she is the daughter of the Boeotian Schoeneus and in the other the daughter of the Arcadian Iasus.   Cared for by a bear after being exposed as a child, her own son, Parthenopaeus, was one of the Seven Against Thebes.  She is most associated with two men, one of whom gave her a prize which indirectly caused his death and the other of whom used three golden apples to win her in marriage.  FTP, name this huntress who helped Meleager kill the Calydonian boar and who was beaten by Hippomenes in a footrace.;;Atalanta
United States History;;Its provisions were extended in 1972’s Argersinger v. Hamlin, and it overturned the 1942 decision of Betts v. Brady. Abe Fortas argued that by allowing states to implement only certain elements of the Bill of Rights, the Supreme Court was allowing a violation of the Fourteenth Amendment.  The decision, written by Hugo Black, stated that "The individual, especially the indigent, is in the greatest need of his Constitutional Rights when he finds himself in trouble with the law". Sparked by the arrest of an electrician for breaking into a pool hall, FTP, name this 1962 Supreme Court case that guaranteed legal council for indigent defendants in criminal cases.;;Gideon ((v(.)|versus) Wainwright)
Literature;;Among his poetic works inspired by women are Concerning Famous Women and The Old Crow.  The chief female inspiration for these works is thought to have been Maria d’Aquino, who could have been the ideal woman Fiammetta that he referred to in such works as his long prose romance Filocolo.  His long poem Teseida was the basis for the numerous stories about Palamon and Arcite, but it is another work set in a country villa outside of Florence during the plague that was even more copied.  FTP, name this 14th-century Italian writer and author of the Decameron.;;(Giovanni) Boccaccio
Noncomputational Math;;Kenneth Bowles at UC-San Diego provided a version of this language that increased its popularity, and its developer won the Turing Award in 1985 for its invention.  Important features include the BEGIN and END commands and although it wasn’t initially released with object-oriented programming, in 1986 Apple released a version that did include the feature.  It was developed to be suitable for teaching purposes in 1970 by Niklaus Wirth.  FTP, identify this programming language named after a seventeenth century French mathematician.;;PASCAL
Religion/Mythology;;This son of Buzi was a prophet who likened Jerusalem to dead wood.  In his book, he condemns Sedecias and, at God’s command, eats a book that tastes like honey.  He lies on his left side for 390 days to symbolize the coming punishment for Judah and makes a model of Jerusalem and attacks it with an iron pan.  He also described seeing beings with four faces and four wings in flying wheels.  FTP, who is this Old Testament prophet who lived during the exile in Babylon and raised the dead, whose book of prophecy follows Lamentations and precedes Daniel.;;Ezekiel
Geography;;Some of their most notable features include the Sierra de Tramuntana Mountains, the Cala Saona and the S’Albufera d’es Grau wetlands.  The archipelago of Cabrera is a national maritime territorial park, and other members include Formentera.  Their two major languages are Catalan and Castilian, which are spoken on such locales as Menorca.  FTP, name this Mediterranean island group, whose other islands include Ibiza and Majorca.;;Balearic (Islands)
World History;;After struggling with Gruffydd ap Llewellyn for two years, he overran Wales with his army.  Despite allegiances he had sworn after being shipwrecked, he accepted the witenagemot’s election of him as king.  He was promptly forced to put down an attempted led by the Norwegian king Hardraada and his own brother Tostig, which he did successfully at Stamford Bridge.  However, in less than a month he took an arrow through the eye at Senlac Hill and was dead.  FTP, name this man who briefly rules as king of England before he was defeated at Hastings by William the Conqueror’s forces.;;Harold (II|the Second|Godwinson){1}?;;Harold
Literature;;It is in flashbacks that this novel’s central character reveals his strict upbringing at the hands of the cruel McEachern and his separation from his first love, the prostitute Bobbie Allen.  That character’s problems include refusing good advice to join a black law firm and working at a mill to cover up his moonshine business.  Perhaps more despicable are Lucas Burch, who betrays that character and Percy Grimm, who castrates and kills him.  FTP, identify this novel about the tragic half-black Joe Christmas, a work by William Faulkner.;;Light in August
Biology;;Interferon alpha was the first drug approved specifically to treat it, while less toxic drugs for milder cases include topical retinoid gels.  Groups previously considered at highest risk for it included Ashkenazi Jews and elderly Mediterranean men, but its spread to a larger subset of the population brought it to greater prominence.  The most effective treatment for it currently known is antiretroviral therapy, which can reduce the edema, enlarged lymph nodes, and colored skin lesions up to many centimeters in diameter.  FTP, identify this cancer, the most common malignancy associated with AIDS.;;Kaposi(')s sarcoma
Music;;As a youth he studied with Carl Czerny in Vienna and went on to take composition lessons from Ferdinando Paer and Anton Reicha.  His major compositions include the character pieces that make up the three-volume Years of Pilgrimage and a symphonic poem based on lines by his friend Lamartine, Les Preludes.  His orchestral works include the two Mephisto Waltzes, but he is remembered for it is for compositions for a specific instrument, as in his 12 Transcendental Etudes.  FTP, name this man, whose other compositions for the piano include his set of 20 Hungarian Rhapsodies.;;(Franz) Liszt
United States History;;Vermont Governor William A. Palmer and Pennsylvania governor Joseph Ritner were members of this party which was heavily supported by Thurlow Weed and his numerous publications.  Sending several men to the 32nd Congress its presidential candidate carried only Vermont in the 1832 presidential election.  Started after the dissapearance of William Morgan, they nominated Willaim Wirt at a convention in Baltimore, the first national nominating conventional held. FTP, identify this American political party that was against secret societies, particularly the namesake one.;;Anti-Masonic (Party)
Literature;;Among the minor speaking roles are those of the faithful servant Adam and Hymen, the god of marriage, who conducts the four marriages that end this work.  Two of those marriages involve the women Audrey and Phoebe, the latter of which finally succumbs to Silvius’ affections.  The other two involve characters who disguise themselves as Aliena and Ganymede before they fall in love with Oliver and Orlando.  Much of the action takes place in the Forest of Ardenne in which Celia and Rosalind briefly take a cottage.  FTP, identify this Shakespeare play, the source of the line "All the world’s a stage and the men and women merely players".;;As You Like It
Chemistry;;A variation on this reaction uses a zinc amalgam and hydrochloric acid and goes by the name of Clemmensen reduction.  Normally a hydrazine hydrate reacts strongly with a base at an elevated temperature to convert a carbonyl C-O bond into a C-H2 bond.  FTP, identify this type of reaction that involves the reduction of a hydrazone, named after the two scientists who discovered it.;;Wolf-Kishner (reduction)
Anthropology;;He postulated that the human mental process of pairing opposites engenders an unconscious "metastructure" of society, an idea known as his "distinctive feature method" of analysis.  First gaining fame with the work A World on the Wane, he argued that the father/son, brother/sister, husband/wife, and uncle/nephew relationships constructed the elementary unit of kinship.  The author of Totemism and The Savage Mind, he is considered a leading exponent of structuralism, a system used heavily in his four-volume work Mythologiques.  FTP, name this French anthropologist and author of The Raw and the Cooked.;;(Claude) L(é|e){1}?vi-Strauss
World History;;A law bearing his name did away with special courts for the clergy and military.  The president of Supreme Court during the presidency of Comonfort he became the leader of the Liberals during the War of the Reform.  He worked rolling cigarettes in New Orleans while in exile during Santa Anna’s rule and died of a heart attack in 1872 after suppressing a revolt by Porfirio Diaz who, ironically, objected to his winning a fourth term as president.  FTP, identify this Mexican leader who led the resistance to Maximilian and the French.;;(Benito) (Pablo) Juarez
Physics;;The Large Electron Positron Collider only saw a trace of it at around 114.9 GeV (giga electron-volts).  Its interaction with the electroweak force causes the difference between the electromagnetic and the weak forces.  It has two isospin states, one with charge +1 and one neutral, but it is unique in the Standard Model because it is the only spin-0 particle.  Proposed to give particles their masses, FTP, identify this hypothetical boson.;;Higgs (Boson)
Art;;The background is painted in muted yellows and greens, and a crucifix pokes into the sky on the left side of the canvas.  A dog is just right of center; his body faces the titular action though his head turns away.   Two clergy are noticeable for their red vestments, while the majority of the people wear black and a couple women cover their faces with handkerchiefs.  Set in the titular village, which was the artist’s hometown, FTP, name this depiction of a peasant’s internment by Gustave Courbet.;;Burial at Ornans|(L')enterrement (à|a){1}? Ornans
Religion/Mythology;;Originally called the Zadokites, this group formed around 100 BCE.  They traced their origins back to the selection of the descendants of Zadok to act as trustees of the Temple in Jerusalem.  Generally speaking, they were the most Hellenized portion of the Jewish population, and were on decent terms with the Romans.  However, their end was directly due to the Roman destruction of the Temple in 70 CE, since their school was an incidental casualty.  FTP, name this Jewish sect, most well known for their strict, legalistic interpretation of the law, and rejection of the concepts of resurrection and angels.;;Sadducees
United States History;;He was a leading attorney on the defense team of  Congressman Sickles and briefly served as attorny general during the lame-duck period of Buchanan’s presidency.  He died after only four days on the Surpreme Court and was the legal advisor to Simon Cameron whom he replaced therby entering his most famous office.  A proponent of Radical Reconstruction, it was his removal from office against the dictates of the Tenure of Office act which caused Andrew Johnson’s impeachment.  FTP, name this man who served as Secretary of War during the Civil War.;;(Edwin) (M(.)) Stanton
Religion/Mythology;;They were governed by kings called "Suleyman," the last of whom built the pyramids.  The highest one is Iblis who led a revolt in Heaven although King Solomon had a diamond ring that could control them.  They were created from smokeless fire and were divided into categories such as si’la, ghul, and ifrit.  Created 2000 years before Adam by Allah, FTP, what are these demons in Islam that can grant wishes and may live in magic lamps?;;(D)Jinn(s)|Genie(s)
Literature;;This Englishman had "long dwelt in Amsterdam" before deciding to move to America.  When we first meet him, he proffers a cup of medicine, and is labeled a "Black Man," or the devil in disguise by his wife.  He had sent that wife ahead of him to America, and when he was delayed for two years after capture by Indians, he was presumed lost at sea.  He eventually arrives in Boston, taking up the profession of a "leech," or doctor, and rooming with Arthur Dimmesdale.  FTP, name this evil and vengeful husband of Hester Prynne in Hawthorne’s The Scarlet Letter.;;(Roger) Chillingworth
World History;;The effects of this event were exacerbated by the "Gregory" clause and the initial laissez-faire approach of Assistant Treasury Secretary Trevelyan and Prime Minister John Russell.  Earlier Robert Peel had used it to justify repeal of the Corn Laws.  One of its results were the death of many in cramped "coffin ships" to the Americas, while it’s indirect cause was a boom in population which necessitated the use of the large "Aran Banner" variety, which was immune to the fungus that caused it.  FTP, identify this 1846-1850 catastrophe which hit the Emerald Isle.;;(Great) (Irish) Potato (Famine|Blight){1}?
Chemistry;;This element transitions at much lower temperatures in its lighter-isotope liquid form because its nuclei are fermions and must form bosonic pairs to condense.  As it is cooled past 2.2 K, the lambda point, it becomes a superfluid, called the liquid two form.  Oxygen is mixed with this element for high-pressure breathing work, such as deep diving, because it is inert and less soluble in blood than nitrogen.  FTP, name this element, the simplest of the noble gases with atomic number 2.;;helium|He
Art;;This painting is based on a legend that dates back to the real life title event, which occurred in 1323, though those portrayed are depicted in the dress of the artist’s time.  Compositionally, it is divided into two sections, a more Venetian-based bottom half and a clearer Mannerist upper section drawn from the time after its artist left Venice.  A series of men in black, with white lace at their necks stand behind the titular figure at the bottom, but perhaps more startling amidst the swirling figures at the top are Saints Stephen and Augustine.  FTP, name this 1586 painting that depicts the interment of a noble, a masterpiece by El Greco.;;(The) Burial of Count Orgaz
Religion/Mythology;;In one myth he created humans by pounding bones from the underworld into a meal and mixing it with blood from a wound in his penis.  In another he burned himself to death after which his heart became the planet Venus and he became known as ‘Lord of the Dawn".  A bearer of culture, early missionaries believed he was actually the disciple Thomas.  In the most famous myth about him he is exiled from Tula and departs on a raft of serpents after being tricked into committing incest by his enemy Tezcatlipoca.  FTP, name this Aztec feathered-serpent god whom Hernando Cortes was mistaken for.;;Quetzalcoatl
Literature;;In Love’s Labour’s Lost it is the name of one of the Princess’ attendants, who falls in love with Lord Dumaine, and in Henry V it is the name of the daughter of the king of France.  A more famous character by this name is given a music teacher by the name of Licio, who is actually the servant Hortensio in disguise.  That character is the eldest daughter of Baptista and sister of the fair Bianca.  FTP, give this common name, the last of which identifies the eventual wife of Petruccio, a woman whose nature is softened in The Taming of the Shrew.;;Katherine
World History;;Major influences in his life were boyhood tutor Simon Rodriguez and his mistress Manuela Saenz.  His first major expedition was eventually repulsed due to the llanero [YA-neh-ro] cavalry of Jose Tomas Boves forcing him into exile, from where he wrote his famous "Letter from Jamaica".  His return saw a succession of victories at Boyaca, Carabobo, and Junin, and under the control of Antonio Sucre, his forces also won at Ayacucho.  FTP, identify this leader who gained the independence of Colombia and Venezuela, thereby becoming known as "The Liberator".;;(Simon) Bolivar
Physics;;Opponents of the Big Bang theory have used this phenomenon to explain redshift, though this is not generally accepted as its influence would be seen in spectral lines.  It was observed by viewing particles that were directed at a carbon target, deflected through a calcite crystal, and then sent into an ionization chamber.  Independently detected by Peter Debye, it occurs during the interaction of electrons and photons with energy levels between 0.5MeV and 3.5MeV.  FTP, name this scientific effect that demonstrates the particle nature of light.;;Compton (Effect|Scattering)
Religion/Mythology;;This religion was revived during the National Learning movement of the 18th and 19th centuries.  Its cosmology posits a three-tiered universe that consists of "The Plain of High Heaven," "The Manifested World," and "The Netherworld".  Although it has no sacred texts it highly values the 8th century histories Kojiki and Nihonshoki.  Divided into Shrine, Sect, and New Sect varieties, its name literally means "way of the gods".  FTP, name this religion centered on the worship of Kami, the indigenous religion of Japan.;;Shinto|(kami|kannagara){1}? no michi
Literature;;Parts one and two of this book, "The Gift" and "The Great Mountains," were first published in the North American Review.  Part three, "The Promise," came four years later in 1937, and the final section, "The Leader of the People" followed soon after.  The young protagonist is mentored by his grandfather and Billy Buck, the only hired hand on the protagonist’s father’s ranch.  The four related tales all chronicle the maturation and loss of innocence of the adolescent Jody Tiflin and his life in Salinas Valley.  FTP, name this John Steinbeck novel that is not, as the title would suggest, primarily about a horse.;;(The) Red Pony
United States History;;Noted examples of this type of legislation are the 1976 Hart-Scott-Rodino Act as well as the 1950 Celler-Kefauver Act and the 1936 Robinson-Patman Act.  Opposing a type of arrangement devised by Samuel Dodd, they are based upon Congress’s right to regulate interstate commerce.  The first of its type was crippled by the Supreme Court’s ruling in U.S. v E.C. Knight Co. although it was eventually used successfully against Standard Oil.  FTP, identify this type of law, the most famous of which are the 1914 Clayton Act and 1890 Sherman Act and which deter corporate monopolies.;;Anti-trust (act(s)|legislation|regulation(s))
Miscellaneous;;Rautaharju and Bazett have both developed methods for calculating the QT interval, a diagnostic tool which derives from this graphic.  It can detect calcium, magnesium, and other electrolyte disturbances and conduction abnormalities.  It is composed of the T wave, which represents repolarization, and the P wave and QRS Complex which correspond to the contraction of the atria and ventricles, respectively.  FTP, name this graphic that can also detect coronary artery blockages and cardiac arrhythmia by recording the electrical voltage of the heart.;;electrocardiogram|E(C|K){1}?G
Music;;Act Three opens in a bridal chamber before moving to the banks of the Scheldt, which is also the setting for the beginning of this work.  That first act sees the arrival of Henry the Fowler and a confrontation between the title character and the husband of Ortrud.  By the end, the title character kills said husband, Telramund, causes the reappearance of Gottfried, and vanishes though not via his swan-drawn boat.  FTP, name this romantic opera about the savior of Elsa, a Knight of the Holy Grail and son of Parsifal, a work by Richard Wagner.;;Lohengrin
Chemistry;;It was first calculated by Josef Loschmidt in 1865, and an alternate measure, due to different standards, is known as the Loschmidt Constant.  Its current name was given by Jean Perrin in his 1909 paper entitled, "Brownian Movement and Molecular Reality," changing the old naming standard of an uppercase "N".  The current number only applies when using the mass unit of a gram.  FTP, give the name of this number, whose value is 6.022 x 10^23, and is the number of objects in a mole.;;Avogadro(')s Number
Literature;;Robert Graves wrote that when this poet was a boy of nine, "he had been violently debauched by his nymphomaniac Calvinist housemaid".  He was fond of taking shots at his contemporaries and did so in his English Bards and Scotch Reviewers, while specifically targeting Robert Southey in 1822’s The Vision of Judgment.  Just two years later he died in Missolonghi after joining the Greek fight for independence.  He left behind such dramas as Manfred and such long poems as Childe Harold’s Pilgrimage.  FTP, name this poet of "She Walks in Beauty" and Don Juan.;;(George) Gordon|(Lord) Byron
World History;;This empire often had trouble keeping its great families such as Karin, Gev, and Suren in check and its administration has often been described as "feudal".  Notable rulers include Vologeses I, who sought to put a puppet ruler up in Aremnia and earned the ire of Rome.  Ruled by the Arsacid dynasty, this empire was defeated in campaigns by Trajan and Septimius Severus, but did succeed in defeating and killing Crassus a Carrhae.  FTP, name this Middle-Eastern empire, which preceded the Sassanids as rulers of Persia.;;Parthia(ns)
Physics;;One describes the relation between electric flux and charge on an enclosed surface.  One describes the relation between magnetic flux through an area enclosed by a closed and the electric field induced along the loop.  Another relates the circulating magnetic field to the electric current in a closed loop.  And the last describes the structure of a magnetic field. Including Gauss’ Law, Faraday’s Law of Induction, and Ampere’s Law, FTP, identify this set of formulas named for the Scottish scientist who grouped them together.;;Maxwell(')(s) Equations;;Maxwell('s)
Philosophy;;His moral theory posits that all virtuous actions are based on fortitude, or strength of mind, which is further divided into animositas, or rational self-preservation, and generositas, or the rational helping of others.  He developed a geometrical method based upon the presentation of Euclid’s Elements which he used in the only work he published non-anonymously in his lifetime, Principles of Descartes’ Philosophy.  His metaphysics revolves around the idea of "God, or Nature" holding that God is the only substance and gaining him the label of Pantheist.  FTP, name this Dutch rationalist, excommunicated from the Jewish community, who wrote The Ethics.;;(Baruch|Benedict) Spinoza
Literature;;He is made a Doctor of Jovial Science after he impresses his father and later finds himself in the midst of the Cake-Peddler’s War.  By then he has learned more than 217 games and spent ten years on Latin grammar under the tutelage of such scholars as Ponocrates and Doctor Tubal Holofernes.  He came into this world bawling, "Give me a drink! a drink! a drink!" as the son of Grandgousier and first appeared in print in 1534.  FTP, name this father of Pantagruel and title character of a Francois Rabelais novel.;;Gargantua
Miscellaneous;;The protagonist of this work is financially backed by Tim Daland, and engages in a love affair with Dr. Claire Lewicki.  A back story involves the mysterious death of Buddy Bretherton, which may have been caused by Harry Hogge’s incompetence.  The climactic scene occurs when the protagonist defeats Russ Wheeler, redeeming himself and Rowdy Burns, who will regain his sponsorship as a result.  Thus ends this 1990 work about the adventures of Cole Trickle.  FTP, identify this film often criticized as "Top Gun on wheels," a movie in the world of Nascar starring Tom Cruise.;;Days of Thunder
World History;;For his action at Caporetto he was awarded the "Blue Max," his country’s highest military decoration.  Twenty years later, he published a book of lectures on tactics entitled Infantry Attacks, and three years after that he led an army division that became known as the "ghost division".  The high point of his career was the capture of Tobruk but after defeat at Mareth Line he was recalled and was preparing coastal defenses in France in his last official position.  Committing suicide after his implication in the assassination plot on Hitler, FTP, who was this German commander of the Afrika Corps, a man known as "The Desert Fox"?;;(Erwin) Rommel
Geography;;Tondaemum is one of the important shopping sections of this city, which is serviced by Kimp’o International Airport.  Important cultural sites include Sejong Cultural Center and the National Museum located on the grounds of Kyongbok Palace, which was the residence for the rulers of the Yi dynasty.  Located on the Han River, its name has come to mean capital in the language of its residents, although there are plans to have Gonju replace it as its country’s capital.  FTP, name this host of the 1988 Summer Olympics and largest city in South Korea.;;Seoul|Soul-t'ukpyolsi
United States History;;He served as America’s first secretary of foreign affairs and drafted the Address to the People of Great Britain for the First Continental Congress.  While serving abroad, he found that he was elected governor of his home state in absentia.  He had already drafted the constitution of that home state, New York, in 1777.  However, he is better remembered for negotiating defined U.S.-Canada boundaries with Lord Greenville in 1794 as part of his namesake treaty, and for the post he was appointed to in 1789.  A co-author of the Federalist Papers with Hamilton and Madison, FTP, name this first chief justice of the U.S. Supreme Court.;;(John) Jay
Literature;;It took its name from the alternate title for the play Confusion.  Leading poetic examples of this movement include the work of J.M. Lenz and Burger’s ballad of "Lenore".  Perhaps the greatest influence upon it was the philosophy of Herder, though it was a drama by Klinger that gave this movement its name.  It is perhaps best typified by Goethe’s Sorrows of Young Werther.  FTP, identify this pre-Romantic German literary movement, whose name translates as "storm and stress".;;Sturm und Drang;;Storm and Stress
Art;;Among the scenes of his later career are superstitious ones like Spirit of the Dead Watching.  With Emile Bernard he proposed a synthetist theory of art emphasizing the use of flat planes and bright, non-naturalistic color in conjunction with symbolic or primitive objects, and he would stress this theory in the Pont-Aven school that he led.  Among his major works are the late masterpiece Where Do We Come From? What Are We? Where Are We Going? and the earlier The Yellow Christ.  FTP, name this one-time French stockbroker, who left his family and retired to paint in Tahiti.;;(Paul) Gauguin
Religion/Mythology;;The poet Stesichorus became blind after a writing a poem slandering her but was cured when he wrote a palinode of praise.  One of her husbands, Deiphobus, was killed in front of her eyes and she was once kidnapped by Theseus and Pirithous, though her brothers rescued her.  She was the subject of a famous rhetorical defense by Gorgias as well as the title character of a Euripides play which reveals that she was retained by Proteus in Egypt while a phantom took her place.  Her daughter Hermione married Orestes and in some stories Nemesis is her mother.  FTP, identify this daughter of Leda and wife of Menelaus whose abduction by Paris caused the Trojan War.;;Helen
United States History;;The head of this man was embalmed by Frederick Weedon and was eventually lost during a fire in Valentine Mott’s Surgical and Pathological Museum.  His father was a British trader named William Powell, but he became better known by a name derived from a ceremonial black drink.  His bitter opposition to the Treaty of Payne’s Landing led to his beginning, in 1835, a two-year guerilla war against U.S. forces in and around Georgia and Florida.  FTP, name this Indian leader and chieftain of the Seminole tribe.;;Osceola
Physics;;To exhibit this property, phosphorus must be compressed at a pressure of two and a half megabars.  Two types of devices use this property, one of which was not verified until after the Meissner effect was discovered.  Of the elements exhibiting the other type, lead does so at the highest temperature.  Some materials with this property have limits on the amount of magnetic field in which they can be to exhibit it, while others work by trapping a magnetic field.  FTP, what is this property in which a material loses all electrical resistance?;;superconduct(ivity|or(s))
Literature;;This work’s contempt for the protagonist’s colleagues was drawn from the author’s time at the Workmen’s Accident Insurance Institute.  A common motif is the central family’s search for a maid who won’t quit, though the family ironically decides to fire a maid at the end of the story, which also sees the family take a tram trip to the country.   The protagonist had intended to announce his intentions to finance his sister Grete’s violin education at the Conservatory, but in his present state he can bring in no money.  FTP, the unique transformation of Gregor Samsa is the subject of what Franz Kafka short story?;;(The) Metamorphosis|(Die) Verwandlung
Art;;Each of the leaves on the right side of this painting has a gold spine and outline and the tree trunks are highlighted with short diagonal lines of gold.  The scene is meant to be set off of Paphos in Cyprus, explaining the orange grove on the right.  Rose blossoms with golden hearts float in the air on the left, while one of the Horae holds a robe up for the titular figure on the right.  Zephyrus and Chloris are aloft at the left and blow that figure toward the shore.  FTP, identify this depiction of a Roman goddess emerging from a scallop shell, a masterwork of Sandro Botticelli.;;(The) Birth of Venus
Religion/Mythology;;This school greatly influenced Geido and the aesthetic principles of shibui, yugen, and ma.  One of its later developed  sects, Obuku, appropriated from the Jodo school the invocation of the Amida or nembutsu.  The Shobogenzo is a work attributed to Dogen the founder of the its Soto sect while its other sect, Rinzai, emphasizes the use of koans.  Eschewing religious scriptures, it advocates a personal transmission of methods of illumination from master to student.  FTP, identify this school of Mahayana Buddhism widespread in Japan and now often associated with Phil Jackson.;;Zen (Buddhism)
World History;;Its sixteenth article was mainly a restatement of the second article of the Conference of Nerat.  Attorney General Bernard did not read it until more than a year after the king signed it in a castle in Bretagne.  Amended by the Peace of Alais [ah-LAY], it created "mixed chambers" in superior law courts and allowed non-Catholics access to Catholic universities.  It was rejected by supreme law courts in several cities including Bordeaux, Toulouse, and Paris, though it excluded Protestants from a zone surrounding Paris.  FTP, identify this law signed by Henry IV granting religious toleration to the Huguenots.;;Edict of Nantes|(L') (É|E){1}?dit de Nantes
Astronomy;;Magnetic field analysis shows that this moon may contain a salty ocean 200 kilometers underground. Its major sites include the crater chain Gipul Catena, and the Valhalla Region, one of the largest impact features in the solar system.  Though it has both the oldest and most heavily cratered landscape in the solar system, it has no large mountains and next to no tectonic or volcanic activity.  Like its three companions, it was discovered by Simon Marius in 1610.  FTP, identify this second-largest and outermost Galilean moon of Jupiter.;;Callisto
Literature;;The title character of this work at one point gives a speech about the legendary Dave Singleman, who inspired him in his profession.  A climactic confrontation occurs at Frank Chop’s House, where we are introduced to the suspected prostitutes Letta and Miss Forsythe.  Other significant moments include the title character’s hallucinated conversations with his elder brother Ben and the final scene of Act II in which he drives away to commit suicide to cash in on an insurance policy for his family.  FTP, name this play about the failures of Biff, Happy, and Willy Loman, a work by Arthur Miller.;;Death of a Salesman
Miscellaneous;;This action is the topic of Alfred Alvarez’s The Savage God.  Edwin Schneidman has developed ten common characteristics of it, and Karl Menninger developed the concept of a "chronic" variety.  In the most famous work on this subject the author doesn’t define it in terms of intentionality but instead his definition hinges on the executor knowing the result of the action.  He also related it to social integration and proposed three types—egoistic, altruistic, and anomic. FTP, identify this title action of an 1897 Emile Durkheim work, the act of killing oneself.;;suicide
Music;;Roberto Gerard’s is nicknamed "Collages," and a better known one features a soloist singing from the Polish Songs of Lysagora.  That one, by Henryk Gorecki, is nicknamed  "Symphony of Sorrowful Songs," while Camille Saint-Saens’ is commonly known as "Organ".  The best-known work of this number was completed in 1804 and was initially composed "In Memory of a Great Man".  FTP, give the common number of these symphonies, the last of which was once dedicated to Napoleon by its composer Beethoven and is commonly known as "Eroica".;;(Third|3rd){1}? (Symphony)|(Symphony No(.)) 3
United States History;;The convention at the Cow Palace nominated him on the first ballot, and his platform included the sale of the TVA and a plan to make Social Security voluntary.  A five-term senator, he served both before and after the presidential election.  In that election he won his home state by only 5,000 votes and only five others in the Deep South partly because of his remark that the U.S. should use  "a low-yield atomic bomb on Chinese supply lines in Vietnam".  FTP, identify this ultra-conservative Arizona Republican senator who also claimed that "extremism in defense of liberty is no vice" before he lost the 1964 presidential election.;;(Barry) (Morris) Goldwater(,) (Sr.)
Biology;;The more familiar members of this order are in suborder Apocrita, while the less familiar are in suborder Symphyta. Rather than familiarity, however, this order is divided into suborders based on the width of the "waist" between the thorax and abdomen.  Small hooks called hamuli join the front wings to the smaller hind wings in almost all adults, and Isoptera is the only other order in its class to display the same complexity of social behavior. FTP, identify this order of class Insecta, which includes sawflies and horntails as well as the more familiar ants, bees, and wasps.;;Hymenoptera
Literature;;His first play, The Wild Gallant, was a failure when first presented, but he soon found more success with The Indian Queen.  With his Panegyric on the Coronation and Astraea Redux he celebrated Charles II, but religious differences with William and Mary led to the loss of his title as Poet Laureate.  Of his tragedies, All for Love, remains the best-known, but it was for allegorical poems that he established his name.  FTP, identify this English poet of "MacFlecknoe" and Absalom and Achitophel.;;(John) Dryden
Philosophy;;The founder of the last version of this classical philosophical school was Aenesidemus.  Earlier, beginning with Arcesilaus, it had control of the Academy from the 3rd to the 1st century BC, which we know because of its primary ancient source, Sextus Empiricus.  George Santayana paired it with "Animal Faith" in work that took the views of David Hume, this philosophy’s greatest modern exponent, a step further.  FTP, identify this philosophy founded by Pyrrhon of Elis, which has now come to represent a view that doubts what is generally accepted as true.;;skeptic(ism|s){1}?
World History;;His own writings include a Book of Privileges in which he lists his claims and titles and the The Book of Prophecy, a compilation of Biblical passages.  Another interesting source is a biography attributed to his younger son Ferdinand.  His rivals included a subordinate on his first trip, Martin Pinzon, as well as Francisco de Babadilla who arrested him and his brothers Bartholemew and Diego for mismanagement of the newly founded La Isabela.  He wound up shipwrecked on Jamaica on his last voyage and on his third discovered the Gulf of Paria and the Orinoco estuary.  FTP, name this Genoese native who sailed west with three ships in 1492.;;(Christopher) Columbus|(Christobal)Colon|(Cristoforo) Colubmo
Chemistry;;Richard Zsigmondy won a Nobel Prize in chemistry for his development of a special type of microscope to observe these substances.  Arne Tiselius’ first use of electrophoresis was to separate them and John Tyndall observed their unique dispersion of light in the effect named for him.  Common types include gels, emulsions, and sols.  FTP, what are these types of mixtures composed of a suspended and mobile phase?;;colloid(s)
Literature;;Wounded ten times during the Sepoy Rebellion, this resident of Bundelkund left his Indian wife and two children for the solace of a remote Pacific Island. Discovered by two Frenchmen and harpooner Ned Land after an attack on the Abraham Lincoln, he reappeared on a second deserted Pacific Island when he saved an American engineer from drowning and killed a group of convicts using electric balls.  His literary appearances ended, however, with the Mysterious Island.  FTP, name this character in two Jules Verne novels, best known as the captain of the Nautiius.;;(Captain) Nemo
Miscellaneous;;The reflective kind was coined by John Rawls and consistently shifts as a person’s views on individual cases conflict with views on general principles. In economics the modern version of the general kind was modeled by Arrow and Debreu, and supply and demand falls under the analysis of the partial kind.  Thermodynamics defines it as a state in which internal processes cause no change in macroscopic properties, while in chemistry it is the point at which the forward and reverse reactions proceed at the same rate.  FTP, identify this term, which in physics is the state of a body at rest where the net force and net torque is zero.;;equilibrium
World History;;In a 1915 article J.H. Little attacked the only primary account of this event, that of John Zephaniah Holwell.  The maximum death toll is likely in the 40s rather than the 123 claimed by Holwell.  It took place at Fort William and was more a result of the negligence than the hostile intent of Suraj-ad-Daulah, though it still became a rallying cry to justify British imperialism.  Occurring on June 20th of 1756, FTP, what was this incident in which the Nawab of Bengal supposedly imprisoned 146 European prisoners in the namesake Indian city?;;Black Hole (of Calcutta)
Miscellaneous;;Only draft busts David Clyde and John Stearns were picked ahead of this man who became Dennis Eckersley’s first strikeout victim.  The only player thus far to have two four-hit games in the same World Series, he almost quit baseball in 1978 to become a professional golfer. He became the first shortstop to lead the American League in both slugging percentage and total bases in 1982, winning the MVP and leading his team to its only World Series appearance.  He also won the MVP in 1989 as a centerfielder and in 1992 he reached 3,000 hits.  Inducted into the Hall of Fame in 1999 along with Nolan Ryan and George Brett, FTP who is this longtime Milwaukee Brewer?;;(Robin) Yount
Literature;;The females in this work include a girl whose name translates as purple, a woman probably in her late forties who throws herself onto the title character, and a princess with a big nose.  The last part of this work deals with the rivalry of two of those women, Niou and Kaoru for the love of Ukifune.  These are just some of the figures involved in the amorous adventures of the titular prince.  FTP, name this early 11th-century work, the first novel of Japan and which was written by Lady Murasaki Shikibu.;;(The) Tale of Genji|Genji Monogatari
World History;;Their greatest decline came under the time of Thomas Arundel, who vigorously prosecuted them.  However, they were briefly reinvigorated by the martyrdom of one of their leaders, John Oldcastle, but they would merge into larger groups within the next 100 years.  Drawn primarily from the peasant class, the members of this group held the Bible to be the only rule of authentic faith.  FTP, name this religious sect of 14th and 15th-century England initially led by John Wycliffe.;;Lollards
Religion/Mythology;;He gained followers by praising the concept of Asha, or order, thereby rejecting the state of Drug [DROOG], or confusion.  These thoughts are expressed in his series of devotional poems, the Gathas, which were widely propagated by the priestly group that claimed him as one of them, the Magi.  The Magi also spread his notions of the destroyer and creator deities, Angra Mainyu and Ahura Mazda.  FTP, name this religious figure, whose teachings were adopted as the state religion of ancient Persia.;;Zarathustra|Zoroaster
Geography;;It contains the Turneffe Islands and several atolls although it itself as not an island as erroneously described in the 2004 Olympic Opening ceremonies.  Its only major highways not named for cardinal directions are the Hummingbird Highway and the Coastal Road.  Its southern border is at the Sarstoon River and its Northern border is at the Rio Hondo.  Gaining its independence from Britain in 1981, FTP, identify this only Central American country without a Pacific coast which has its capital at Belmopan.;;Belize
Miscellaneous;;He provided the voice for Commander Nebula in two Buzz Lightyear of Star Command videos, and his role as Agent Sid was cut from the final print of Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back.  His recurring characters include a multitasking strip club DJ, a hack morning radio personality who reminds listeners that every city in Southern California is "checking in" at seventy-seven degrees, and Vietnam veteran Birchum.  He is currently working in the rotation of substitute Late Late Show hosts and continuing to assist Dr. Drew on Loveline.  FTP, name this co-creator of The Man Show with Jimmy Kimmel.;;(Adam) Carolla|Ace Rockolla
Literature;;In her later years, she edited the letters of Anton Chekhov, wrote the plays The Autumn Garden and Toys in the Attic, and defended herself from charges of fabricating parts of her biographies in An Unfinished Woman and Pentimento.  In her major works, she created such characters as Mary Tilford and Regina Hubbard.  Perhaps more famously she refused to indicate her connections to Communism in a 1952 hearing, stating "I will not cut my conscience to fit this year's fashions" and she was the model for Nora Charles, a creation of her lifelong lover Dashiell Hammett.  FTP, name this American playwright of Watch on the Rhine, The Children’s Hour, and The Little Foxes.;;(Lillian) Hellman
United States History;;In the first decades of the twentieth century, this organization was divided into "lily-white" and "black and tan" factions over the issue of African-American participation. It was originally founded and named by Alvan Bovay and Chicago Tribune publisher Joseph Medill. It suffered another factional dispute over the issue of civil service reform, with leaders including Roscoe Conkling of the Stalwarts and James G. Blaine of the Half-Breeds. FTP, name this political party founded in 1854, whose first successful presidential candidate was Abraham Lincoln.;;Republican (Party)|G(rand) O(ld) P(arty)
Biology;;It is divided into three nuclear layers and four plexiform layers.  The inner nuclear layer contains the bipolar and amacrine cells, which are key intermediates in signal transduction.  The choroid layer oxygenates it and separates it from the sclera.  It has a small yellow area called the macula, which is bounded by the ora serrata and surrounds the fovea.  The ganglia are found at its surface, while its innermost layer contains rods and cones.  FTP, name this structure which converts light into a nerve impulse, found along the back of the eye.;;retina
Music;;The form was brought to France by Antoine Charpentier, although Berlioz’s Infancy of Christ is the most famous French one.  Recent examples include Krzysztof Penderecki’s Saint Luke Passion, and Liszt worked in this form to create Christus and The Legend of Saint Elizabeth.  Other examples include Beethoven’s Christ on the Mount of Olives, Elgar’s Dream of Gerontius, Mendelssohn’s Elijah, and Haydn’s Creation.  FTP, name this form consisting of a two-act dramatic vocal and orchestral rendition of a sacred subject, a form often associated with Georg Handel.;;oratorio
Religion/Mythology;;In one myth about him he is comforted by Thetis after being driven out of the land of Lycurgus of Thrace.  Another tells of his kidnapping by pirates whom he turns into dolphins when they jump off the ship.  He was cared for in his childhood by the nymphs of Nysa as well as his aunt Ino.  He is often given as the father of Priapus and Deianira and his tutor was Silenus.  Born from the thigh of Zeus after his mother, Semele, perished when she saw Zeus in his god-form, FTP, name this leader of the maenads and god of revelry and wine.;;Dionysus
Literature;;Among the uses of anticlimax in this poem is the couplet "Here thou, great Anna, whom three realms obey,/Dost sometimes counsel take, and sometimes tea".  The protagonist is given a bag of sighs and tears in order to continue fuming, but the resultant melee causes the loss of the very object she was trying to retrieve and its assumption into the stars.  The trouble begins at Hampton Court Palace following a game of cards, when the Baron performs the title activity and Umbriel makes a trip to the Cave of Spleen.  FTP, Belinda loses the titular curl of hair in what mock-epic by Alexander Pope?;;(The) Rape of the Lock
World History;;Among his notable appointments were the court scholars Kemalpasazade and Abu al-Su’ud.  He seized Erxurum, Iraq, and Lake Van from Persia and his forces won the naval battle at Preveza after he appointed Khayr ad-Din, also called Barbarossa, as fleet admiral.  He suffered losses at the Battle of Güns and the first siege of Vienna, and, shortly before his death during the siege of Szigetvár, his expedition to Malta was defeated.  Earlier, however he had great success in expanding his empire into Hungary winning victories at Belgrade and Mohács.  FTP, name this man who ruled from 1520 to 1566 as Ottoman sultan.;;Sule(y|i){1}?man (the Magnificent|I|the First|the Lawgiver|Muhtesem|Kanuni)
Noncomputational Math;;Algebraic surfaces of this type include the Togliatti surface and equations of this type include the de Moivre equation. These equations may be solved by reducing them to the Bring form and applying Jacobi theta functions.  Alternatively, after undergoing a Tschirnhausen transformation, the related icosahedral equation can be used to find a solution in terms of hypergeometric functions.  Those and other methods are now known, but there can never be a general equation for them using only field and radical operations.  FTP, name this class of algebraic equations whose study led to the development of Galois groups and Abel’s impossibility theorem.;;quintic|fifth-degree
Miscellaneous;;While in college she was head of a science and social group known as the "Ash Can Cats".  She worked with the American Museum of Natural History for 52 years, during which time she wrote A Rap on Race with James Baldwin.  Other works of hers include Culture and Commitment and Male and Female and her autobiography, Blackberry Winter.  But she may still be best known for her first work, an analysis of adolescence and sex in Oceania.  FTP, name this anthropologist and author of Coming of Age in Samoa.;;(Margaret) Mead
Philosophy;;Friedrich Nietzsche in his Twilight of the Idols dedicates a section to "The Problem" of this man.  The frustration his contemporaries had with him can be attributed to his method of elenchos in which conversations about definitions of abstract concepts generally end in aporia as well as his use of the eirôneia style, which came to be known as his "irony". He also insisted that a personal daimon was more important than ritualistic piety which provided one of the reasons for which he was accused by Lycon, Anytus and Meletus.  For 10 points, name this mouthpiece of the Platonic dialogues who was eventually sentenced to death despite his so-called Apology.;;Socrates
Literature;;In a symbolic section of this book, eels swarm over the rotting head of a horse and toy shop owner Sigismund Markus is ejected from a cemetery.  The sight of a moth flapping its wings against a light bulb becomes the protagonist’s "master," and he later paints "Madonna 49," meets the "musical clown" Bebra, possibly fathers Maria Truczinski’s child, leads "the dusters," and tricks his father into committing suicide by swallowing a Nazi Party membership badge.  The narrator is long the size of a three year old and wields an intolerable scream whenever he is separated from the title object.  FTP, name this story of Oskar Matzerath, the first novel of the Danzig trilogy by Günter Grass.;;(The) Tin Drum|(Die) Blechtrommel
World History;;It began when the leader interrupted a speech by Gustav van Kahr and it was aimed at kidnapping a triumvir of officials including General Lossow and Colonel Seisser.  As part of this action men under Ernst Rohm were to seize strategic points about the city.   Its leader started it with the proclamation that "The National Revolution has begun" and this event ended after a brief firefight between insurgents and police in the Residenzstrasse.  Lenient juries completely let off one major leader, Erich Ludendorf, while the other was given only five years in prison and only served eight months, during which time he wrote Mein Kampf.   FTP, name this 1923 rebellion in Munich led by Adolf Hitler.;;Beer Hall Putsch
Physics;;One of Irving Langmuir’s classic examples of "pathological science," the so-called Allison effect, falsely claimed to use this phenomenon as the basis for a new method of spectroscopy.  In its "inverse" version the spin of certain particles can be converted into angular momentum.  It causes an amount of circular birefringence dependent on the Verdet constant of the medium, and its direction is caused by the direction of the magnetic field producing it.  FTP, identify this rotation of a light beam’s plane of polarization, discovered by a British scientist who is also the namesake of the unit of capacitance.;;Faraday (effect|rotation)
Art;;Very few people notice the rust colored butterfly that flits above a dark colored dog of indistinguishable breed in this painting.  The only person directly facing the viewer is a young girl in a white sundress and hat.  She holds the hand of her mother, who is dressed and equipped like all the women in this painting.  It’s hard to find all seven parasols that appear, but much easier to see the lone monkey and even easier to see the river Seine on the entire top left of the painting.  FTP, name this canvas depicted a popular Parisian picnic spot, the pointillist masterpiece of Georges Seraut.;;(A) Sunday Afternoon (on the Island of la Grande Jatte|Isle of Grand Jatte|Island of Grande Jatte){1}?
Geography;;This country controls the enclave of Artsvashen within its eastern neighbor.  Kapan is the leading city in its southern Syunik province, while the north contains the Debed and Hrazdan rivers and Lake Sevana.  Its chief farming regions include the Shirak Steppe and Ararat Plain.  This country has had an ongoing dispute with Azerbaijan over control of the Nagorno-Karabakh region.  FTP, name this former Soviet republic which also borders Turkey and Iran and has its capital at Yerevan.;;(Republic of) Armenia|Hayastani (Hanrapetut’yun)
Literature;;The title character of this novel enjoys the radio work of Norman Corwin.  He reminisces on "the pumpkin" and "the pilgrim" while deriding the "monkey" Mary Jane Reed, modeled on Margaret Martinson, as well as his mother Sophie.  As an adult he works as the Assistant Commissioner of Human Opportunity for the City of New York.  The first page defines the title phenomenon as "A disorder in which strongly-felt ethical and altruistic impulses are perpetually warring with extreme sexual longings, often of a perverse nature".  FTP, name this novel consisting of a session at the office of Doctor Spielvogel for the title character, an autobiographical creation of Phillip Roth.;;Portnoy(')s Complaint
World History;;One early victory was over the Merkit who had kidnapped his wife Borte.  In this fight and in his later rise to power he was greatly aided by Togril, a friend of his father Yekusai, whom he later turned against.  He succeeded in consolidating his people and gaining rule over them at the khuriltai of 1206 and went on to lead them against the Kwarezm Empire as well as the Hsia and Ch’in kingdoms.  He died while on campaign in China and was succeeded by his son Ogadai.  FTP, identify this great Mongol ruler, the grandfather of Kublai.;;(Genghis|Jenghiz|Chaangyus){1}? Khan||Temujin
Biology;;Two whose expressions are commonly seen include c-neu [see-new] and c-L-myc [see-ell-mike].  Based on the action of the Rous virus, src [s-r-c] became the first one discovered.  When working properly, RB and p53 counter their effects, but when defective, they become the inherited type.  They are often activated by retroviruses performing insertional mutagenesis or simply by point mutation, amplification, or translocation, as in the "Philadelphia chromosome".  FTP, name these chromosome sections that, when altered, spur cancerous replication.;;oncogene(s)
Literature;;In Rome he studied rhetoric under Epidius and learned from Siro the Epicurean, expressing his amazement at the city through the character of Tityrus.  Among his minor works are the short epics Ciris and Culex and a didactic poem on volcanism, Aetna.  He advised farmers to "First find your bees a settled sure abode/Where neither winds can enter" in the fourth Georgic, and prophesized the birth of a "miraculous child" in his fourth Eclogue.  FTP, name this author who wrote of "arms and the man" and such characters as Dido and Anchises in the Aeneid.;;V(i|e){1}?rgil|(Publius) Vergilius (Maro)
World History;;He was rebuffed by Cardinal Cajetan and goaded by the actions of Andrea Karlstadt into a disastrous debate with Johann Eck.  He was then the subject of the bulls Exsurge Domine and Decet Romanum Pontificem.  Those pitfalls may have caused him to write such pamphlets as Against the Heavenly Prophets and Against the Jews and Their Lies.  He also wrote Against the Murderous and Thieving Hordes of Peasants to denounce their actions in the Peasant’s War.  Protected by Frederick III of Saxony after his condemnation at the Diet of Worms, FTP, who was this reformer who railed against indulgences in his Ninety-Five Theses, thus catalyzing the Protestant Reformation?;;(Martin) Luther
Miscellaneous;;Due to a brief interruption where he worked with an octet, his periods with larger groups are dubbed the "Old Testament" and "New Testament".  Another departure from his major project led to a series of duets with Oscar Peterson. He employed Sweets Edison, Herschel Evans, Lester Young, vocalist Jimmy Rushing, and guitarist Freddie Green in recording such hits as "Every Tub," "Shorty George," and his group’s signature tune, "One O’Clock Jump".  FTP, name this pianist and bandleader who received his name from a Kansas City DJ’s proclamation that he was part of the "jazz aristocracy".;;(William) (Count) Basie
Literature;;At two points in this novel, the riddle "Nansen kills a Kitten" is discussed in relation to the moral quality of the protagonist.  Formative events in the main character’s childhood include the murder of Uiko, a meeting with Tayama Dosen, and the protagonist walking in on his mother cheating on his dying father.  The rationalist Kashiwagi tempts the main character from his studies, and eventually his frustration with his own stammering speech and physical shortcomings causes Mizoguchi to lash out at the nearest object of beauty.  FTP, name this novel based on the actual burning of the title structure in 1950, written by Yukio Mishima.;;(The) Temple of the Golden Pavilion|Kinkakuji
Physics;;This instrument is the basis for the "pair telescope" used on Cosmic Ray Satellite B and the Energetic Gamma Ray Experiment.  It produces an image based on the activity of the thyratron circuit, which activates based on the signal sent through the discriminator and coincidence circuit by the photomultiplier tube.  Later versions used gaps of up to forty centimeters and gathered additional data with audio transducers.  FTP, name this type of detector consisting of several parallel plates of metal within an inert gas, which responds to an electric field by discharging energy along a particle’s track.;;spark chamber
United States History;;Born in Hanover County, Virginia, he got his start as a defense lawyer, successfully gaining acquittals in all 300 cases he tried. He was dubbed "The Villain" by Andrew Jackson, who regretted not having shot him. Peace commissioner for the Treaty of Ghent despite having been a leading War Hawk, he saw his "American System" become the central platform of the Whig Party, but failed in his numerous attempts to win the presidency, stating "I’d rather be right than president". FTP, who was this Kentucky politician known as the "Great Compromiser"?;;(Henry) Clay
Chemistry;;In plasmas, the ambipolar version of this phenomenon is inversely proportional to the collision frequency, while the classical form is directly proportional, and is a random-walk process. A semi-empirical formula can be used to describe the Bohn version, while classical cases are governed by Fick’s laws and Graham’s law. FTP, what is this process in which gases mix due to the random motions of their molecules?;;diffusion
Literature;;This author’s satirical style is seen in such stories as "The Coach" and "Old-World Landowners". His last days saw him come under the spell of the fanatical priest Konstantinovsky, who convinced him to burn the completed manuscript of the sequel to his best-known work. The early narratives collected in Evenings on a Farm Near Dikanka were followed by works like Taras Bulba, "The Overcoat" and The Inspector General. FTP, who is this Russian author of the novel Dead Souls?;;(Nicolai) Gogol
Music;;Notable pieces in this opera are the aria "O muto asil" and the "Soldiers’ Dance", but it is most famous for its overture. A subplot concerns Arnold’s love for Matilda, but soon Arnold sees his father Melcthal executed. The villain Gessler celebrates a century of Austrian occupation in Switzerland by ordering the Swiss to kneel, and when the title figure refuses, Gessler orders him to perform his most famous feat on his son Jemmy. FTP, what is this opera by Rossini about a Swiss folk hero who shoots an apple from his son’s head?;;(William|Wilhelm){1}? Tell
Philosophy;;Works by this philosopher include Reconstruction in Philosophy, Philosophy and Civilization, and The Quest for Certainty. He held that the various modes and forms of human activity are developed by humans to solve individual and social problems, a position he labeled instrumentalism. He is also known for his rejection of traditional teaching methods in favor of learning through experimentation and practice. FTP, who was this American philosopher, the author of The School and Society and Democracy and Education?;;(John) Dewey
Religion/Mythology;;He stabbed the Branstock tree with the magical sword Balmung, stating that he who could pull it free would win in battle. He could make the dead speak, and once persuaded Baugi to bore a hole in his brother Sattung’s cave so that he could obtain the mead of Kvasir. He hung pierced from the boughs of Yggdrasil by his spear Gungnir in order to obtain the runes that made him so wise. Owner of the ring Draupnir and the eight-legged horse Sleipnir, FTP, who was this leader of the Norse pantheon?;;Odin
World History;;According to some reports, his mother was Abrotonon of Thrace or Euterpe of Caria, but it was certain that he was related to the Lycomedea through his father Neocles. As archon, he sponsored the first efforts to make the defensible rock bays of Piraeus into harbors, but in general suffered from a reputation as a slick politician willing to profit through war. Unlike many older Athenians, he had the foresight to realize that the battle of Marathon would not end the war against the Persians, prompting him to urge for expansion of the navy and the building of triremes.  FTP, name this general who tricked Xerxes into initiating the naval engagement at Salamis.;;Themistocles
Literature;;A recent translation of this literary work used such diverse inspirations as Gerard Manley Hopkins, W.R. Rogers, and the translator’s barely-literate aunt to create a version notable for its unique versification and juxtapositions with the original text, the result of twenty years work by Seamus Heaney. Consisting of over 3,000 lines, it opens with the mysterious arrival of Scyld Scefing from across the sea, and goes on to tell of the title figure’s death fighting a dragon with Wiglaf fifty years after coming to the aid of Hrothgar. FTP, what is this Old English poem that includes the defeat of the monster Grendel?;;Beowulf
Biology;;Cold periods stimulate their production in the roots of plants, after which they move upward through the xylem and pass into the leaves and fruits. Including such substances as zeatin and kinetin, they are derivatives of adenine involved with chloroplast development, seed germination, leaf formation, and the breaking of bud dormancy and leaf senescence. FTP, what are these plant growth hormones that work in conjunction with auxin to promote cell division?;;cytokinin(s)
Art;;Although at first eight towers were intended, only two were actually built at the west end. The west, north, and south fronts all have triple portals and are decorated with limestone sculptures, including one of the Apostles against the splays of the central doorway in the south transept. It is famous for its spires and 136 stained-glass windows, most of which date back to its construction. Built from 1194 to 1220, FTP, identify this High Gothic cathedral, named for the town southwest of Paris in which it stands.;;Chartres (Cathedral) (of Notre-Dame)
World History;;Originally formed under Hasan i-Sabbah, they sprang from a sect called the Ishamelis. Their final years saw the killing of their last leader, Khurshah, and the destruction of their last fortress, Alamut, by Hulagu Khan. Their members were likely motivated by being drugged to sleep and taken to a harem, which their Master would claim was a glimpse of Paradise. Known for killing Egyptian and Arab caliphs, FTP, what was this Islamic sect whose name has come to denote one who kills a person of political importance?;;Assassin(s)
Literature;;The son of Jewish and Irish vaudeville performers, he worked for British Intelligence during World War II, and eloped from his lavish New York wedding for an early honeymoon in Florida with his wife Muriel, who he soon begins to call "Miss Spiritual Tramp of 1948". He appears to prefer the company of young girls, such as Esme, an adolescent British choir singer, and the 4 year-old Sybil. He spent much of his youth trying to teach his equally precocious younger siblings the importance of the Upanishads, but eventually shoots himself in the head. FTP, name this eldest of the Glass children and protagonist of A Perfect Day for Banana Fish, the subject of a famous "Introduction" by J.D. Salinger?;;Seymour (Glass)
Geography;;The largest permanent stream in this region is the Kerulen River. Its western part is entirely sandy, but much of the rest is composed of great stony expanses. The site of the discovery of the first dinosaur eggs, its Yulduz Valley is enclosed by the Chol-tagh and the Kurugh-tagh, which are sub-ranges of the Tian-shan mountain range. FTP, what is this large desert shared by Mongolia and China?;;Gobi (Desert)
Chemistry;;A pastor of Leeds as well as a scientist, this man's first experiments involved the discovery that brewery gas extinguishes wood chips.  A meeting with Benjamin Franklin led to the discovery that graphite conducts electricity, which he documented in his book The History of Electricity. In his most famous experiment he placed a candle and a plant in a jar and concluded that candles and organisms destroy the air while plants replenish it with what he called "dephlogisticated air".  FTP, name this English scientist, the discoverer of oxygen.;;(Joseph) Priestley
United States History;;One of the first cases to directly challenge its enforcement was Brushaber v. Union Pacific Railroad Company, in which the Supreme Court ruled that it conferred no new powers on Congress and rejected the argument that it would lead to self-incrimination. It became necessary after the Court’s ruling in Pollock v. Farmer’s Loan and Trust Company, even though the Court had earlier allowed a three percent levy to help finance the Civil War. FTP, what is this Constitutional Amendment that authorizes Congress to collect income taxes?;;(16th|Sixteenth){1}? Amendment
Physics;;Metals exposed to them induce the creation of Landau levels, allowing the mapping of Fermi surfaces through the De Haas-van Alphen effect. In some elements, such as bismuth, their presence gives rise to forces that attempt to counter or expel them, the most famous example of which is seen in semiconductors via the Meissner effect. They fall off as the inverse of the distance around a current carrying wire, and can be represented by continuous lines that emerge from north-seeking poles and enter south-seeking poles. FTP, what are these regions in which the namesake force is observable?;;magnetic field(s)
World History;;Early in his career he was forced to share power with John Carteret, but was eventually able to force his resignation. He spent time in jail for graft during a period of Tory ascendancy, but was most popular for his economic policies, including his establishment of the sinking fund to reduce the national debt, which he had also addressed with his resolution of the South Sea Bubble crisis. However, he was forced from office due to British failures in the early stages of the War of the Austrian Succession. FTP, who was this first official Prime Minister of Britain?;;(Robert) Walpole
Art;;The ornate chandelier at the top of the painting holds a single lit candle, while several pieces of fruit can be seen by the window on the left. A red pair of shoes on the floor in the back contrasts with the pair of wooden clogs in the lower left. The figure on the right has her green dress gathered up in one hand, while a little dog, possibly representing fidelity, stands in the middle at the participants’ feet. Perhaps best known for the concave mirror in the background that reflects two witnesses, including the artist, FTP, identify this Jan van Eyck painting depicting the marriage vows of a certain couple.;;(The) Arnolfini Wedding|(The) Marriage of Giovanni Arnolfini and Giovanna Cenami|(The) Betrothal of the Arnolfini
Literature;;Worried about the reputation *this* poem might give him, the poet wrote a companion poem decades later whose epilogue contains the line "And who loves War for War’s own sake is fool or crazed or worse". It is written in six stanzas, the last of which opens "When can their glory fade"? Supposedly composed while raking leaves, the author took the phrase "someone had blundered" from a newspaper report. Containing the lines "Their’s not to reason why, Their’s but to do and die",. FTP, what is this poem by Tennyson about a deadly attack in the Crimean War?;;(The) Charge of the Light Brigade
Literature;;The titular event turns out to be a hanging rather than the shooting the reader is led to believe it is at one point. At various times, the protagonist is described as walking down a long road at night under a sky filled with strange constellations or on the way to see his wife and children. However, it turns out that Peyton Farquhar has never actually left his place of capture. FTP, identify this Ambrose Bierce story about the execution of Farquhar at the title structure.;;(An) Occurrence at Owl Creek Bridge
United States History;;One factor in this president’s election was the Murchison letter, leading to his victory in the electoral college despite losing the popular vote by over 60,000 votes.  His economic policy was influenced by his vice-president, the New York banker Levi Morton, and led him to sign into law the Sherman Silver Purchase Act and McKinley Tariff.  The major symbol of his campaign was the log cabin, which had served a famous relative well 48 years earlier. FTP, who defeated Cleveland in 1888 to become president, the grandson of the hero of Tippecanoe?;;(Benjamin) Harrison
Music;;A medieval estate is depicted in one of its sections, entitled "The Old Castle", while the gardens of Paris are evoked in "Tuileries". Although originally written for the piano, Maurice Ravel created the famous orchestral transcription through which it is well known today. Several sections entitled "Promenades" depict the composer walking about contemplating paintings like "The Hut on Fowl’s Legs" and "Gnomus" found at a showing of the art of Victor Hartmann. FTP, what is this piano suite by Modest Mussorgsky?;;Pictures at an Exhibition
Literature;;The story begins with the author saying he saw the main character in a dream, crying out because his family and town had to be destroyed.  That protagonist flees the town without his family, who won’t leave, and after sundry adventures is wounded in his fight with the giant devil Apollyon.  After healing his wounds with leaves from the Tree of Life, he visits the caves of Pope and Pagan, and then meets a fellow traveler, Faithful,. with whom he braves the perils of Vanity Fair, and after safely crossing the River of Death, Christian is led to the gate of heaven. FTP, what is this allegory by John Bunyan?;;(The) Pilgrim(')s Progress (from This World to That Which is to Come, Part I)
Biology;;The rate at which this process occurs is governed by a group of proteins that contain repeated structures called "finger domains". In eukaryotes, it begins in the TATA box, 25 nucleotides upstream from the initiation sites, and sees RNA polymerase II add to the three prime end of the new molecule until the conclusion, which is commonly induced when the sequence AATAAA is achieved. FTP, what is this process in which the genetic information of DNA is transferred to a molecule of messenger RNA, the first step in protein synthesis?;;transcription
Religion/Mythology;;One of the main stories about them concerns an arrow that pierced one of their members, Elatus, which ultimately resulted from the time Heracles was entertained by another of them named Pholus. The first of them was born from the union of Ixion and a cloud shaped like Hera. Inhabitants of Mount Pelion, one of them, Eurytion, attempted to rape Hippodamia at her wedding to Pirithous, leading to their famous battle with the Lapiths. Most famously represented by the tutor Chiron, FTP, what were these creatures with the bodies of horses and the heads of men?;;Centaur(s)
World History;;Some histories suggest that this leader was raised by peacock tamers, while others say his mother Mura reared him.  His forces captured and killed Dhana Nanda, and he consolidated his rule by creating a strong bureaucracy and taking the provinces of Kabul, Herat, and Baluchistan on the advice of his minister, Kautilya.  His son Bindusara continued the expansion of his kingdom, which was made secure by his defeat of Seleucus Nicator.  FTP, name this founder of the Mauryan Empire.;;Chandragupta (Maurya)
Literature;;J.D. Salinger used a line from this poet to name his book "Raise High the Roof-Beam, Carpenters".  Swinburne translated the "Ode to Anactoria," but believed that Catullus’s translation couldn’t be improved.  Though much of this poet’s work was likely destroyed by Byzantine emperors, odes and fragments like "Cleis" and "It Was You, Atthis" survive.  Other than a brief sojourn in Sicily, her whole life was spent in Mytilene, where she led a band of women devoted to music and poetry.  Often called the "tenth muse", FTP, name this ancient Greek poet who supposedly threw herself into the sea after her rejection by a beautiful youth.;;Sappho
Chemistry;;This quantity is conserved as a constant in the throttling process, and it is often convenient to express the energy that can be extracted from a turbine in terms of the change in this quantity across the turbine. If the only work done in a system is a change of volume at constant pressure, then the change in this quantity is exactly equal to the heat transferred to the system, leading it to sometimes be called "heat content" or "total heat". The term that differentiates Gibbs free energy from Helmholtz free energy, FTP, what is this quantity symbolized H, defined as the product of pressure and volume added to a system’s internal energy?;;enthalpy
Geography;;Most of the eastern half of this state is part of the Drift Prairie, while its western half is mountainous, reaching its highest point at Harney Peak. Its largest body of water, Lake Oahe, receives and is drained by the Missouri River, which bisects this state from north to south, but which doesn’t prevent the dry environment that results in its "black blizzards" of topsoil. FTP, name this state, home to Wind Cave, the Badlands, and Mount Rushmore.;;South Dakota
Religion/Mythology;;The Byzantine historian Procopius described a white stone column located in North Africa that described the flight from the army of this Old Testament figure, the son of Nun.  Of the tribe of Ephraim, his forty years as a slave are mentioned in Exodus, as is his selection to fight the people of Amalek.  Upon the death of Moses, this man led the Israelites.  FTP, identify this namesake of the sixth book of the Old-Testament, perhaps best known for conquering Jericho.;;Joshua
World History;;It began on October 1 with a number of concerts and balls to entertain the delegates, leading the Prince de Ligne to famously say that "it doesn’t work, it dances".  Work did get done, however, like installing the Prince of Orange on the throne of the United Netherlands, giving the left bank of the Rhine to Prussia, and making Sweden sovereign over Norway.  On March 13th, the delegates officially termed Napoleon an outlaw, but Talleyrand stayed to continue his diplomatic work.  Meeting in 1814 and 1815, FTP what was this summit of European powers called to reshape the continent after Napoleon’s defeat?;;(Congress of) Vienna
Literature;;A favorite saying of the protagonist is, "When a man says yes, his chi says yes also," illustrating his sense of his own boldness and strength.  A critical moment in the novel occurs when the girl Ezinma is carried off by Chielo, the priestess of Agbala, who is followed by Ekwefi, the wife of the protagonist.  The protagonist loves Ezinma for her strength, favoring her over his son, Nwoye. Its main plot concerns the ways in which Okonkwo deals with the colonization of Nigeria. FTP, what is this classic 1958 novel by Chinua Achebe?;;Things Fall Apart
Art;;His relief "The Feast of Herod" graces the front of the baptismal font in the Siena Cathedral.  He embedded pieces of colored glass in marble to create his unique Canteria, or "Singing Gallery," for the Florence Cathedral.  According to Vasari, he could be observed repeatedly muttering, "Speak, damn you; speak!" while creating his sculpture of the prophet Habbakuk whose bald head has led it to be nicknamed the Zuccone. FTP, who was this great Early Renaissance sculptor who created the equestrian statue Gattemalata and the bronze David?;;Donatello (or Donato di Niccolo)
Astronomy;;Its typical temperature at its noontime is about four Kelvin, and its total mass is estimated to be 40 times that of the Earth. It is believed to have a dense core lying near the ecliptic, the contents of which continually replenish its outer boundaries.  Besides the weak gravitational pull of the sun, it is also affected by tidal forces produced by other stars in the Milky Way’s galactic disk, often causing some of its roughly six trillion objects to pull away.  FTP, what is this source of long-period comets at the fringe of our solar system, first theorized by a Dutch astronomer in 1950 and known as his "cloud"?;;Oort Cloud
United States History;;In 1785 he published Sketches of American Policy, one of the first works advocating a strong central government. In New York he founded The American Magazine in addition to publishing the Federalist newspapers The Minerva and The Herald. Earlier he had written Grammatical Institute of the English Language, which became known as his "Spelling Book", but he is best known for another compilation. FTP, who was this man, author of An American Dictionary of the English Language?;;(Noah) Webster
Philosophy;;This term had previously occurred only in passing in the work of Goethe, and it is not clear whether its creator conceived of it as a person or an idea. Supposed to arise from those who sacrifice themselves for earthly goals, he is set up in opposition to the "last man," who is solely concerned with his own comfort and is not capable of creating anything beyond himself.  Unchained from the slave mentality, he feels that compassion and religion are for the weak, as they keep him from exercising his will to power.  FTP, who is this new type of man conceived by Friedrich Nietzsche?;;(ü|u(e)){1}?bermensch|(super|over){1}?man
Literature;;Throughout this novel, the characters are protected from harm by the belief in the insanity of the eccentric singing master David Gamut. Major Heyward disguises himself as a French doctor to aid the rescue of those captured by the Iroquois despite the promise of safe conduct to Fort Edward, and although Alice Munro is saved, Cora Munro and Uncas die at the hands of the evil Magua, who in turn is killed by Hawkeye. FTP, what is this novel set during the French and Indian War, the second of The Leatherstocking Tales of James Fennimore Cooper?;;(The) Last of the Mohicans(: A Tale of 1757)
Miscellaneous;;In a 1936 lecture, its theorizer said that this structure corresponds to what Marcel Mauss called "categories of the imagination".  Earlier he said that the influence ascribed to the stars by astrologers was nothing more than the "introspective perceptions of [this structure’s] activity" in his 1927 work, Structure of the Psyche. Proposed by its developer based on the ideas of Adolf Bastien, it doesn’t develop individually, but rather originates from the inherited structure of the brain, and is identical in all people. Constructed from motifs and archtypes, FTP, what is this part of the psyche containing the common memories and impulses of humanity, posited by Carl Jung?;;collective unconscious
Chemistry;;Among the inventions named for this scientist are a grease-spot photometer for measuring brightness and a carbon-zinc electric cell. He explained the workings of geysers, and discovered that ferric oxide could be used as an antidote to arsenic poisoning after an explosion involving arsenic compounds nearly killed him and left him blind in one eye. With Gustav Kirchhoff he pioneered the use of spectroscopic analysis, allowing them to discover cesium and rubidium. FTP, who was this German chemist who invented a vertical metal burner named for him?;;(Robert) Bunsen
World History;;In a meeting at Ponthion, this monarch received the title "Patricius" from Pope Stephen II in reward for assistance against the Lombard King Aistulf.  Several years later he began a long campaign against the forces of Waifar, king of Aquitane, fully subduing the region in 768, the year of his death.  Prior to that he fended off the claims to the throne of his half-brother Griffon. The illegitimate son of Charles Martel, FTP, name this king of the Franks, the father of Charlemagne who was known as "the Short".;;Pepin (the Short|III|the Third)
Literature;;The first edition says that it contains a "compleat description of the four elements, conflitations (sic), ages of man and seasons of the year".  Including works like "In Honor of That High and Mighty Princess Queen Elizabeth of Happy Memory," its focal point is the long work "A Dialogue between Old England and New; Concerning Their Present Troubles".  Its first American edition included "The Author to Her Book," a modest contemplation of this collection, published in 1650 without the author’s knowledge.  FTP, name this first book of poetry published by an American, written by Anne Bradstreet.;;The Tenth Muse Lately Sprung up in America
Art;;Currently on display in the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York, this 1928 painting was part of Alfred Stieglitz’s personal collection before his death.  In its upper-right quadrant the name "Carlo" can be seen, seemingly spelled out in lights.  The name "Bill" appears in all caps at the top left, partly cut off by the edge.  The background of geometric grays and silvers is dominated by a red field and three gold numerals.  This describes, FTP, what work based on a William Carlos Williams poem by Charles Demuth?;;I Saw the Figure Five in Gold
Biology;;Functional divisions of this organ include the lateral lobes, the flocculonodular (FLOCK you low NOD you lar) node, and the vermis.  Within this organ, mossy and climbing fibers modulate the activity of Purkinje (per KIN gee) cells, which receive an efference copy of a voluntary movement signal and modulate that movement.  A part of the central nervous system involved in motor learning, FTP, what is this part of the brain found below the occipital lobe of the cerebrum, whose name means "little brain"?;;cerebellum
World History;;Its official beginning was the attempted murder and subsequent suicide committed by Mangel Pande, whose unit was disbanded by General Hearshey as a result.  Three weeks later, the 3rd Light Cavalry openly refused orders, and fighting soon spread from Meerut, with the greatest violence coming at Cawnpore and the siege of Lucknow.  The arrival of reinforcements under Colin Campbell led to its eventual end in 1859.  Catalyzed by the use of beef and pork fat in Enfield rifle cartridges, FTP, name this 19th-century rebellion against the British in northern India.;;Sepoy (Mutiny|Rebellion)
Art;;One of his sculptures, entitled "Fugit Amor," depicts a man and woman with backs pressed together, being torn apart by wind. One of his first major works, The Man With the Broken Nose, was followed 18 years later by The Little Man With the Broken Nose. He created controversy with the naturalism of The Age of Bronze, and went on to create large works incorporating many individual sculptures like The Gates of Hell and The Burghers of Calais. FTP, who was this man who created "The Thinker"?;;(Auguste) Rodin
Literature;;The most annoying character in this novel is the former Augusta Hawkins, whose Bristol vulgarity is readily apparent.  Miss Bates and her mother are also quite annoying, and the former is cruelly rebuked by the heroine, an action for which she is reproached by the owner of Donwall Abbey.  A side plot concerns the secret affair of Jane Fairfax and Frank Churchill, but it is the love life of Harriet Smith with which the heroine is primarily concerned.  Ending with the title character’s marriage to Mr. Knightly, FTP, what is this novel about Ms. Woodhouse’s meddling in other people’s lives, a work by Jane Austen?;;Emma
Religion/Mythology;;She turned a nymph her husband was chasing into a mint plant, and when Pirithous tried to take her for his wife, he was bound by snakes. The nymph Cyane melted into water after witnessing her abduction, which occurred when she wandered away from her friends the Oceanids to examine a large dark-blue flower. This gave Hades the chance to carry her off, while later, her eating of pomegranate seeds forced her to become his queen. FTP, who is this daughter of Demeter who must spend part of each year in the underworld, where she gets to share Adonis with Aphrodite?;;P(ersephone|roserpina|ersephassa){1}?
Noncomputational Math;;Every connected one can be shown to be a manifold of constant curvature -1, 0, or 1. They are used to study sheaves of analytic functions and for the process of analytic continuation. The most trivial case is the complex plane itself. They arise naturally when examining how functions like the logarithm appear to become multi-valued in the complex plane. FTP, what are these eponymous surfaces named for the 19th century German mathematician who also lends his name to a type of sum often seen in introductory calculus classes?;;Riemann(ian) (surface)
United States History;;Several of their leaders, including Jonas Fay and Thomas Chittenden, declared the lands under their control a republic in 1777. Other leaders like Seth Warner and John Stark were instrumental in the defeat of the British at Bennington. They were formed in 1770 to prevent the annexation of the so-called "New Hampshire Grants" by New York, but they are better known for their leadership by a man who tried to bring about their home region’s annexation by Canada. For 10 points, name this Vermont militia that captured Fort Ticonderoga under the leadership of Ethan Allen.;;Green Mountain (Boys)
United States History;;It quoted John Marshall’s decisions in the Bollman and Swartout cases as well as the views of Justice Joseph Story.  The defendant’s trouble began with his burning of a bridge in Parkton, for which he lost his position in the Baltimore County Guards and was detained by General George Cadwalader in Fort McHenry, prompting Chief Justice Taney to argue for his release.  FTP, name this 1861 ex parte case in which Taney claimed that the President did not have the power to suspend habeas corpus.;;(Ex) (Parte) Merryman
Literature;;His early works include the historical sagas Love’s Comedy and The Pretenders, but of these it is his first production, 1850’s Catiline, that is the only one still frequently performed. His first major play was the verse drama Brand, and he used Julian the Apostate as the inspiration for Emperor and Galilean.  His return to his homeland in 1891 sparked his last productive period, which resulted in John Gabriel Borkman and When We Dead Awaken.  FTP, name this author of The Master Builder and Ghosts, a Norwegian playwright best known for A Doll’s House?;;(Henrik) Ibsen
Noncomputational Math;;Variants of it include System V and BSD. Among its innovations was the idea of "pipes" that allow the results of one program to be used as the input for other programs. It began in the 1960s with work at Bell Labs, MIT, and General Electric to develop a reliable time-sharing operating system, giving rise to a 1971 edition by Thompson and Ritchie. Its source code was offered freely to colleges and universities but without any offer to support it from Bell Labs, leading to its rapid and divergent evolution. Originally based on a system called Multics, FTP, what is this operating system similar in nature to Linux?;;UNIX
Philosophy;;In Book 4 its author discusses his first work, De pulchro et apto, and his reading of Aristotle’s Categories, which, along with Cicero’s Hortensius, greatly influenced him. Book 3 relates the author’s infatuation with the Manichean heresy, while Book 5 tells of the first meeting with Ambrose in Rome. Book 9 is the last of the autobiographical ones and closes with prayers to Patricius and Monica, the author’s mother. Detailing the author’s early hedonism and conversion to Christianity, FTP, name this spiritual work by St. Augustine.;;(The) Confessions (of St(.) Augustine)
World History;;Idi Amin once got so mad at this man that he challenged him to a boxing match, with Muhammad Ali as the referee.  He translated Julius Caesar and The Merchant of Venice into Swahili, but he is better known for tracts like Freedom and Unity, which defended the socialist doctrine of Ujamaa, and for leading his country after it was formed from the union of Zanzibar and Tanganyika.  For 10 points, name this president of Tanzania.;;(Julius) (Kambarage) Nyerere
Literature;;This poem deviates only four times from end-stopped lines, notably upon the introduction of the "hoary-headed swain" who is the speaker in most of the latter portion. A famous section is its conclusion, "The Epitaph", written to "a youth to Fortune and to Fame unknown". It celebrates the existence of "the short and simple annals of the poor" and "some mute inglorious Milton", because, as the author observes, "the paths of glory lead but to the grave". Often cited as the greatest poem of the 18th century, FTP, what is this elegy by Thomas Gray?;;Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard
Geography;;This lake is composed of two basins separated by a ridge known as the Great Barrier.  When the lake is high, the southern basin is diverted near the site of Borkou through a string of basins called Soro.  It is primarily fed by the Komadugu, Yobe, and Chari Rivers.  FTP, name this fourth largest lake on the African continent that lies at the conjunction of Cameroon, Niger, Nigeria, and its namesake country.;;(Lake) Chad
Physics;;They generically occur in theories in which the U(1) group of electromagnetism is embedded in a larger non-Abelian group G. The 't Hooft – Polyakov "hedgehog" solution is an example in an SU(2) theory equipped with a Higgs field. Better known is the Dirac string example, which predicts that the existence of one would lead to the quantization of electric charge, but the third of Maxwell’s equations claims that they don’t exist. FTP, what are these hypothetical particles possessing an isolated elementary magnetic charge?;;(magnetic) monopole(s)
Music;;Originally used interchangeably with the term "canzona," this musical form gradually adopted its most well known structure through the Biblical ones of Kuhnau and seventy written by C.P.E. Bach.  Examples of them include MacDowell’s Eroica and Tragica and Liszt’s Apres une lecture de Dante and one in B minor. Other examples include Les Adieux and Hammerklavier, which are found among Beethoven’s celebrated set of 32.  Including an exposition, development, and recapitulation of a theme, FTP, what is this form of instrumental music, examples of which include Beethoven’s Waldstein, Appassionata, and Pathetique?;;sonata
Philosophy;;Its preface is entitled "On Scientific Cognition," and other sections are named "Consciousness," "Self-Consciousness," and "Reason," all stages in the development of the title faculty. Ethics and religion are also discussed, but its main topic is the development of consciousness, as handled in sections like "The Truth of Self-Certainty" and "Absolute Freedom and Terror". FTP, what is this 1807 work that greatly influenced Marx, one of the masterpieces of Hegel?;;(The) Phenomenology of (the) (Spirit|Mind){1}?|Phenom(ä|a){1}?nologie des Geistes
Chemistry;;The osmotic pressure of a solution is proportional to both the solute concentration and this number. The maximum heat capacity of a solid is held by the law of Dulong and Petit to be three times this constant, while the difference between the heat capacity at constant pressure and at constant volume is approximately this.  Equal to Avogadro’s number multiplied by Boltzmann’s constant, it appears in a law relating pressure, volume, and temperature. FTP, what is this constant approximately equal to 8.314 Joules per Kelvin moles, symbolized by capital R?;;(ideal|universal) (molar) gas constant
World History;;He was raised by Cato the Younger, his mother’s half-brother, and when Cato died, he asked Cicero to write a eulogy, but rejected it as "effeminate and spineless". Although he hated Pompey for killing his father, he allied with Pompey until after Pharsalus, but he is better known for an alliance with Cassius.  For 10 points, name this man who was beaten by Antony and Octavian at Philippi after plotting against Caesar.;;(Marcus) (Junius) Brutus
Literature;;Known by the nickname "The American" for his democratic sympathies as a student, he wrote criticism like the essay "Hamlet and Don Quixote" and stories like "Mumu", in which a serf is forced to kill his beloved pet dog.  His first novel was Rudin, but he did not gain success until the publication of A Sportsman’s Sketches. Also known for the play A Month in the Country and the novel A Nest of Gentlefolk, he is best known for a novel about the student Bazarov that introduced the term "nihilism".  For 10 points, name this Russian author of Fathers and Sons.;;(Ivan) (Sergeevich) Turgenev
Economics;;He discussed theoretical psychology in The Sensory Order and attacked the idea that social scientists should adopt the methods of physical science in The Counter-Revolution of Science.  The cousin of Ludwig Wittgenstein, his book The Constitution of Liberty included the misleadingly titled postscript "Why I am not a conservative," but this Austrian is best known for attacking Keynesian economics.  For 10 points—name this economist who shared the Nobel Prize with Gunnar Myrdal, the author of The Road to Serfdom.;;(Friedrich) Hayek
Geography;;Located in the La Gran Sabro region on the Churun River, a tributary of the Caroni, it is found on Auyan Tepui.  First reported in 1937 when their discoverer crashed his plane on a nearby mountain, its main cataract drops 3,212 feet.  For 10 points—name this Venezuelan waterfall, the highest in the world.;;Angel Falls
Religion/Mythology;;When the dwarf Alvis asked for the hand of this god’s daughter Thrud, this god asked Alvis questions until the sun turned Alvis to stone.  He is the patron god of the lower classes, and receives them in the magnificent hall Bilskirnir.  To reach the Urdar fountain in the shade of Yggdrasil, he must wade through the rivers Kormt, Ormt, and Kerlaug, because he is not allowed to cross Bifröst.  He is equipped with the belt Megin-giörd and the gauntlet Iarn-greiper, which allows him to wield his hammer Mjölnir more effectively. FTP, who is this powerful Norse god of thunder?;;Thor|Donar
World History;;His early writings include 20 books on Etruscan history and a treatise on dice playing. He extended rights to the colonies of Northern Africa and recognized the rights of Jews, and entrusted to Aulus Plautius the campaign to subjugate Britain that he began. He came to power when a soldier found him trembling in the imperial palace after the murder of his nephew and predecessor, Caligula. The subject of two novels by Robert Graves, FTP, identify this Roman emperor from 41 to 54 AD who was poisoned to make room for Nero.;;(Tiberius) Claudius ((Caesar Augustus|Nero){1}? Germanicus)
Literature;;The narrative of this short story is presented as having been published in La Revue Anti-Aristocratique by a certain Monsieur de l’Aubépine, an alter ego of the true author.  The lustful old dame Lisabetta aids the protagonist, who does not heed the warnings of the kindly professor Pietro Baglioni.  Though his suspicions are roused by purple marks on his skin, wilting flowers, and the title character’s ability to kill insects by breathing on them, Giovanni pursues a relationship with Beatrice until discovering he has become poisonous as well due to the experiments of Beatrice’s father.  FTP, what is this short story by Nathaniel Hawthorne?;;Rappaccini(') s Daughter
Physics;;Ordinary numerical integration causes systems of this type to deviate, so symplectic methods are often used instead.  Systems of this type obey Liouville's Theorem, and their dynamics can be described by taking derivatives of a single function on phase space. Their evolutions are determined by the functions of the same name that express their energy in terms of momentum and positional coordinates. FTP, what are these dynamical systems named for the developer of quaternions?;;Hamiltonian (systems)
Art;;A red barn can be seen in the back right of this painting, while the main building’s attic features a pointed arch window that provides part of the basis for its title. One figure is seen staring at something to the viewer’s right, and is based on the artist’s sister Nan. Byron McKeeby, the artist’s dentist, modeled for the other figure, who is given symbolic significance by holding a pitchfork in his right hand. FTP, what is this classic of American Regionalism, painted by Grant Wood?;;American Gothic
World History;;A powerful influence in this man’s formative years was his tutor, Adrian of Utrecht, later Pope Adrian VI. His reign was plagued in part by the revolts of the comuneros and the North German states. The son of Philip the Handsome and Joanna the Mad, he ended French hegemony in Italy with his defeat of Francis I at Pavia, but in his last years tried to stave off debt by having his son Philip II wed Mary I of England. Reigning from 1519 until his 1556 abdication, FTP, who was this Holy Roman Emperor?;;Charles (V|the Fifth|(I|the First){1}? of Spain){1}?
Literature;;This play features an argument between Right Logic and Wrong Logic over the benefits of bathing.  The creditors Pasias and Amynias are rebuked by the dishonest main character, a farmer who, because the titular chorus wishes to teach him fear of the gods, eventually receives a severe beating from his sophist son Pheidippides.  Strepsiades ultimately burns down the Thinkery of Socrates in, FTP, what Aristophanes play whose title refers to a group of celestial shape-shifters?;;(The) Clouds|Nephelai
Miscellaneous;;He chronicled his experiences in the field in works like The Indian Journals and The League of the Ho-de-no-sau-nee. In his best-known works, he laid the foundation for the study of kinship and developed a theory of cultural evolution positing that cultures develop through stages of savagery, barbarism, and civilization. FTP, who was this pioneer of American anthropology, the author of Systems of Consanguinity and Affinity of the Human Family and Ancient Society?;;(Lewis) (Henry) Morgan
Religion/Mythology;;Two lesser-known Biblical figures with this name were a prophet killed by King Jehoiakim and the chief priest of Ahaz of Judah who witnessed for Isaiah. The best-known figure of this name was rewarded with a mess of meat for following his king’s command to go home and wash his feet. However, he slept at the king’s door due to his guilt that Israel, Judah, and Joab had to sleep in a tent, after which the king sent him to the front lines of a fierce battle to engineer his death. FTP, who was this husband of Bathsheba betrayed by David, known as "the Hittite"?;;Uriah
Miscellaneous;;Learning his trade from the Lutheran minister Dan Call, one morning in 1905 this man forgot the combination to the safe in his office and kicked it in frustration.  He broke his toe, which grew infected, leading to his death from blood poisoning in 1911. He celebrated his 21st birthday by buying the knee-length frock coat and planter’s hat in which he is always depicted today. His product was the only one of its kind to win the Gold Medal at the 1904 World’s Fair in St. Louis, as one can read on the labels of this man’s legacy.  FTP, name this resident of Lynchburg, Tennessee, the developer of his namesake Old No. 7 sipping whiskey.;;(Jasper) (Newton) (Jack) Daniel
Philosophy;;During WWI, he published Egotism in German Philosophy, having earlier produced an important critique of literature entitled Interpretations of Poetry and Religion. He stated that to judge anything beautiful is "to establish an ideal" in The Sense of Beauty and attempted to describe the human intellect in The Life of Reason. He later described his theory of immediately apprehended essences in his major works, Scepticism and Animal Faith and Realms of Being. FTP, who was this Spanish-born American philosopher and author of the novel The Last Puritan, known for his quote "those who cannot remember the past are doomed to repeat it"?;;(George) Santayana
Biology;;This disease comes in two varieties known as urban and jungle that are differentiated by the means of transmission. The urban version’s only vector of transmission is the Aedes aegypti mosquito, as discovered by Walter Reed, knowledge that has prevented an outbreak in the United States since 1905. After an incubation period of several days, those infected suffer headache, fever, and vomiting, which is soon followed either by recovery or worsening fever, vomiting of dark, altered blood, and even death. FTP, what is this fever whose associated jaundice provides the skin coloration that gives it its name?;;yellow fever
United States History;;He was a religious fanatic who castrated himself to maintain his purity. Although he was eventually hanged, he evaded capture by authorities for almost a month with the aid of a sympathetic ship’s captain. He planned the pivotal event of his life for August 30, 1800, when he hoped to lead an army of several thousand on Richmond, Virginia, capture James Madison, and establish an independent black state with himself as king, but a torrential rainstorm dispersed his forces, and before they could reassemble, informants revealed his scheme. FTP, who was this leader of America’s first major slave uprising?;;(Gabriel) Prosser|Gabriel
Literature;;The speaker catalogues the three stages of his youth and "the coarser pleasures of my boyish days / And their glad animal movements all gone by".  However, he goes on to say that "other gifts / Have followed; for such loss, I would believe, / Abundant recompense".  He describes one of these gifts as being "Of eye, and ear, - both what they half create, and what perceive," and concludes this poem by demanding to "behold in thee what I was once" while addressing his sister Dorothy during his return to the banks of the Wye river.  FTP, what is this poem written by William Wordsworth, named for an edifice found nearby?;;(Lines Composed a Few Miles above) Tintern Abbey(, on Revisiting the Banks of the Wye during a Tour, July 13, 1798)
Geography;;This country’s main rivers are the Purari, Fly, and Sepik, and its central mountain chain, the Highlands, reaches its highest point at Mount Wilhelm. It includes the archipelagoes of Bismarck, Buka, and Bougainville, the latter of which declared independence in 1990, but has not been recognized by any country. Its main land is found to the east of Irian Jaya, and it has its capital at Port Moresby. FTP, name this Southeastern Pacific nation that shares with Indonesia the second largest island in the world.;;(Independent) (State of) Papua New Guinea
Chemistry;;With Max Delbruck he developed a theory of molecular complementarity in antibody-antigen reactions. His theory of "directed valence" grew from his early work, in which he introduced the concept of hybrid orbitals and developed an empirical definition of electronegativity. His main ideas were collected in 1939’s The Nature of the Chemical Bond, and won him his first Nobel Prize. FTP, who was this chemist who won a second Nobel in 1962 for his campaign against nuclear testing?;;(Linus) Pauling
Music;;Much confusion has surrounded the direction senza sordini in the first movement of this musical work, whose third and final section, presto agitato, concludes with a remarkably long 43-bar coda. The composer’s Opus 27, Number 2 in C-sharp minor, its most famous part is its first section, adagio sostenuto. Originally titled "Quasi una fantasia" to account for the non-traditional use of its form, it gained its nickname from a description by the poet Ludwig Rellstab involving Lake Lucerne. FTP, what is this 14th piano sonata by Beethoven bearing a lunar name?;;Moonlight (sonata)
Noncomputational Math;;In a regular Sturm-Liouville problem, the spectrum of these numbers is discrete and semi-infinite. There is a conjecture that, for some positive operator, the zeroes of the Riemann zeta function are in fact this type of value, whose magnitudes can be bound by the size of matrix elements using Schur's inequalities. Symbolized lambda, they can be found by setting to zero the determinant of the matrix minus lambda times the identity matrix or by finding the roots of the characteristic equation. FTP, what are these values that reveal by how much matrix multiplication changes their corresponding eigenvectors?;;eigenvalue(s)
Literature;;This author reminisced about his home life in the essay collections Nuptials and The Wrong Side and the Right Side.  Early in his career, he organized the avant-garde Théâtre de l’equipe and wrote plays like The Misunderstanding, while later plays include State of Siege and The Just Assassins. He contrasted moral rebellion with political rebellion in his essay The Rebel.  FTP, who was this French-Algerian author of the novels The Plague and The Stranger?;;(Albert) Camus
World History;;The author of the 1926 expressionist novel Michael: A German Destiny in Diary Sheets, he first came to prominence in 1927 as the founder and editor of the journal Der Angriff. He earned a doctorate from Heidelberg under Friedrich Gundolf after gaining exemption from World War I service due to a clubfoot that was later held by some to the hoof of the Devil. Leader of the Berlin branch of the Nazi Party in the 1920s, he became chancellor the day before he took his own life in Hitler’s bunker. FTP, who was this Nazi minister of propaganda?;;(Josef) Goebbels
Chemistry;;It is thought to have properties similar to tungsten. Scientists at Switzerland’s Paul Scherrer Institute have been able to create it by bombarding Californium-248 with neon atoms. It was first created in 1974 at the Soviet Joint Institute for Nuclear Research via the bombardment of lead with Chromium-54, and then by Albert Ghiorso at the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory via the nuclear fusion of Californium-249 with Oxygen-18.  FTP, name this element with atomic number  106, named after the American co-discoverer of the first 11 trans-uranium elements.;;Seaborgium|unnilhexium
Literature;;He wrote of a virus plague, an intergalactic conspiracy, and pirates in his 1981 work Cities of the Red Night. With the painter Brion Gysin, he developed a "cut-up" method by which several random texts are blended into one hybrid narrative, a technique explained in The Third Mind. His metaphor for the forces of conformity, the "control machine", appears in Nova Express, while 1985’s Queer is a sequel to his first novel, Junkie: Confessions of an Unredeemed Drug Addict. FTP, who is this Beat author best known for the novel Naked Lunch?;;(William) (S(.)) Burroughs
Chemistry;;The original use of osmium and uranium catalysts for it has now given way to iron catalysts containing potassium and aluminum oxide promoters. The reaction involved is reversible and exothermic, so that a high yield is favored by low temperatures around 450 degrees Celsius. The raw material now most frequently used for it is called synthesis gas, which is used in the reaction between 3H2 and N2. Of immense importance for the fixation of nitrogen for fertilizers, FTP, what is this industrial process for producing ammonia?;;(Haber-(Bosch)|Bosch-(Haber)){1}? (process)
Geography;;The south part of this city is found on the banks of the Riachuelo River, to the north of which are major neighborhoods like La Boca and San Telmo. Its inhabitants call themselves porteños, and it is home to attractions like the Calle Florida and the "Pink House". It is located at the northeastern edge of the Pampas, where the Parana River delta widens to meet the Rio del la Plata. Named for St. Mary of the Good Air, FTP, what is this largest city and capital of Argentina?;;Buenos Aires
World History;;Gaining the throne just six days after birth, this ruler was forced to appoint as regent the earl of Murray on her abdication, which resulted from the outrage stemming from her marriage to the earl of Bothwell. Originally married to the dauphin of France, she sought to reinforce her claims to the English throne by her marriage to Lord Darnley, who soon turned on her and murdered her counselor, David Rizzio. Her Roman Catholicism led to her involvement in the Throckmorton and Babington plots, forcing Elizabeth I to order her death. FTP, who was this queen of the Scots?;;Mary (Stuart) (,) (Queen of Scots)
Religion/Mythology;;The Thracian bard Thamyris was blinded and given amnesia for claiming to be the superior of this group of deities, while a similar claim by the Pierides was disproved in a contest judged by a panel of nymphs. Generally depicted as winged deities, they were the children of Zeus and Mnemosyne. Early myths claimed there were three named Nete, Mese, and Hypate, but the best known account is that of Hesiod, who described nine, including Erato, Polymnia, Terpsichore, Calliope, and Urania. FTP, who were these goddesses of literature and the arts?;;(The) Muses
Literature;;The title character finally achieves peace in this novella through the simplicity of his servant Gerasim. He had married Praskovya Fyodorovna because his friends approved, and had built a life based on orderly routine while seeking to become the perfect traditional bureaucrat. The main part of this story deals with his attempts to deal with an incurable illness, which follows the opening section, in which his family and colleagues reflect on how his death will affect their careers and fortunes. FTP, what is this novel by Leo Tolstoy?;;(The) Death of Ivan Ilyich|Smert Ivan Ilycha
Physics;;If it is expressed as a complex number, the imaginary part of this value is an indicator of absorptive properties. Recent experiments have shown that it can be negative for some materials, which can lead to bizarre effects like reverse Doppler shifts. Its dependence on wavelength gives rise to chromatic aberration and explains why a prism works. It is often defined as the ratio of the speed of light in a vacuum to the speed of light in a given medium. With a value of 1.33 for water, FTP, what is this index that measures the change of direction in a wavefront when passing from one medium to another?;;index of refraction|refractive index
Miscellaneous;;This historian's late work The First Salute gives an account of the American Revolution from an international point of view. Originally a research assistant for the Institute for Pacific Relations, this historian published one book before the age of 40, entitled The Lost British Policy: Britain and Spain Since 1700. Bible and Sword marked a return to historical research that would result in Stilwell and the American Experience in China, A Distant Mirror and The Proud Tower, but she is best known for an account of the first month of WWI. FTP, who was this historian, author of The Guns of August?;;(Barbara) Tuchman
Miscellaneous;;The reliance on official government statistics to study it has been successfully attacked by J.B. Douglas, especially in his 1976 work that analyzes its "social meaning". In its most famous treatment, it was concluded that incidences of it are highest in areas of social disintegration. That same analysis divided it into four types, two of which, egoistic and altruistic, have a common source in strong personal value-systems, in contrast to the other two types, fatalistic and anomic. FTP, such describes Emile Durkheim’s attempts to analyze what act in which a person brings about his or her own death?;;suicide
Music;;The female lead in this opera expresses her devil-may-care attitude in the piece "Balatella", sometimes known as the "Bird Song". It opens with the song "Si puo"?, while the second act features the serenade "O Columbine", found in the play within a play. The plot tells of the discovery that Silvio is having an affair with Nedda, prompting the clown Canio to kill them in his madness. FTP, what is this opera, the masterpiece of Ruggiero Leoncavallo?;;(I) Pagliacci|(The) Clowns
Literature;;In the opening of this work we learn of the title figure’s fine clothes, her elaborately ostentatious "coverchiefs", and her hat as broad as a buckler shield. She then describes a fight she picked with her misogynist husband Jankin in which she pretends to have been nearly killed, prompting him to repentantly offer to let her run the marriage. Her prologue on the ideal marriage is then followed by a tale in which a knight of King Arthur’s court is sentenced to death unless he can discover what women most desire. FTP, what is this Canterbury Tale about an oft-married woman?;;(The) Wife of Bath('s Tale)
Biology;;In 1995, a team at Ohio State found that some examples possess a capability called "homing", in which RNA transcripts splice them into DNA at the exact spots they are found in other genes. Much debate still rages about the two major theories of their origins, the "early" and "late" theories. Confined to eukaryotes, they are removed in the cell nucleus by spliceosomes. A Nobel Prize was awarded to Philip Sharp and Richard Roberts for leading the teams that discovered them in 1977. FTP, what are these nucleotide sequences that do not code for the gene product, as opposed to exons?;;intron(s)|intervening sequence(s)
Philosophy;;For works like 1905’s Knowledge and Misunderstanding, this thinker became one of the founders of a realistic philosophy known as Empiriokritizismus. His main works, translated as The Analysis of Sensations and The Science of Mechanics, have led many to call him the father of logical positivism, and he greatly influenced Einstein with his principle stating that a body can have no inertia in a universe devoid of other mass. FTP, who was this Austrian philosopher for whom the ratio of an object’s speed to the speed of sound is named?;;(Ernst) Mach
United States History;;This battle occurred after the withdrawal of defensive outposts from Las Guasimas. The 1,200 defenders under Arsenio Lenares Pomba were first subjected to an advance by Lawton’s division on the right, taking El Caney. Soon after, the main body of Jacob Kent’s forces advanced on a series of ridges and took the titular position after a daring charge up Kettle Hill by the Rough Riders, led by Teddy Roosevelt. FTP, what was this July 1, 1898 U.S. victory of the Spanish-American war?;;(Battle of) San Juan Hill
Religion/Mythology;;Attempts to codify this work’s contents include "The Prepared Table", the "Book of Rows", and the "Decided Laws". It exists in two versions, the longer of which is the "Bavli", or "Babylonian" version, which has more authority than the shorter "Yerushalmi", or "Palestinian" version. It consists of two parts, the second of which, the "Gemara", is commentary on the laws found in the first part, the "Mishnah". FTP, what is this book of Judaism second in importance only to the Bible?;;(The) Talmud
Literature;;This author was known for his intense preparation, as when he rode in a locomotive to research La Bete Humaine. He was fired from his job as a clerk in a publishing house when the autobiographical novel The Confession of Claude attracted the attention of Paris police. His best known works include L’Assomoir, The Soil, and The Dram Shop, and are found in a long series of naturalistic novels about life in the Second Empire called the Rougon Macquart series, which also contains Nana and Germinal. FTP, who was this French author perhaps best known for defending Alfred Dreyfus with his open letter J’accuse?;;(Emile) Zola
World History;;This leader has made frequent attempts to unite his country with other Arab nations, in keeping with the ideas in his tract on Islamic socialism, the Green Book. He revived the practice of cutting off the hands of thieves, outlawed drinking and gambling, and ousted the Italian and Jewish populations of his country after his successful coup against King Idris I in 1969. His attempt to gain better diplomatic relations with the west began when he turned over suspects in the Lockerbie bombing in 1999, but his earlier support of terrorist activities led to a U.S. bombing raid in 1986 that killed several of his children. FTP, who is this leader of Libya?;;(Muammar) (al) -Qaddafi
Art;;This artist’s early paintings often concerned Classical themes, as in Young Spartans, but his work soon developed an undercurrent of violence, seen in Interior, which is sometimes called The Rape. His exploration of unusual artistic subjects resulted in The Cotton Exchange in New Orleans and The Absinthe Drinker, while the only sculpture exhibited during his lifetime, Little Fourteen-year-old Dancer, was an example of his most famous subject. FTP, who was this French painter of The Rehearsal and The Dance Class?;;(Edgar) Degas
Literature;;At one point, one of the characters of this story claims to be en route to consult a man named Luchesi, who the other main character insists is ignorant and will provide no insight concerning the title object. Having arranged for his servants to be absent from his estate, one of the characters engineers a meeting with the other at a carnival, and uses his vanity concerning his knowledge of fine wines to trick him into his family’s vaults, where Montressor seals Fortunato inside a small crypt, thus avenging Fortunato’s "thousand insults". FTP, what is this story by Edgar Allan Poe?;;(The) Cask of Amontillado
Noncomputational Math;;It is equivalent to the n=5 and n=6 cases of the Hadwiger Conjecture, and may be viewed as the genus zero case of the Heawood Conjecture, which gives upper bounds on chromatic numbers for graphs that can be embedded in various topological surfaces. In 1890, Heawood pointed out the error in Alfred Kempe's proposed proof of it by using an example with 18 regions. In 1976, Wolfgang Haken and Kenneth Appel proved it by combining Kempe’s idea with a controversial use of computer analysis. FTP, what is this theorem stating that only a certain number of hues are needed to illustrate a map so that no two neighboring regions are shaded the same?;;Four-Color (Map) (Theorem)
Geography;;It was laid out in 1821 on a central location called LeFleur's Bluff overlooking the Pearl River. Originally, Thomas Jefferson's plan called for an orthogonal grid of streets, with alternating blocks of buildings and city parks like a checkerboard, but that plan has not survived to the present. Forty years later, it could only boast 1,881 inhabitants, but it nevertheless became a major manufacturing and transportation center for the Confederacy, and its large supply of rum assisted Sherman in his pillaging and burning of the city on 15 May 1863. Nicknamed "Chimneyville" for the namesake structures left standing by Grant's army, FTP, this is what largest city and capital of Mississippi?;;Jackson(, Mississippi)
Biology;;Members of this phylum have a three-layered body wall consisting of an epidermis, a gastrodermis, and a mesogloea (mess-o-GLEE-a).  Tentacles encircling the mouth are used for food capture, and also contain the highly distinctive nematocysts (knee-MAT-o-sists) that characterize the phylum.  They have two characteristic body forms, a sessile hydroid or polyp form that attaches to a substrate, and the motile medusa form that is common in the Physalia or Portuguese man-of-war.  FTP, name this invertebrate phylum of sea anemones, corals, and jellyfish.;;Cnidaria(n)|coelenterata
Geography;;Its shape has been compared to "a long, pliant, apple-paring" and the first Europeans to see it originally called it the "Rio Grande". Its source, not identified until 1832, is named for the Latin for "true head".  Its greatest flood occurred in 1927, submerging 23,000 square miles of land and killing 250 people; now, about a quarter of its sediment and water has been diverted to the Atchafalaya.  Emptying into the Gulf of Mexico principally via South Pass and Southwest Pass, Louisiana, FTP, what is this river whose name means "Father of the Waters", the longest in North America.;;Mississippi (River)
Literature;;Book IV of this literary work includes the tale of Scudamour and Amoret, Book III features the character Belphoebe, and Book II describes the destruction of Acrasia and her Bower of Bliss. Book I tells of the rescue of Lady Una from the dragon Errour and the magician Archimago by the Knight of Holiness, while the other five published books tell of knights like Sir Artegal, Sir Britomart, and Sir Guyon. An allegory whose title figure is modeled on Queen Elizabeth, FTP, what is this epic by Edmund Spenser?;;(The) Faerie Queene
United States History;;It was sparked by a trip to visit family in Waterloo by one of those involved, who paid a social visit to a friend in the titular town, where talk soon turned to a recently passed New York Property Rights Act. This soon grew into a two day meeting in a local Wesleyan Church presided over by James Mott. Its ultimate result was the issuance of the Declaration of Sentiments and the adoption of 11 resolutions, including one calling for women’s suffrage. Organized by Lucrezia Mott and Elizabeth Cady Stanton, FTP, what was this 1848 meeting, the first modern women’s rights convention?;;Seneca Falls (Convention)
Literature;;This author died in bed in 1950 while reading a comic book, having earlier served as the oldest war correspondent covering the South Pacific during WWII. His later works were lackluster pulp and science fiction writings like The Cave Girl, The War Chief, and Apache Devil. He is known for the escapist value of his early science fiction fantasies about Mars, including A Princess of Mars and Under the Moons of Mars, but he is mainly remembered today for his tales of an English aristocrat raised by apes in the African jungle. FTP, who was this creator of Tarzan?;;(Edgar) (Rice) Burroughs
Music;;The main theme of this musical work was first developed for the trio section of the composer’s March in D Major, and its music was later adapted for his Coronation Ode with the words "Land of hope and glory". The first of five similar compositions by the composer intended to prove that serious music could be written in the military march form, the tradition with which it is most associated grew from its use at a Yale ceremony conferring an honorary doctorate on its composer, Edward Elgar. Named for a quote from Othello, FTP, what is this famous march now ubiquitous at graduation ceremonies?;;Pomp and Circumstance(,) (No(.) 1)
Physics;;A close approximation to it was reported by the German scientists Paneth and Peters, who observed spontaneous catalysis in which hydrogen absorbed through palladium produced helium. The major obstacle to it is the electrostatic repulsion between nuclei, and the best current approach to overcome it is the meson-catalysed method. Great interest surrounded its supposed discovery by Pons and Fleischmann at the University of Utah, but the results proved to be unrepeatable. FTP, what is this elusive nuclear process that can be performed at room temperature?;;cold fusion;;fusion
Religion/Mythology;;As the god Rig, he created the three races of mankind:  the serfs, the peasants, and the warriors.  Similar to the god Tyr, his rides the mount Gulltop, and lives in the hall of Himinbjorg.  Born of the nine daughters of Aegir, he is also known as Gullintani because of his "golden, shining teeth".  He can hear the grass grow and can see a hundred miles around him, and he will sound his great Gjallarhorn to summon the gods to battle at Ragnarok.  FTP, name this Norse god of light, the guardian of the rainbow bridge Bifrost.;;Heimdall
Biology;;In the middle layers of this structure, amacrine, bipolar, and horizontal cells work together to produce a graded response to synaptic input from receptors, which they transfer to the outermost layer of ganglion cells, neurons whose axons constitute the output from this structure to the brain via the second cranial nerves.  The innermost layer is known as the pigment epithelium, and serves to prevent backscattering of light.  FTP, name this structure of the eye that also has two types of photosensitive receptor cells, commonly referred to as rods and cones.;;retina
Biology;;There are over 100 biotypes of this disease, but only 01 and 0139 possess both the VPI pathogenicity island and the CTX prophage that confer its characteristic exotoxin. It is caused by the Vibrio bacterium, which never enters the cells, but adheres to the intestinal lining and secretes a toxin that deactivates ion pumps and increases the cells' permeability to water. It can be prevented by basic sanitation and it runs its course within 2 weeks if patients are kept hydrated. FTP, what is this disease marked by severe diarrhea, vomiting, and dehydration?;;cholera
Miscellaneous;;The 14th overall pick of the 1989 NHL Entry draft, this goalie played no more than 30 games in his first six seasons in the league. In his eighth, he led his team to the 1998 Stanley Cup Finals, where they came up short to the Detroit Red Wings. Despite not getting though the first round of the playoffs since, he has racked up several individual accolades, including the 2000 Vezina Trophy.  FTP, name this South African-born net minder for the Washington Capitals, affectionately named "Olie the goalie".;;(Olaf) Kolzig
Biology;;Its causes and symptoms are similar to von Willebrand’s disease, which is sometimes known as the "vascular" form of this disease. It can be passed on to both sexes in the version caused by PTA deficiency, but more common are the versions caused by deficiency of either factor VIII or factor IX, the latter of which is called "Christmas disease". The major physical disability associated with it is chronic joint disease, or "arthropathy", which stems from the seeping of blood into the joints. FTP, what is this disease associated with several historical royal families, an X-linked recessive genetic disease that leads to inefficient blood clotting?;;hemophilia
Literature;;It is revealed that the protagonist has decided to commit suicide on his 50th birthday, a fact learned while he reads a treatise about himself given to him by a strange man carrying a sandwich board and tray of almanacs. His education in the life of hedonism is aided by his affair with Maria. The climax occurs at a Fancy Dress Ball, where his friend Hermine and the saxophone player Pablo lead him into the Magic Theater, where he fails to laugh at the compromises life forces on humanity. FTP, what is this novel about Harry Haller, written by Hermann Hesse?;;Steppenwolf
Geography;;This city’s importance stems in part from its location at the intersection of three important trade routes, including a valley formed by the Morava and Vardar rivers. Known in ancient times as Singidunum, it now has a name meaning "White Fortress". It was the site of an August 16, 1717 victory by Prince Eugene over overwhelming Turkish forces, and in 1456 a siege was successfully weathered there by John Hunyadi. Located at the confluence of the Sava and Danube rivers, FTP, what is this capital of Serbia?;;Be(lgrade|ograd){1}?
Religion/Mythology;;Chapters 40-66 of his book are thought to be by later authors, and contain the "Servant songs". The son of Amoz, he had his sins removed from him when a seraphim held a burning coal to his lips during his dramatic calling, described in chapter 6. From the last days of King Uzziah to the invasion of Sennacherib he acted as God’s ambassador, warning kings and advisors of their sins. FTP, who was this first of the major prophets?;;Isaiah
World History;;Ten months after this battle, Elie-Frederic Forey used reinforcements to successfully besiege the namesake city, taking it for the French. The battle occurred when, seeing their path to the capital blocked, the French general Charles Laurencez recklessly ordered a frontal assault up the steep Cerro de Guadalupe, only to be repulsed by the forces of Ignacio Zaragoza. FTP, what was this 1862 battle delaying the establishment of a French puppet state in Mexico, now commemorated during Cinco de Mayo?;;(Battle of) Puebla
Literature;;At one point, the poet describes the archangel of the soul trapped between two visual images, soon after which a wail of "eli eli lamma lamma sabacthani" shivers the cities. The poet explains that he is not safe while his beloved Carl is "in the total animal soup of time". Other parts describe down and out Mensa-types slumming in the black part of town looking for heroin while "Anglehead hipsters burn for ancient heavenly connections to starry dynamos". FTP, what is this poem explaining that the poet has seen the destruction of the best minds of his generation, a masterpiece of the Beat Movement by Allan Ginsburg?;;Howl
Chemistry;;This element is found in economically important quantities in minerals like spodumene, lepidolite, and petalite, in which it was first discovered in 1817 by Johan Arfwedson. It has the highest specific heat of the metallic elements and produces a crimson color in a flame, providing an important test for its presence. Its compounds alter sodium transport and interfere with ion exchange and nerve conduction, but despite being a poison at moderately high levels, it is often used to treat manic-depressive disorders. FTP, what is this lightest of the metallic elements, with atomic number 3?;;lithium
Music;;The protagonist of this opera exuberantly downs champagne while dressing for a wedding feast he has planned for his peasants, and he later barely escapes the drawn sword of Ottavio, who is responding to a girl’s cries for help. The title character thwarts a posse bent on lynching him using a disguise that allows him to issue bogus directions and assault Masetto, who is nursed by Zerlina. After he contemptuously waves Elvira out of his chamber, he and Leporello witness the arrival of a statue of the murdered Commendatore, who drags the title figure to hell. FTP, what is this opera by Mozart about the legend of Don Juan?;;Don Giovanni
World History;;Part of this work recounts the author’s attempt to understand man through the technique and style of Europe, revealing only a succession of negations and murders. It claimed that, although Europe had stuffed itself with gold and raw materials, the wealth of imperial countries belong to all. A notorious preface by Sartre addressed its major idea, which advocated a "collective catharsis" in which colonized peoples purge themselves of their degradation through violence against their European oppressors. FTP, what is this 1961 book about emancipation from mental slavery, written by Frantz Fanon?;;(The) Wretched of the Earth|(Les) Damnes de la terre
World History;;Among those employed by this man were Gil Eanes, Joao Zarco, and Tristao Teixeira, all of whom flew the red cross due to his membership in the Order of Christ, which financed many of his endeavors. Much of the information about him comes from his biographer, Gomes Eanes de Zurara, including an expedition with his father King John I and his two older brothers to take the Moroccan city of Ceuta. Eventually, he established a court at Sagres, where he erected an observatory and oversaw the missions he funded. FTP, who was this Portuguese prince famous for the exploratory voyages he sponsored?;;(Prince) Henry the Navigator
Literature;;He wrote the failed epic King Arthur shortly before turning to realism with the 1853 work My Novel and the three-volume novel The Caxtons. He established himself as a popular writer with Pelham, and continually anticipated changing public tastes in novels like Eugene Aram, Zanoni, Harold, the Last of the Saxon Kings, and Paul Clifford, the last of which opens with the line "It was a dark and stormy night", thus inspiring the award for bad writing named for him. FTP, who was this author perhaps best known for The Last Days of Pompeii?;;(Edward) Bulwer-Lytton
Chemistry;;One use of this term in computer science refers to a device used to decouple processes so that the reader and writer may operate at different speeds or on different amounts of data. A major problem concerns dealing with the overflow problems of another device of this name, a part of RAM used for temporary storage of data that is waiting to be sent to a device. In chemistry, their functional range is described in the Henderson-Hasselbach equation, while an example of their use is the addition of limestone to a lake affected by acid rain. FTP, what is this term describing a mixture of a weak acid and its conjugate base that serves to moderate the pH of a solution?;;buffer(s)
Philosophy;;One part of this book suggests that since Naaman suffered to bow in the house of Rimmon, Christians should outwardly yield to a non-Christian sovereign. The author claims that Romulus was the first saint in a chapter entitled "Of What Is Necessary For a Man's Reception into The Kingdom of Heaven". The claims that our thoughts are deterministically governed by the law of association and that life is merely the motion of limbs are found in its first section "Of Man", while later the author holds that obedience to moral rules is necessary for peaceable living. Subtitled The Matter, Form, and Power of a Commonwealth, Ecclesiastical and Civil, FTP, what is this masterpiece of Thomas Hobbes?;;Leviathan
Religion/Mythology;;One of his forms is a union of himself and his consort in one body known as Ardhanarisvara, while other manifestations include Dakshinamurthi and Nataraja, the cosmic dancer. The Ganges flows through his hair, breaking its fall to the earth. He has imparted his immense knowledge of the arts to his sacred mount Nandi, which always appears opposite the main sanctuary of his temples. In private shrines he is generally worshipped in the form of the lingam, a phallus that is fixed upon a pedestal. The father of Skandi and Ganesh, FTP, who is this god of the Hindu trinity, known as the Destroyer?;;S(h)iva
Literature;;A key development in this novel is the discovery of plans for a static energy converter among the ruins of a deserted factory. The author’s theory that sexual desire is a true expression of one’s values is illustrated when Lillian’s vapid conversation causes her husband Hank Rearden to lose interest in her. Divided into three parts entitled "Non-Contradiction", "Either-Or", and "A is A", it sees the copper heir Francisco d’Anconia conduct an affair with the railroad magnate Dagny Taggert while both try to explain the mysterious disappearances of people of ability from the world. Opening with the question "Who is John Galt"?, FTP, what is this novel which, with The Fountainhead, is the best known novel by Ayn Rand?;;Atlas Shrugged
World History;;With a name meaning "knowing the oak tree", many people voluntarily joined this class due to their exemption from tribute and abstinence from warfare. Some early information about them comes from the Stoic Poseidonius, but the principal source of knowledge comes from Julius Caesar, who claimed that they and the noblemen were the two classes held in honor in Gaul, where they were suppressed by Tiberius. In Ireland, they lost their priestly status after the coming of Christianity, but survived as poets and historians. FTP, what is this class of judges among the Celts now remembered for frequenting forests?;;Druid(s)
Physics;;It is unlikely that a workable theory in which these particles have non-zero charge is possible, since the Cherenkov effect would likely lead them to release arbitrarily large amounts of energy. Maiorino and Rodrigues showed that their existence would invalidate special relativity through the creation of an unavoidable time paradox. First proposed by Arthur Sommerfeld and named by Gerald Feinberg, their existence remains hypothetical, despite a 1973 claim by Philip Crough and Roger Clay to have observed them in a cosmic ray shower. Particles that gain speed as they lose energy, FTP, what are these hypothetical particles that travel faster than the speed of light?;;tachyon(s)
Art;;The background of this painting is a vast landscape in which two men can be seen walking away from the viewer up a road on the left. Various remains from antiquity can be seen littered about a green and white floor in the foreground, which is dominated by a stone column featuring the artist’s signature in Greek. The title figure is standing on a block of stone with his feet tied to the column, dying from the numerous arrows piercing him. FTP, what is this painting by Andrea Mantegna?;;(St(.)|Saint){1}? Sebastian
Literature;;While in Simla, the title character is instructed in the arts of spying and disguise by Lurgan. He frequently runs errands for Mahbub Ali, and experiences a series of picaresque adventures carrying a vital message to Colonel Creighton on the Grand Trunk Road, which he travels with his mentor, a Tibetan lama who seeks to be freed from the Wheel of Life by finding the sacred River of the Arrow. Concerning the orphaned child O’Hara, FTP, what is this novel set in Asia, written by Rudyard Kipling?;;Kim
United States History;;Support for this measure grew from a meeting the year before in Harrisburg, Pennsylvania attended by delegates from over half the states. As famously indicated by John Randolph, it was drafted in the hopes that its expected defeat would politically isolate New England, but it was surprisingly passed. It saw charges on foreign iron, wool, and hemp increase to nearly 50 percent, while rates on clothing rose to 45 percent, creating the highest import duties until the Morrill Tariff. FTP, what was this 1828 tariff whose universally loathed nature led to its nickname?;;Tariff of Abominations
Music;;A skilled ballet dancer who often acted the clown in Moliere comedies, he wrote "Amour, Que Veux-tu de Moi". As a boy, he was a gift of the Duc de Guise to lady Montpensier; as a man, his lavish operatic productions introduced overtures and female dancers to Versailles. FTP, name this composer of Armide et Renaud and Alceste, who famously expired after poking his foot with his conductor's baton.;;(Jean) (Baptiste) Lully
Religion/Mythology;;To the grief of his parents, he married Judith and Bashemath, two maidens of Canaan. The descendents of this "son of the desert", the Edomites, remembered the old quarrel between he and his brother, and with fierce hatred warred against Israel. FTP, name this Old Testament figure who was given the nickname of Edom, or "red", because of the red lentil pottage for which he sold his birthright.;;Esau
Miscellaneous;;A former member of the "Pershing Rifles", an elite ROTC unit at New York's Pratt Institute, he put together the book "Lady" in collaboration with bodybuilder Lisa Lyon. He shared a cockroach-ridden room at the Chelsea Hotel with Patti Smith, and created the striking cover of her debut album. His posthumous  "Perfect Moment" tour ground to a halt in 1989 when Washington's Corcoran Art Museum refused to display materials from his "X" portfolio, including "Man in a Polyester Suit". FTP, who was this photographer infamous for his depictions of sadomasochism and the Manhattan underworld?;;(Robert) Mapplethorpe
World History;;One king of this name and number, a 14th century ruler of Navarre called "the Bad," tried to poison the king of France.  Another, the Lame, was a king of Naples who fought unsuccessfully for Sicily until 1302.  One known as the Mad was the slow-witted Spanish monarch whose death led to the War of Spanish Succession.  The Bald was a grandson of Charlemagne who was king of France from 843-77.  FTP, give the name and number these men share with the "Merry Monarch" of England from 1660-85, the Stuart king who regained the throne in the Restoration.;;Charles (II|the Second){1}?;;Charles
Literature;;The 13-day gap between two dates in this story corresponds to the gap between the old and new calendar systems, suggesting a dream as the explanation for its events.  While wearing a gold-braided uniform, the title object is lost, but when its owner tries to place an ad to find it, the newspaper refuses. Later, it is confiscated from the barber Yakovlev and returned to Kovalyov, but it refuses to stick to his face.  FTP, name this short story by Nikolai Gogol about a wayward proboscis.;;(The) Nose
World History;;In 1995, this site’s Condor Temple was found to feature a hidden series of caves leading to a deep, narrow hole that was probably made 530 years ago.  Buildings here include the Tower of the Sun and the Temple of the Three Windows.  The stones in its walls were carved so precisely that a knife cannot fit between them, despite the fact that no mortar was used.  Its famous stone sundial is dedicated to Inti, an Incan sun god.  FTP, name this Incan city in the Andes rediscovered in 1911 by Hiram Bingham.;;Machu Picchu
Chemistry;;Along with reducing sugars, they are detected by Fehling’s test. They can be produced by adding a mild reducing agent to an acid chloride, through a Rosenmund reduction, or by the oxidation of a primary alcohol. Adding a Tollens reagent to this type of compound will leave a silver mirror coating on the flask.  The lightest one is used in making Bakelite and in preserving specimens. Given names ending in the suffix –al, FTP, name these compounds that have a hydrogen bonded to their carbonyl group, unlike ketones.;;aldehyde(s)
Music;;When Mahler conducted this opera in Vienna, he inserted a trial scene from the play on which it was based.  "Voi che sapete" and "Porgi amor" are notable arias from this opera whose complications result in part from the page Cherubino’s attachment to Barbarina, the gardener’s daughter.  Susanna dresses as the Countess to trick the title character, while Count Almaviva tries to seduce his own wife, who is dressed as Susanna, the bride-to-be.  With libretto by Lorenzo da Ponte, FTP, what is this Mozart opera based on a Beaumarchais play concerning the wedding of a former barber of Seville?;;(The) Marriage of Figaro|(Le) Nozze di Figaro
World History;;In his eighties he served as prefect of Italy, but was very unpopular and was recalled from Ravenna when he was almost 90.  At Casilinum, he used archers and infantry to beat the Alemanni Franks, two years after his great heavy infantry defeat of Totila and the Goths at Taginae. FTP, name this rival of Belisarius, one of the great generals of Justinian.;;Narses
Literature;;This author’s early work came as a translator, producing important English language versions of Strauss’s Life of Jesus Critically Examined and Feuerbach’s Essence of Christianity. She used local events as the basis for stories like "Janet’s Repentance" and "Mr. Gilfil’s Love-Story" that were soon collected in the book Scenes of Clerical Life. Later, she penned novels like Felix Holt, the Radical, Daniel Deronda, and Adam Bede. FTP, who was this author originally named Mary Ann Evans, the author of The Mill on the Floss and Middlemarch?;;(George) Eliot|(Mary) (Ann) Evans
Geography;;Measuring about 860 miles long, its tributaries include the Rahad and Dindar.  Its namesake gorge is a notable fossil site, and it is known as Abbai in Ethiopia, where it flows from Lake Tana.  It is dammed at Roseires and Sennar for farming, while a larger dam downstream reduces the effects of its flooding, since its high volume each summer had caused annual floods in Egypt.  FTP, name this river that merges in Khartoum with the White Nile.;;Blue Nile (River)|(Al) Bahr Al Azraq;;Nile (River)
Biology;;A ring-shaped or "bulls-eye" rash is seen in about 60 percent of cases of this disease, which is caused by the spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi.  Even after the spirochete is dead, many patients suffer from symptoms that resemble fibromyalgia or multiple sclerosis. Marked by fatigue, swollen lymph glands, and fever, it is transmitted by insects of genus Ixodes, and over 90% of U.S. cases are in the mid-Atlantic and the northeast, where the first known cases occurred in 1975.  FTP, what is this disease named for a town in Connecticut and carried by deer ticks?;;Lyme (disease)
Religion/Mythology;;One member of this movement was Pasquier [pas-key-YAY] Quesnel [kay-nel], whose 101 propositions were condemned by Clement XI.  Earlier members included Pierre Nicole and Jean Duvergier de Hauranne, the latter a friend of its founder, the Bishop of Ypres [EE-pruh].  Though the movement proclaimed an attachment to the Roman Catholic Church, they believed in predestination and the total corruption of human nature owing to original sin, as stated in 1640’s Augustin.  Centered at the Port-Royal Monastery, FTP, name this pessimistic religious movement whose heyday was from 1640-1710, and whose members included Antoine Arnauld and Blaise Pascal.;;Jansenis(m|t){1}?
United States History;;Confederate Colonel Bartow and General Bee were killed in this battle.  Union forces crossed a river at Sudley Ford and drove the Confederates back to Henry Hill, but after a brigade of reinforcements arrived by train from the Shenandoah Valley, the Union line was broken, and McDowell’s men had to make a hasty retreat.  "Stonewall" Jackson earned his nickname here, and the battle led to McDowell being replaced by George McClellan.  FTP, name this July 1861 battle in Virginia, the first of two at the same site, sometimes called the first major battle of the Civil War.;;First (Battle of) Manassas|First (Battle of) Bull Run;;(Battle of) (Manassas|Bull Run){1}?
Literature;;The title figure of this novel has a name meaning "Father of gods who can do anything in this world".  He rescues a woman held prisoner by a Skull and captures Death in a net, and he uses his skills as a juju-man to change into a bird or a lizard.  He can drink 225 kegs a day, but when his tapster dies, he travels to the Dead’s Town to find him. FTP, what is this novel about the lover of a particular beverage that inaugurated English-language literature in western Africa, written by Amos Tutuola.;;(The) Palm-Wine Drinkard (and His Dead Palm-Wine Tapster in the Dead's Town)
Miscellaneous;;This work features sections entitled "The Attitude Towards Personality," "Maturity and Old Age," and "Education for Choice," and uses people like Lola, Fala, Mala, and Siva as examples.  Its 68 test subjects lived in three villages on the lee side of the island of Tau, and were all between the ages of about 9 and 20.  Based on eight months living in the namesake locale, the author concluded that social and cultural structures play a large role in adolescent development.  FTP, name this book, the best-known work of Margaret Mead.;;Coming of Age in Samoa
United States History;;In All Politics is Local, he offers such rules as "To be a successful public speaker, memorize poetry," and "Never get introduced to the crowd at a sporting event, only boos will ensue".  He sponsored the Legislative Reorganization Act of 1970 to restrict unrecorded voting by House members, 18 years after his election to the House seat vacated by John F. Kennedy.  A native of Cambridge, Massachusetts, FTP, who was this 17-term Congressman and Democratic Speaker of the House from 1977-86 whose actual first name was Thomas?;;(Thomas) (P(.)) (Tip) O(') Neill
Earth Science;;In late 2001, scientists from UC-Santa Cruz detected what appear to be "rigidity zones" in this region, and scientists at Johns Hopkins have proposed that an analog of the jet stream might be found in it.  About 2,300 kilometers thick, it blocks S waves, and its upper bound is the Gutenberg discontinuity.  Comprised of iron-nickel alloys, FTP, name this liquid layer of the earth just below the mantle.;;outer core
Religion/Mythology;;He stole the fire for his mother’s kitchen, and his name may mean either "beautiful eye" or "left-handed".  When challenged by the giant eel Te Tuna, he showed his phallus, then crawled through the mouth of Te Tuna and decapitated him.  Also called Tiki, this trickster god made a fish hook from a jawbone and pulled up a giant fish, which became the land.  FTP, name this Polynesian trickster and creator god who shares his name to the second largest Hawaiian island.;;Maui
Art;;In 1989, artist Jenny Holzer created a marquee that ran continuously for thousands of feet inside this museum. The adjacent Thannhauser Building is part of this museum that is built around an open center lighted by a dome of glass. Many of its paintings are hung on concealed metal arms to give a floating appearance to the collection, which includes the world’s largest collection of Kandinsky paintings. FTP, what is this spiral-shaped New York City art museum that houses the namesake’s collection of Non-Objective Painting, designed by Frank Lloyd Wright?;;(the) (Solomon R(.)) Guggenheim (Museum)
Literature;;The opening chapter of this novel closes with the narrator dreaming that he and his father are at a circus where his father refuses to laugh at the clowns.  The narrator gets a scholarship after giving a speech to thunderous applause, despite the controversy over the words "social responsibility" and the blood he swallowed after Tatlock threw him blindfolded into a boxing ring with 9 other boys.  Its climax comes at a race riot in Harlem, prompting the unnamed narrator to live in the sewers, where he writes the book.  FTP, what is this 1952 novel, the best-known work by Ralph Ellison?;;Invisible Man
Biology;;Enzymes involved in this process include enolase and aldolase, and some of its stages include fructose-6-phosphate and PGAL.  A net gain of 2 ATP results from this process, which begins when hexokinase and ATP are added to a certain type of sugar.  Its end products are two pyruvate molecules, and it can occur with or without oxygen being present.  Also known as the Embden-Meyerhof pathway, FTP, name this respiration process in which glucose is split in two.;;glycolysis
United States History;;Its first two provisions stated that the countries involved sought no territorial changes that did not accord with the wishes of the people concerned.  The eighth and final point stated a shared belief in disarmament of aggressor nations, while the sixth point stated that after the "destruction of the Nazi tyranny," both nations hoped for a peace that allowed people in all lands to live "in freedom from fear and want".  Issued on August 14, 1941, it was the result of a meeting on a warship anchored off Newfoundland.  FTP, name this statement of common principles issued by Roosevelt and Churchill and named for the ocean where they met.;;(The) Atlantic Charter
World History;;This city lost its influence when Fustat was founded nearby. Home to two colossal statues of Ramses the Great and a famous alabaster sphinx, the necropolis of Sakkara to its west contains the Serapeum, a burial site for this city's mythical guardian, Ptah. It became the seat of the satraps during the Persian period centuries after its founding by the legendary King Narmer. FTP, what is this Old Kingdom capital of Egypt that shares its name with a city of southwestern Tennessee?;;Memphis
Biology;;These microstructures are normally guarded from damage from neutrophil elastase buildup by the protein alpha-1 antitrypsin. Adhesive atelectasis is caused by underproduction of surfactant by their  Type II cells. Cytoplasmic extensions of their type I cells form their epithelium, which separates them from the capillary endothelium and allows their primary function. The termination point for bronchioles, FTP, name these small cup-shaped sacs of the lungs, the site of diffusion of oxygen into the bloodstream.;;alveol(i|us){1}?
Literature;;Influenced by Blake’s "The Sick Rose," he wrote the poem "The Force that Through the Green Fuse Drives the Flower," which won him the publication of his first collection, 18 Poems. Some of his notable short stories are collected in Adventures in the Skin Trade. The oft-quoted line "After the first death, there is no other" comes from his poem "A Refusal to Mourn the Death by Fire of a Child in London," part of the collection Deaths and Entrances, which also contains his poem "Fern Hill". FTP, name this Welsh poet of "Do Not Go Gentle into That Good Night".;;(Dylan) Thomas
Economics;;His "Essay on the influence of the Low Price of Corn" discusses theories that would lead him to oppose the Corn Laws as a Member of Parliament. He created a stir with his tract The High Price of Bullion, while his best work begins with comparisons of value in use and in exchange, and reasons that the interests of society are opposed by the interests of landowners, an idea central to his theories of economic rent. FTP, name this founder of the classical school of economics who proposed ideas like the iron law of wages in The Principles of Political Economy and Taxation.;;(David) Ricardo
Geography;;Its resources include Bernic Lake, home to the world’s richest cesium mine, the flax and wheat-farming Souris Plains, and the Flin Flon Zinc District. In its southwest, the land rises to the Pembina and Porcupine plateaus, which are home to its Riding Mountain National Park. The Assinboine River supports its second largest city, Brandon, while other rivers include the Nelson, Churchill, and Hayes. The easternmost of the Prairie Provinces, FTP, name this Canadian province with capital Winnipeg.;;Manitoba
Literature;;The sixth chapter of this work describes how the taking of the Goose-Feather Armor by Shi Qian leads to the defeat of the army of Hu-yuan Zhuo. Later, Shi Qian is unable to restrain himself from stealing a cock, leading to the three attacks on Zhu Village by Song Jiang, the leader of the Liangshang Po. FTP, name this classic of Chinese literature describing the decline of the Song dynasty through the exploits of the title group of 108 bandits.;;Outlaws of the Marsh|(The) Water Margin|All Men are Brothers|Shui-hu chuan
Noncomputational Math;;It follows for large exponents if the Bogomolov-Miyaoki-Yau inequality is true, while if certain conditions are met by Wieferich primes the ABC conjecture proves it as well. A key idea in its proof was the replacement of elliptic curves with Galois representations, circumventing a clash between Selmer Groups and the Taniyama-Shimura conjecture, thus allowing for the use of the class formula. Proven by Andrew Wiles, FTP, what is this theorem stating that there are no integer solutions for the equation x to the n plus y to the n equals z to the n when n is greater than 2,. famously proposed in the margins of a book by its namesake?;;Fermat(') s Last (Theorem)
Religion/Mythology;;Oenops, Alcidamas of Caunas and Eurypylus were among the men slaughtered by this warrior who later defeated king Harpalycus of Thrace on his return to Buthrota. He granted his mother Deidamia as wife to the seer Helenus, and in Scyros helped trick Philoctetes out of the arrows of Heracles. More despicable acts during the war include tossing Astyanax over the walls of Troy and sacrificing Polyxena to the shade of his father, Achilles. FTP, name this warrior who slaughtered Priam on an altar of Zeus.;;Neoptolemos|Pyrrhus
World History;;It saw the cession of Breisach to France, and confirmed its sovereignty over Toul, Metz, and Pinerolo. The Rhenish Palatinate was left to Charles Louis, and the Elector of Brandenburg was compensated for his loss of Pomerania. Its religious stipulations were a continuation of the Peace of Prague, the most important of which was the restoration of the worship rights of 1624. FTP, name this 1648 peace that resulted in the recognition of independence for The Netherlands and Switzerland and ended the Thirty Years’ War.;;((Treaty|Peace){1}? of) Westphalia
Philosophy;;Though he persuaded Melancomas to abdicate, he neglected his city’s public affairs, and his aristocratic air led the citizens to give him a name meaning "he who rails at the people". He distrusted the senses because they fail to comprehend phenomena as universal harmony, but believed in the soul, which he thought was formed via condensation. After his death, his doctrine of "becoming as actuality" was spread by his chief exponent, Cratylus. Known for his belief that the world was derived from fire, FTP, name this philosopher who summed up his belief in flux by saying "no man can step in the same river twice".;;Heraclitus
Miscellaneous;;Among those to accomplish this feat were Jimmy Cooney and Johnny Neun, who did it on consecutive days in 1927. George Burns was one of only two first basemen to do it, while Bill Wambganss is the only player to do it in a World Series. In recent years John Valentin, Randy Valarde, Mickey Morandini, and Rafael Furcal have all turned this play after catching a line drive during a hit and run play. FTP, what is this incredibly rare baseball play in which one player records all the outs in an inning on one play?;;unassisted triple play
Physics;;The Landau-Lifschitz-Bloch Equation models this phenomenon’s onset. It develops in stepwise fashion via the Barkhausen Effect and leads to Ising-like behavior at low temperatures. Materials exhibiting this property display magnetostriction, leading to the low vibration of gadolinium metals under high applied fields. Appearing below the Curie Temperature, FTP, what is this type of magnetism in which net magnetic moments line up so that magnetization persists after the removal of the applied field, named for the fact that iron exhibits it?;;ferromagnetism
Literature;;During the 19th century, many notable actresses were attracted to the rantings of Constance in this play. In a memorable scene, Arthur’s moving pleas convince Hubert de Burgh not to blind him, but Arthur later jumps to death trying to escape. The title figure dies in Swinstead Abbey after his defeat by the French and the forces of Cardinal Pandulph, leaving England to be rebuilt by Henry III with the aid of the loyal bastard Faulconbridge. FTP, what is this early Shakespearean play concerning the signer of the Magna Carta?;;(The) (Life and Death of) King John
United States History;;It was amended by two acts that enforced its sections 2 and 7, the Robinson-Patman Act and the Celler-Kefauver Act. A declaration that the labor of a human being is not an article of commerce was included in this legislation that restricted the use of injunctions against labor unions, legalized picketing and boycotts, and prohibited exclusive sales contracts and inter-corporate stock holdings. FTP, name this 1914 anti-trust act that amended and supplemented the Sherman Anti-Trust Act.;;Clayton (Anti-Trust) (Act)
Music;;The atypical "harmonic" version of this instrument is used almost exclusively by French composers. The typical version is tuned diatonically in the key of C-flat, through six octaves and a fifth. At the front of it, called the front pillar, are seven pedals that can be depressed two notches each, and which shorten the strings to sound one or two pitches higher. FTP, what is this instrument in which approximately 45 strings are stretched in a triangular frame?;;harp(s)
Religion/Mythology;;Sometimes identified as a double of the enemy of Athanasius of Cappadocia, some myths involving this religious figure involve his conversion of the empress Alexandra and his baptism of Perseus. A vision of him supposedly foretold the fall of Antioch, inspiring Richard I to pray to him for protection during his drive to Jerusalem. He accomplished his best-known feat with the aid of the girdle of the Princess of Selena, which allowed him to lead his victim like a lamb. FTP, name this saint whose symbol is an upright red cross, known for his association with dragon slaying and as the patron saint of England.;;(Saint|St(.) ) George
Chemistry;;It is produced most effectively by the nuclear reaction between lithium-6 and neutrons from nuclear fission reactors. The effect of cosmic rays on atmospheric nitrogen leads to its presence in natural water, as discovered by Aristid Grosse and Willard Libby. A radioactive species with a half-life of 12.32 years, it was discovered by Paul Harteck, M.L. Oliphant, and Ernest Rutherford, who bombarded deuterium with high energy deuterons. FTP, what is this isotope of hydrogen named for the presence of a proton and two neutrons in its nucleus?;;tritium
Literature;;After an episode in which the protagonist of this novel imagines a voice telling her she’ll marry a blind man, she is visited by George Bakewell, but dismisses him because he considers her a curiosity. Miss Ockenden spies on her after a Peruvian misogynist attempts to rape her. The main character is disheartened by her experiences in New York after winning an award for writing from Ladies’ Day magazine, and after she is rejected by the writing teacher with whom she had hoped to study, she attempts suicide and must deal with a subsequent series of shock treatments. Describing the life of Esther Greenwood, FTP, what is this novel by Sylvia Plath?;;(The) Bell Jar
United States History;;Some of the losing forces in this battle were able to escape to the south due to the late arrival of a supporting force under James Ewing. It began with the overrunning of outposts to the north and west by two columns under John Sullivan and Nathanael Greene. Despite rough weather that delayed the attack until 8 A.M., the Continental Army received little resistance from Johann Rall's Hessians, who were still recovering from Christmas celebrations. FTP, what was this New Jersey battle made possible by Washington's daring crossing of the Delaware?;;Trenton
Art;;Willy Lott is the owner of the building shown in this painting, in which a figure makes his way through thick hedges along the river at right, below which a boat is concealed. Four figures are plying their trade in a meadow across the river Stour opposite a cottage behind Flatford Mill, in front of which a small dog watches the main action. FTP, what is this famous painting depicting two men attempting to guide a large ox-drawn cart through the water, the masterpiece of John Constable?;;(The) Hay Wain
Chemistry;;Robert Bergman showed how these compounds can be activated by irradiation in a cyclopentadiene carbonyl rhodium coordination complex medium, which is important because they normally interact only through Van der Waals forces. Sodium metal is used to recover them along with salts in the Wurtz Reaction, and they may be produced by hydrolysis of a Grignard Reagent or by fractional distillation of crude oil. FTP, what are these simple hydrocarbon chains with formulae C-n, H-2n-plus-2, examples of which include propane, ethane, and methane?;;alkane(s)|paraffin(s)
Literature;;This poem’s third section contains a description of the "Unreal City", where the Smyrna merchant Mr. Eugenides asks the poet to lunch.  Other sections describe a reading of tarot cards by Madame Sosostris and the drowning of Phlebas the Phoenician. Introduced by a quote from the Satyricon, it is broken up into sections entitled "The Fire Sermon", "Death by Water", "What the Thunder Said", "A Game of Chess", and "Burial of the Dead". FTP, name this poem that begins by labeling April the cruelest month, perhaps the most famous poem by T.S. Eliot.;;(The) Waste Land
Geography;;Economically important parts of this region include the coalmines around San Giovanni Valdarno and the renowned marble quarries of Carrera. Bordered by Latium, Umbria, Romagna, and Liguria, the Ombrone and Arno rivers supply water to the wine districts of Chianti, while other tourist centers include cities like Lucca, Pisa, and Siena. With capital at Florence, FTP, what is this region in west central Italy whose name is derived from its ancient Etruscan civilization?;;Tuscany
United States History;;One famous member of this Native American tribe was a medicine man whose name translates as "crazy, spherical puma". Their name derives either from the Spanish for "wild" or from a Creek word meaning "runaway", the latter due to their secession from the Creeks after the Treaty of Fort Jackson. Their willingness to harbor runaway slaves sparked conflict with Georgia and South Carolina, while resistance to the Treaty of Payne’s Landing led to the bloodiest of three namesake wars that eventually saw most of them relocated with the rest of the Five Civilized Tribes. Famously led by Osceola, FTP, what is this Florida Indian tribe whose name is now used by the Florida State athletic program?;;Seminole(s)
Chemistry;;This chemical can cause irritation to the skin, ironic in that one of its first notable uses was as the favored antiseptic of Joseph Lister. It is produced by the cumene process, and with chlorobenzene it is the product of the Raschig process. It is an important industrial chemical that can be combined with formaldehyde to produce Bakelite, and is used in the production of explosives, pharmaceuticals, resins, and Nylon. Also known as benzenol and carbolic acid, FTP, what is this chemical with formula C6H5OH, the simplest member of a group of organic compounds characterized by a hydroxyl group attached to a carbon on an aromatic ring?;;phenol|hydroxybenzene
Music;;In spite of this composer’s anti-Semitism, the fourth work in his Opus 17 has come to be known as "The Jew". He incorporated the cello into his early chamber work Grand Duo on Themes from Robert the Devil, but is better known for piano works, including a famous Fantasy-Impromptu that he disliked so much he refused to have it published. He gained fame for his intimate drawing-room performances of works like the "Military" and "Heroic" Polonaises and his Second Piano Sonata, containing his famous funeral march. FTP, who was this French composer of Polish descent responsible for the "Minute" Waltz?;;(Frederic) Chopin|(Fryderyk) Franciszek
Literature;;One development of this novel is the imprisonment in Rolande’s tower of the madwoman Paquette la Chantfleurie, who lost her sanity after gypsies kidnapped her daughter. Another sympathetic character is the poet-philosopher Gringoire, who has fallen in love with a gypsy girl and is duped into leading her to her execution for the murder of Captain Phoebus. The crime was actually perpetrated by Claude Frollo, an archdeacon who had earlier denounced Esmeralda as a witch, and who is finally thrown to his death by the title figure. FTP, what is this novel about Quasimodo by Victor Hugo?;;(The) Hunchback of Notre-Dame|(The) Notre-Dame of Paris|(the) Cathedral of Paris
World History;;This ruler oversaw medical reforms implemented by the Imperial physician Gerhard van Swieten, while a stronger central government was achieved with the aid of talented ministers like Chotek, Haugwitz, and Kaunitz. The first partition of Poland saw the loss of Silesia, but influence to the west was gained when her husband Francis of Lorraine became Holy Roman Emperor. Succeeded by Joseph II, she had come to power after the death of her father Charles VI due to the Pragmatic Sanction. FTP, who was this ruler of Hungary, Bohemia, and Austria who defended her position in the Seven Years War and the War of Austrian Succession?;;Maria Theresa
Miscellaneous;;He is well known around his office as an intercessory supplication buff, and he claims to keep his secret fears and terrors in an Altoids tin that he threatens to open when contradicted. Recently, he has announced plans to offer opinion, even umbrage, at the media’s coverage of the Kobe Bryant trial, but admits that he will probably end up "call(ing) someone a fag" and getting fired. He currently voices the head of Harvey Birdman’s law firm, while earlier gigs include the role of Chuck Noblett on Strangers With Candy and the voice of Ace in the Ambiguously Gay Duo. FTP, name this comedian and star of a recent series of Mr. Goodwrench commercials best known as a senior correspondent on the Daily Show.;;(Stephen) Colbert
Astronomy;;Significant features include the Aselli Australis, the Aselli Borealis and the star Acubens. Probably its most notable feature is M44, an open cluster alternately called the Praesepe, the "Crib", or the "Gate of Men". The faintest constellation of the zodiac, its brightest star is its beta star, called either Al Tarf or Sertan, which translates as "the claw". FTP, what is this constellation symbolising a Crab?;;Cancer
Philosophy;;One name by which this philosopher was known was "Oulides", a reference to his devotion to the Apollo Oulia of his hometown. Like most ancient thinkers, he wrote a work entitled On Nature, his being the best preserved of all pre-Socratic works. One part of it, entitled The Way of Truth, sees a goddess explain that there are only two aspects of nature, "being" and "non-being", and since one cannot make something that "is" from something that "is not", change is an illusion. FTP, who was this philosopher whose ideas were further elaborated by his pupil and adopted son, Zeno of Elea?;;Parmenides
Literature;;Late works by this author include a collection of short pieces called Wolfert’s Roost, a five-volume life of George Washington, a Life of Oliver Goldsmith, and a book on Mahomet and His Successors. Great hostility greeted Tales of a Traveler, although the earlier work Bracebridge Hall had been well received. His time as a diplomat in Spain inspired the Chronicle of the Conquest of Granada and a series of Spanish legends entitled The Alhambra. FTP, who was this author famous for A History of New York and The Sketch Book of Geoffrey Crayon, the latter of which contained "The Legend of Sleepy Hollow"?;;(Washington) Irving
World History;;He would meet his end at the hands of Queen Tomyris, who stuffed his head in a jar of blood to satisfy his craving for it. He was ordered exposed as a baby because his grandfather Astyages dreamed that the shoot from his daughter’s genitals would overshadow his empire, but in a reversal he was allowed to live. He did in fact supplant Astyages, and went on to defeat the Lydians at Pteria and Thymbra before conquering Nabonidus and taking Babylon. FTP, name this man who overthrew the Medians and established the Persian empire, nicknamed "the Great".;;Cyrus (II|the Second|the Great){1}?;;Cyrus
Miscellaneous;;Key developments include the revelation that English Bob is not as dangerous as he claims and the realization that the Schofield Kid lied when claiming to have killed before. The body of Ned Logan is displayed after he is tortured and killed by the local sheriff, helping to complete Will Munny’s regression from a family man to the savage killing machine he used to be, leading to a deadly confrontation with Little Bill Dagett, whose portrayal by Gene Hackman won him a Best Supporting Actor Oscar. FTP, what is this 1992 film that also won Best Picture and Best Director for its star, Clint Eastwood?;;Unforgiven
Biology;;The gastrointestinal version of this hormone is released by L cells, and ironically, its only purpose is to spur production of a substance strongly antagonized by the other type. That other type is a 29 amino-acid polypeptide released by alpha cells of the islets of Langerhans that aids carbohydrate metabolism and opposes the operation of insulin. FTP, what is this hormone that increases the concentration of glucose in the blood by stimulating the breakdown of glycogen?;;glucagon
Religion/Mythology;;Objects associated with him include the water pot, a string of pearls, a spoon, a staff, and an alms dish. Acknowledged in many myths as the father of Narada, Dharma, and Atri, he is usually depicted as having red skin, wearing a white robe, and holding in his hands the Vedas that supposedly sprang from his head. Later, he grew more heads to look at the beautiful goddess he created to be his consort, Sarisvati. FTP, name this god, the creator in the Hindu pantheon.;;Brahma
Literature;;He examined the English class system in the pro-feminist work Ann Veronica and discussed religion in the works God, the Invisible King and First and Last Things. He described a political sex scandal in the novel The New Machiavelli, the loss of a child in Mr. Britling Sees It Through, and the world of medical quackery in Tono-Bungay. He remains best known for a specific genre, for which he wrote novels like The Wonderful Visit, The First Man in the Moon, and The Island of Dr. Moreau. FTP, who was this author of science-fiction classics like The Time Machine and The War of the Worlds?;;(H(.) (erbert)) (G(.)(eorge)) Wells
United States History;;The admiralty was included in the scope of this legislation by the case Ex Parte New York, but its protections were diminished by Osborn v. Bank of the United States. It modified Article III, Section 2 of the Constitution, and later saw the case Principality of Monaco v. Mississippi add rulers of foreign nations to its list of prohibited plaintiffs. Drafted to overturn Chisholm v. Georgia, FTP, what is this law making it illegal for states to be sued by residents of other states, the first amendment not found in the Bill of Rights?;;(Eleventh|11th){1}? Amendment
Physics;;One instance of this phenomenon, discovered by Lee, Osheroff, and Richardson, is distinguished by either an "A phase" or "B phase", and is valuable in theoretical studies due to its anisotropic nature. Laszlo Tisza proposed the "two fluid" model to help explain the first known instance of it, while Lev Landau offered a partial explanation in which quantum soundwaves remove internal resistance to movement when the medium reaches the "lambda point", which was about 2.2 Kelvin when Pytor Kapitza discovered it in Helium-4. FTP, what is this phenomenon in which all viscosity is removed from helium at very low temperatures?;;superfluidity
Literature;;This literary work is composed of sections called "Passus", and, due to the great dissimilarity of its two halves, it is usually divided into two parts known as the "Visio" and the "Vita". The "Vita" is less popular, and sees the narrator consult Clergy, Scripture, Imagination, Thought, Wit, and Study in his search for Truth. The "Visio" sees the narrator fall asleep in the Malvern Hills, where his vision of people working in a field between the Tower of Truth and the Dungeon of Wrong is followed by the title character’s offer to lead the people in their search for Truth. FTP, what is this Middle English allegory usually attributed to William Langland?;;(The) (Vision of William Concerning) Piers Plowman
United States History;;This party’s vice-presidential nominees included A.M. West, B.J. Chambers, and Samuel Carey. It elected 14 congressmen in 1878, influencing Congress to pass the Bland-Allison Act. It dissolved after the poor showing of Benjamin Butler just 8 years after running its first candidate, Peter Cooper, but it had its greatest success when it joined with the Labor party to run James Weaver. Formed in response to the Panic of 1873, FTP, what was this political party that sought to wipe out agricultural debt by issuing the paper money that gave it its name?;;Greenback(s) (Party)
Chemistry;;In the 1920s this man tried to extract gold from seawater, while earlier he was the first to demonstrate that oxidation and reduction take place at the electrodes. His study of the combustion of hydrocarbons led to the commercial "cracking" of natural oil into its components. Initially professor at Karlsruhe, he served from 1911-33 as director of the Kaiser-Wilhelm Institute for Physical Chemistry, but was forced out by the Nazis, despite having aided the WWI cause with his production of poison gas. FTP, who was this winner of the 1918 Nobel Prize for Chemistry for his method of ammonia production that was later modified by Bosch?;;(Fritz) Haber
Literature;;This author wrote about his experiences with a debilitating virus known as Guillain-Barre syndrome in the book No Laughing Matter. He drew on his experiences in WWII for the failed play We Bombed in New Haven, which was followed by novels like God Knows, Good as Gold, and Something Happened, but he is best-known for his first novel, which featured characters like Snowden, Milo Minderbinder, and John Yossarian. FTP, who was this author of Catch-22?;;(Joseph) Heller
Biology;;This muscle shares its name with structures known as the pelvic and urogenital types that perform their functions using similar actions. It features holes that allow for the passage of the vena cava, aorta, and esophagus. It aids in the digestive process by stimulating the stomach and liver, and performs its most famous job by contracting its dome-shaped structure. FTP, what is this muscle separating the chest and abdomen whose contractions are essential for breathing?;;diaphragm
United States History;;A key early development in this battle was the failure of Ewell’s Second Corps to storm the Union forces on the first evening of fighting. The day before, Pettigrew’s North Carolina Brigade encountered Federal cavalry at the site, but Lee had already ordered 70,000 troops in that direction. Much of the fighting centered on elevated positions like Culp’s Hill, Seminary Ridge, and Cemetery Hill, and saw Meade fail to follow up on Lee’s retreat, which came after Longstreet reluctantly ordered Pickett’s Charge. FTP, what was this February 1863 battle in Pennsylvania, the site of a subsequent address by Lincoln?;;(Battle of) Gettysburg
Religion/Mythology;;One story tells of his encounter with the nymph Carna, who beguiled suitors into a cave but ran away after promising to make love to them. However, this god caught her, after which she granted him her favors, for which he gave her the power to chase away vampires. His son Tiberinus gave the river Tiber its name after drowning in it. After Tarpeia betrayed the Romans to the Sabines, he saved the Romans by flooding the gates; appropriate, since he was the god of gates and doors, as well as beginnings and endings. FTP, who was this Roman god best known for having two faces?;;Janus
Geography;;The Cowlitz, Pend Oreille, and Okanogan are major tributaries of this river featuring a sweeping curve in mid-course known as the "Big Bend". It runs for 1,240 miles, and among North American rivers has the fourth largest discharge of water. Rising in the Canadian Rockies, it spends 500 miles in Canada before entering the United States, joining tributaries like the Willamette and Snake before entering the Pacific. FTP, what is this river whose last 300 miles forms the border between Oregon and Washington?;;Columbia (river)
Literature;;A notable part of this novel is the section "Tale of the Indian", telling of the influence wielded by the title character over Immalee, a girl living by herself on an Indian island. Characters include Moncada, who is in the hands of the Inquisition; Walberg, who sees his children die of hunger; and Stanton, who is imprisoned in a lunatic asylum. Despite their hardships, none is willing to accept the same deal as the title character, who has sold his soul to the Devil for prolonged life, but who can avoid his fate if someone else is willing to make the same deal as he did. FTP, what is this great Gothic novel by Charles Maturin?;;Melmoth the Wanderer(:) (A Tale)
Chemistry;;The major commercial use of this gas is in the production of azelaic acid, and it is frequently produced commercially by the silent discharge method. Typically measured in Dobson units, in its pure form it is an unstable, faintly bluish gas with a characteristically penetrating odor. It can be formed by lightning and by some electric motors and generators, but more frequently, it is made by the action of ultraviolet light on oxygen. FTP, what is this gas with formula O3 that composes a protective layer of the atmosphere?;;ozone
United States History;;In 1885 this politician was made U.S. minister to Germany, a post he held until his death. In 1867 he put forward what became known as the "Ohio plan" to redeem certain Civil War bonds with paper money, a plan that cost him the 1868 Democratic presidential nomination. In 1864 he served as the Democratic vice-presidential nominee, but is best known today for an 1883 act that created a three-man commission to draft examinations for hiring and promoting federal employees. FTP, who was this Ohio politician known for his namesake Civil Service Act?;;(George) Pendleton
Miscellaneous;;This character claims to know about hardship because she had to attend Tufts when all the other colleges to which she applied rejected her. Her legendary temper is seen after her fish die in a parking garage and during numerous fights with a boyfriend she describes as having a "kroner-comprehension problem". She loses another boyfriend and her job at Pendant Publishing due to her love of Jujy Fruit, but later works as the assistant of Mr. Pitt and as publisher of the J. Peterman catalog. FTP, who is this Seinfeld character, Jerry's former girlfriend?;;Elaine (Benes)
Religion/Mythology;;To resolve the competition for land between this Biblical figure and his uncle, his uncle allowed him to settle in the east in the valleys of Jordan. As an old man, he became the father of Benammi and Moab after his daughters made him drunk and slept with him. The most famous story about him ends with his departure for Zoar after he is visited by two angels, who warn him that they are about to destroy Sodom. FTP, who was this nephew of Abraham whose wife was turned to a pillar of salt?;;Lot
Literature;;Many of the characters in this story believe that only the late Barclay Goodson could have been behind the act that sets the plot in motion. In an attempt to repay a debt of gratitude, Reverend Burgess saves Edward Richards from the disgrace that befalls 18 other people, all of whom are revealed to be liars when they attempt to use information provided by the mysterious Howard L. Stephenson to win $40,000, thus ruining the town’s reputation for honesty. FTP, what is this story by Mark Twain?;;(The) Man That Corrupted Hadleyburg
Art;;Early in his career, this artist executed a series of powerful engravings, notably The Frugal Repast, while his contributions to the realm of sculpture included Head of a Bull, Metamorphosis, made using the seat and handlebars of a bicycle. Images like the Dying Horse, the Weeping Woman, and the Minotaur predominate in his late work, which includes The Charnel House, while his early efforts, like La Vie, The Family of Saltimbanques, and Les Demoiselles d’Avignon, are often divided into periods like the "Rose" and "Blue" Periods. FTP, who was this Spanish painter probably best known for Guernica?;;(Pablo) Picasso
Physics;;The Lummer-Gehrcke type is interesting for its use of only one main component, and is useful in the study of hyperfine structure. The Fizeau-Laurent version is used to detect imperfections in flat surfaces, while lenses and prisms are tested using the Twyman-Green type, a variation of the most famous example. An etalon is used in the Fabry-Perot version of this device, but the most famous is the one used to disprove the existence of ether by Michelson and Morley. FTP, what is this instrument named for its production of optical interference fringes?;;interferometer(s)
World History;;In the early fifth century BC, this city was defeated by Hippocrates of Gela, returning to power its social elite, the gamoroi. Founded in 734 BC by Corinthians led by Archias, it was frequently at war with Carthage, winning a major 480 BC battle at Himera under Gelon. Its later years were marked by the successful reigns of Dionysius the Elder and Younger, but it was finally conquered by Rome in 211 BC, when it became the provincial capital of Sicily. FTP, what is this city that successfully resisted a 415-413 siege by Athens with the help of Archimedes?;;Syracuse
Music;;Highlights of this opera include the chorus Gloria all’Egitto, the title character’s arias Ritorna vincitor and O patria mia, and the "Triumphal Scene". One of its unique features is a brief atmospheric prelude that replaces the traditional overture. The plot is fairly simple, involving a love triangle in which a captain inadvertently reveals battle plans to the enemy. The jilted Amneris then has Rhadames arrested as a traitor and walled up in a pyramid, where he is joined in death by the titular Ethiopian princess. FTP, what is this opera by Verdi?;;Aida
Literature;;He included the ghost story "Wandering Willie’s Tale" in his novel Redgauntlet, and wrote a series of novels collectively entitled Chronicles of the Canongate to pay off his debts. His early writing consisted of poems like Harold the Dauntless, The Bridal of Triermain, Marmion, and The Lay of the Last Minstrel, but by 1810 he began writing historical novels, including The Legend of Montrose, The Fortunes of Nigel, The Bride of Lammermoor, and Guy Mannering. FTP, who was this Scottish writer best known for "Waverly" novels like Rob Roy and Ivanhoe?;;(Sir) (Walter) Scott
Biology;;Differentiated from its closest relative by its slightly smaller size and lighter color, it typically grows to about 20 inches, and is stout-bodied with black and pink blotches of color. Most of its teeth possess two grooves that conduct its venom, a nerve poison stored in the lower jaw. Known scientifically as  Heloderma suspectum, it and the Mexican beaded lizard are the only known poisonous lizards. Found in the American southwest, FTP, what is this lizard named for a local river basin?;;Gila monster(s)
Philosophy;;The author of this work claims that the monarchy is the type of government best suited to hot climates, but that in general aristocracies are the most stable. The example of the Roman comitia is used when discussing voting, in which the author advocates popular assemblies where each person ideally votes for the general will, resulting in near unanimity in healthy states. Dubbing the collective grouping of all citizens the "sovereign", he claims that it is almost always in conflict with the government, and will ultimately destroy the state. Containing the famous line "man is born free, but he is everywhere in chains", FTP, what is this work stating that legitimate political authority comes only from the title concept, written by Jean-Jacques Rousseau?;;(The) Social Contract|(Le) Contrat social
World History;;Early in his reign, he ended the war he inherited with Russia by the Treaty of Stolbova, but soon found himself embroiled in a long defensive war to protect his throne from Sigismund III. He concluded the Treaty of Altmark, gaining a six-year truce with Sigismund in order to oppose the Catholic forces that he defeated at the Lech and Breitenfeld before being mortally wounded in his victory at Lutzen. FTP, who was this brilliant military commander, the king of Sweden from 1611-32?;;Gustavus Adolphus|Gustav (II|the Second){1}? (Adolf);;Gustav
Literature;;Late in this novel, the protagonist grieves after stabbing to death a Frenchman named Gerard Duval. He and friends like the locksmith Tjaden and the peasant Detering are treated cruelly by Himmelstoss, a training instructor known as "The Terror of Klosterberg". He and his schoolmates have enlisted in the army under the influence of the patriotic schoolteacher Kantorek and experience the horrors of World War I. Ending with the death of Paul Baumer, FTP, what is this war novel by Erich Maria Remarque?;;All Quiet on the Western Front
Geography;;It arcs over a length of 1,580 miles with a mean width of 43 miles. The most extensive explorations of it were made on the ship Trieste by Jacques Piccard. One part of it, Nero Deep, was discovered southeast of Guam, while later the research ship Vityaz sounded an even greater depth of over 36,000 feet. FTP, what is this trench of the Pacific Ocean, the deepest known?;;Mariana(s) Trench
Physics;;A generalization of this law to three dimensions due to Cauchy incorporates a 6 by 6 matrix known as the compliance matrix. Its constant differs for each material, and can be approximated by multiplying the mass of the atom by the bulk modulus and dividing by the density times the square of the atomic spacing of the material. It was originally stated as F equals k times x, but is also known in a generalization stating that stress is directly proportional to strain. FTP, what is this law of elasticity stating that the amount a spring deforms is proportional to the applied force?;;Hooke(')(s) (law)
World History;;He became known as "the needle on the Italian scales" and gained the power to create a new Council of Seventy after boldly presenting himself at the court of Ferdinand I. The peace he concluded with Ferdinand forced Pope Sixtus IV to abandon the plot against him that had led the Pazzi family to attempt to assassinate him, resulting in the murder of his co-ruler and brother Giuliano. In addition to his political achievements, he was a renowned poet and patron of the arts. FTP, who was this Florentine leader, the grandson of Cosimo, known as the "Magnificent"?;;Lorenzo (d(e)) (') (Medici) (,) (the Magnificent)
Literature;;Like Francis Beaumont, this dramatist frequently collaborated with John Fletcher, notably on The Custom of the Country, The Spanish Curate, and The Beggar’s Bush. His satirical bent is seen in his solo efforts, including The Bondman, The Renegado, and Believe as You List. He believed his tragedy about Domition entitled The Roman Actor to be his best work, but today he is remembered for over-the-top characters like Luke Frugal and Giles Overreach. FTP, who was this author of The City Madam and A New Way to Pay Old Debts?;;(Philip) Massinger
Economics;;Keynes wrote a book whose title declared the "end of" this economic concept. Its greatest supporter in 19th-century Germany was Friedrich List, whose advocacy led to the establishment of the Zollverein system. In his Discourses Upon Trade, Dudley North gave an early development of it, although its name was not coined until almost a century later by Vincent de Gournay, one of the Physiocrats. It fell out of favor after the industrial advances of the late-19th century, a century after it was held to be the best way to encourage the workings of the "invisible hand" by Adam Smith. From the French for "let it be", FTP, what is this theory advocating no government interference in the economy?;;laissez-faire
Music;;This composer’s early struggles ended with the publication of his Moravian Duets. He experienced great success with his less-ambitious works like the Scherzo Capriccioso and the Gypsy Songs, but his 10 operas, including Rusalka, were less successful. Although he composed the American String Quartet and the Dumky Trio, today he is known for introducing folk melodies into classical music, notably in the Slavonic Dances. FTP, who was this great Bohemian composer whose 9th symphony is known as the New World Symphony?;;(Antonin) Dvorak
World History;;A blow to the loyalists in this battle came in the initial skirmishing with the death of John Howard, Duke of Norfolk. Early in the day, the king's forces took a superior position on Ambien Hill to oppose the contender to the crown, who had landed at Milford Haven 15 days earlier. The tide turned with the attack by William Stanley on the king's left flank, after which the king was unhorsed and killed in a bog. Fought on August 22, 1485, FTP, what was this victory for Henry Tudor over Richard III, the final battle of the Wars of the Roses?;;(The) (Battle of) Bosworth (Field)
Religion/Mythology;;Examples of this type of mythological creature include the Japanese god Ryujin and Long, one of the four spiritual creatures of Chinese myth. Ahura Mazda’s son Atar battled one named Azhi Dahaka, while Indra defeated one named Vritra. Tiamat is one from Babylonian myth, while the best-known example from classical myth is probably Ladon, who guarded the golden apples. FTP, what are these huge winged lizards who often have the ability to breathe fire?;;dragon(s)
Noncomputational Math;;In 1838, De Morgan coined the term for this technique and codified its use, although it had already been utilized to celebrated effect by Euler in his proof of Fermat’s Little Theorem. The "transfinite" type can be used in arguments involving transfinite numbers, although an extra step is usually required to account for cases involving limit ordinals. Calculus students often encounter this type of argument for the first time in proofs of summation formulas. In it, the result is proven for a starting number, often 1, after which it is argued that the case involving the number n is true if one knows that the result is true for numbers less than n. FTP, what is proof technique whose name is also used in philosophy for the opposite of deduction?;;(mathematical) induction
Miscellaneous;;His Harvard thesis was "Literary Progeria in the Works of William Faulkner and Flannery O'Connor". He appeared as Jonathon Silverman's rival Cameron Duncan on "The Single Guy" and as Sean the Doorman in the Five-Time Host Club sketch on Saturday Night Live, where he worked as a writer for two years. He went on to write such classic episodes as "Homer Goes to College" and "Marge Versus the Monorail" as a writer on "The Simpsons", but is now better known for a show featuring characters like Preparation H Raymond, the Masturbating Bear, and Triumph, the Insult Comic Dog. FTP, who is this host of NBC's Late Night?;;(Conan) O(') Brien
Literature;;One part of the story about this character describes his shocking testimony in a trial where his beautiful girlfriend is struck by the prosecutor, prompting him to deck the prosecutor and call him a miserable cur, which reminds him to buy dog biscuits. It ends by describing him standing before a firing squad, while earlier, his adventures as a famed surgeon and flying ace were interrupted by the petty errands he must run while in town with his nagging wife. FTP, name this daydreamer whose "Secret Life" was described by James Thurber.;;Walter Mitty
United States History;;Some of the causes for its negotiation were the issuance of almost identical rival grants to P.A. Hargous and Albert Sloo for a vital communications corridor and the failure of the United States to control American Indian migration under Article IX of a previous treaty. A block of northern senators held up its ratification until the sum of money involved was reduced by five million dollars, which the Mexican government accepted due to bankruptcy. Inspired by the desire for a transcontinental railroad, FTP, what was this agreement by which the United States bought over 45,000 square miles of what is now southern Arizona and New Mexico?;;Gadsden (Purchase)
Religion/Mythology;;Fairly recent cases have involved people like Catherine Emmerich, Elizabeth Mora, Marie de Moerl, and Louise Lateau. Earlier cases involving saints include those of St. Lidwine, St. Gertrude, and St. Lutgarde, the latter of which was the second known occurrence. The first occurred on Mount Alverno, and was attested to by Pope Alexander IV, while in a later case, Catherine of Siena prayed in her humility that the evidence for hers be made invisible. First occurring to St. Francis of Assisi, FTP, what is this appearance of bodily wounds like those suffered by Christ?;;stigma(ta)
Chemistry;;One problem with it is its frequent violation by hydrogen bromide, which often exhibits the opposite behavior it predicts. It occurs when the mechanism involved is electrophilic addition, and is due to a distortion in the electron distribution in a double bond, making one carbon atom negative in charge. It states that when a hydrogen halide adds to an unsymmetrical alkene, the hydrogen attaches to the carbon with more hydrogens already attached. FTP, what is this rule of chemistry named for the Russian chemist who first proposed it?;;Markovnikoff(') (s) (rule)
Geography;;This country claims a number of small islands, including Europa, the Glorioso Islands, and Tromelin. Home to the Betsiboka and Sofia rivers, it consists of a low coastal strip surrounding central highlands that are home to the Ankaratra Mountains and Mount Maromokotro, its highest point. The people include those of African and Malayo-Indonesian descent, most of whom speak Malagasy. With capital at Antananarivo, FTP, what is this African republic found on the world’s fourth largest island?;;(Democratic Republic of) Madagascar
Literature;;The daughter of the title figure of this story becomes enamored with the hereditary prince of an Asiatic kingdom who is a fellow traveler on the ship Atlantida. After a life spent accumulating wealth, the protagonist and his family have set out on a two-year vacation in the Old World, but after arriving on the island of Capri, he suddenly and inexplicably dies, and is packed into a crate and shipped back to the title city. FTP, what is this story, the most famous work by Ivan Bunin?;;(The) Gentleman from San Francisco
World History;;Much of the information about him comes from his secretary, Francisco Lopez de Gomara, including his journey to study at Salamanca at age 14. He defeated a force under Panfilo de Narvaez as part of his feud with his former commander, Diego de Velazquez, which also prompted him to scuttle his 11 ships to prevent Velazquez loyalists from returning to Cuba. His killing of Cuauhtemoc concluded his main endeavor, which, despite a temporary retreat after the "sad night", saw him defeat the forces of Montezuma. FTP, who was this conquistador who conquered the Aztecs?;;(Hernan) Corte(s|z){1}?
Physics;;In the current model, it is held to be mediated by the exchange of intermediate vector bosons. It is only known to occur between leptons and in the decay of hadrons, and is responsible for the beta decay of particles and nuclei. 10 to the 30th times stronger than gravity, FTP, what is this fundamental interaction whose name indicates its relationship to the electromagnetic and strong forces?;;weak ((nuclear) force|interaction)
Literature;;This author advocated a spare, impressionistic style in the essay "The Novel Demeuble". Her dissatisfaction with modern society is seen in late works like the three tales comprising 1932’s Obscure Destinies and the novel Lucy Gayheart, with the latter’s grim ending standing in contrast to an early work on a similar theme, The Song of the Lark. FTP, who is this author of Death Comes for the Archbishop, My Antonia, and O Pioneers?;;(Willa) Cather
Art;;In the bottom right of this painting can be seen a young girl dressed in red with her left foot on a dog lying on the floor. On the back wall, the king and queen are reflected in a mirror next to an open doorway, in which a man in black is seen peering at the main scene. To the left, the artist is looking at the viewer while working on the huge canvas before him, while the front center is dominated by the Princess Margarita and her attendants. FTP, what is this 1656 painting, one of the masterpieces of Diego Velazquez?;;(Las) Meninas|(The) Maids of Honor
Biology;;The first examples of them were derivatives of ethylamine, while the forerunner of most modern types was an alinine derivative called Antergan. Most examples in use do not suppress gastric secretion, an exception being Tagamet, one of the H-2 blocking agents. It acts by binding to one of two receptor sites normally used by the substance whose effects it is designed to counteract, but can cause sleepiness in the process. FTP, what are these synthetic drugs used to combat inflammation and allergies?;;antihistamine(s)
United States History;;One of its clauses was interpreted to include corporations as legal persons in the case Santa Clara County v. Southern Pacific Railroad Company, allowing trusts to thwart state prosecutions in cases like Smyth v. Ames and Allgeyer v. Louisiana. After its ratification, cases like U.S. v. Cruikshank limited its applicability to the actions of states, but later its due process clause led to the systematic extension of the Bill of Rights to the states. FTP, what was this amendment that overturned Dred Scott by declaring that blacks were U.S. citizens?;;(Fourteenth|14th|XIV){1}? (Amendment)
Literature;;An associate of Anaxagoras, this man's reputation for eccentricity stemmed from habits like sitting in caves staring at the sea. The son of Mnesarchus and Cleito, he used a patriotic theme in his play Heraclidae. The author of Hercules Furens and Cyclops, the only extant Greek satyr play, characteristics of his plays include an accelerated prologue that dispensed with exposition of previous action, seen in works like Ion, the Phoenecian Women, and the Bacchae. FTP, who was this author of Medea, The Trojan Women, and Iphigenia at Aulis, the youngest of the three great Athenian tragedians?;;Euripides
World History;;An inscription found at this site records its 10th century BC occupation by Sheshonk I. Found on the southern edge of the Plain of Esdraelon, excavations of it have revealed its namesake "Ivories", one of the best examples of Canaanite art, as well as Solomon’s chariot stables. General Edmund Allenby’s WWI victory was the most recent in a long series of battles fought there due to its strategic location at the crossing of two military and trade routes. Also known for a 1468 BC victory for Thutmose III, FTP, what is this town of ancient Palestine that probably served as the source of the term "Armageddon"?;;(Tel) Megiddo
Art;;This artist’s early period is marked by works like Self-Portrait with Felt Hat, Still Life With Shoes, and Portrait of Pere Tanguy. Late works like Wheat Field With Crows and Village Street in Auvers were created while he lived in Auvers-sur-Oise to be near one of his subjects, Dr. Gachet. Red Vineyard at Arles was the only work sold during his lifetime, but today he is known for works like The Night Cafe, The Potato Eaters, and Starry Night. FTP, who was this artist of Self-Portrait with Bandaged Ear?;;(Vincent) (van) Gogh
Chemistry;;It was first proposed independently in two 1916 papers, one of which was by Walther Kossel. One explanation for it sees it as an extreme means of achieving lower energy, but it is violated by a large number of cases, notably ones involving hypervalence. It was introduced in part by Gilbert Lewis, after which it was used to explain the relative inertness of the noble-gas elements. FTP, what is this rule of chemistry stating that atoms seek to attain a configuration with eight outer electrons?;;octet (rule)
Geography;;In the north of this body of water is found Missisquoi Bay, while its southern terminus is marked by the appropriately named South Bay. Running 107 miles from north to south, it reaches a maximum width of only 14 miles. In the southwest, a narrow channel brings water from neighboring Lake George. Known for its scenic islands, including Isle La Motte, Grand Isle, and Valcour Island, it is drained by the Richelieu River, which connects it to the St. Lawrence. Found mainly along the New York-Vermont border, FTP, what is this lake named for a French explorer?;;(Lake) Champlain
Literature;;Later works by this author include Taratuta, and Still Life With Pipe, The Garden Next Door, and A House in the Country, which he considered his best novel. Starting with his first collection, Summer Vacation and Other Stories, he displayed a keen psychological insight into the dreams and fears of his characters, seen in novels like This Sunday, Hell Has No Limits, and Coronation. FTP, who is this Chilean author of the Latin boom, probably best known for The Obscene Bird of Night?;;(Jose) Donoso
United States History;;More violence than actually occurred was averted by the parliamentary maneuvers employed by moderates at a meeting at Parkinson’s Ferry, soon after its more extreme leaders tried to incite its participants with information from letters gained while robbing the postal service. Despite the passage of a bill transferring some federal trials to state courts, disgruntled citizens burned the home of General John Neville, a regional inspector of the excise that was crippling the economy of the western United States. Collapsing after Washington called out state militias, FTP, what was this rebellion of the early 1790s caused by the taxing of alcohol?;;Whiskey (Rebellion)
Music;;One of this musical work’s unusual features is the appearance of the main theme only after an 18-bar introduction and its first main section. The seventh section marks the first use of the Dies Irae theme, which is periodically placed in opposition to the main theme until it concludes with a famous unaccompanied statement of the main theme. The 19th section celebrates the left-hand pizzicato technique of the work’s inspiration, but the most famous is the 18th, a romantic anthem derived by inverting the main theme. FTP, what is this rhapsody celebrating the 24th caprice of a famous violinist, written by Sergei Rackmaninoff?;;Rhapsody on a Theme of Paganini
Astronomy;;This constellation contains an M6 dwarf star called Wolf 359, the fourth closest star to the Earth. Its gamma star is the double star Algieba, while its second brightest star is Denebola. The faintest of the first magnitude stars is its alpha star, Regulus, but it is more famous for the fact that the sun passes through it from the second week in August to the third week of September. FTP, what is this constellation of the Zodiac representing a lion?;;Leo
Philosophy;;The author begins his analysis of the title subjects before the eighteenth century, when they were achieved through ceremonial public affairs designed to reestablish the authority and power of the king. The author them claims that the reforms of the eighteenth century were not motivated by concerns about welfare, but rather to optimize the transfer of power to the government through a more theatrical presentation. Bentham’s introduction of the Panopticon gave rise to the modern prison system, which the author claims actually produces delinquency as a means of structuring and controlling crime. FTP, what is this philosophical work about the penal system by Michel Foucault?;;Discipline and Punish(ment) (:) (The Birth of the Prison)
Literature;;A mistress stolen by a friend is the subject of poems 40-42, while poems 78-86 discuss a rival poet. The first 17 concern the writer’s affection for a young man of rank, urging him to marry to reproduce his beauty. Poems 18-126 form a sequence of 108 poems whose main theme continues to be the young man, but beginning with poem 127 the subject changes to the "dark lady". Including such opening lines as "My mistress’ eyes are nothing like the sun" and "Shall I compare thee to a summer’s day", FTP, what is this collection of 154 poems by William Shakespeare?;;(the) Sonnets (of Shakespeare)|(the) (Shakespeare(an)) ('s) sonnets
Religion/Mythology;;One historical figure of this name was a freedman of Claudius I who amassed an enormous fortune as his secretary general until Agrippina arranged his death. Another was a famous wrestler who murdered Commodus. The mythological figure with this name was the son of the nymph Liriope, who learned from Tiresias that he would live a long life if he never knew himself. Known for rejecting the advances of Echo, FTP, who was this beautiful youth who died when he couldn’t stop staring at his own reflection?;;Narcissus
United States History;;Precedents used in reaching the opinion in this case included Patterson v. Colorado, Aikens v. Wisconsin, and Gompers v. Buck’s Stove and Range Company. Decided along with the case Baer v. United States, it concerned the constitutionality of the Espionage Act. It arose when the general secretary for the Socialist party challenged his conviction for distributing pamphlets designed to obstruct the draft. FTP, what was this 1919 case in which Justice Holmes issued his famous opinion containing the "clear and present danger" test and the analogy to a person yelling fire in a theater?;;Schenck (v(.)|versus) (U(.) (nited) S(.) (tates))|U(.) (nited) S(.) (tates) (v(.)|versus) (Schenck)
Literature;;Late in this novel, the protagonist marries the sailor Marmaduke Bonthrop Shelmerdine and uses the aid of the renowned critic Nicholas Greene to publish the poem "The Oak Tree". After writing "Aethelbert: A Tragedy in Five Acts", he becomes a favorite of Queen Elizabeth I. He is later made Ambassador Extraordinary to Constantinople, but after sleeping with the dancer Rosina Pepita, he sleeps for a week and wakes to find that his gender has changed. FTP, what is this novel by Virginia Woolf?;;Orlando(:) (A Biography)
Biology;;One of this microorganism's lesser-known traits is the ability to produce small amounts of vitamins K and B12. In genetic engineering it is the preferred microorganism for hosting gene-splicing for cloning. The most toxic known strain of this bacterium is 0157:H7, which can cause a potentially deadly hemolytic-uremic syndrome like the one seen in a 1993 outbreak in Washington state. A normal inhabitant of the intestinal tract of animals and humans, FTP, what is this bacterium, the most famous member of genus Escherichia?;;E(scherichia) (.) coli
United States History;;This man was imprisoned in Missouri in 1854 for preaching to African Americans. Later, when elected as a state senator in 1869, he sought to restore voting and office holding rights to former confederates. Ending his career as president of Alcorn College, he left his position as a church pastor and school principle in Baltimore to serve as a chaplain to black Union soldiers during the Civil War, and later settled in Natchez, Mississippi, where he gained his greatest claim to fame by replacing Jefferson Davis in a government post. FTP, who was this man, the first African American elected to the U.S. Senate?;;(Hiram) Revels
Art;;Titian satirized this artwork by creating a woodcut in which all of the figures were replaced by monkeys. A major renovation was undertaken in the 1950s in which the right arm was returned to the titular figure and placed in its correct position behind his head. The subject of a celebrated rediscovery in a Roman vineyard in 1506, most of the information about it comes from Pliny the Elder, who states that in his time it stood in the palace of the emperor Titus, and claims that it was made by Hagesander, Polydorus, and Athenodourus of Rhodes. FTP, what is this ancient marble group representing a Trojan priest and his two sons being crushed to death by a snake?;;Laocoon (and his sons|group)
World History;;One of its rare uses of military force came in the struggle against Valdemar IV, forcing Valdemar to accept its supremacy in the Peace of Straslund after a decisive 1368 victory over the Danes. It established a number of enclaves called Kontore in foreign towns like Novgorod, Bergen, and the Steel Yard in London, but was ultimately unable to compete with the powerful nation states that formed around it, meeting for the last time in 1669. Originating in an alliance between Lubeck and Hamburg, FTP, what was this league that dominated trading in northern Europe from the 13th to the 15th century?;;Han(seatic|sa){1}? (League)
Literature;;Poems like "Hibiscus on the Sleeping Shores" and "Le Monocle de Mon Oncle" are typical of this poet’s early work, characterized by an intricate style and tropical imagery, also seen in the poem "Sunday Morning". Collections like Owl’s Clover, Ideas of Order, Harmonium, and The Man With the Blue Guitar established him as an influential poet despite only writing in his spare time. FTP, who was this 20th century American poet, author of "Thirteen Ways of Looking at a Blackbird" and "The Emperor of Ice Cream"?;;(Wallace) Stevens
Physics;;The Debye-Sears effect concerns materials exhibiting this effect that are placed in a liquid and vibrated at a fixed frequency, in which they set up acoustic waves. Trigonal crystals exhibiting it are especially useful in the eponymous oscillator. The reverse version of the effect is also useful, and occurs when a potential difference is applied to materials that exhibit it, such as barium titanate, Rochelle salts, and quartz. FTP, what is this effect, the generation of a potential difference in certain non-conducting crystals that are subjected to stress?;;piezoelectricity|piezoelectric (effect)
Literature;;The narrator in this work takes on her task due in part to her attraction to the man who sends her to work at the country house Bly, where she meets the housekeeper, Mrs. Grose. Charged with caring for the children Miles and Flora, she soon finds herself in a struggle for their souls with the former valet Peter Quint and her own predecessor, Miss Jessel, but it is left to the reader to decide whether the ghosts are real or simply a figment of her imagination. FTP, what is this ghost story by Henry James?;;(The) Turn of the Screw
Literature;;In a note accompanying this poem, the author states that it is a "psychological curiosity". At one point, its title figure hears "Ancestral voices prophesying war," and it ends with a warning to "Beware! Beware! his flashing eyes and floating hair". Other important images include "a woman wailing for her demon lover," "a damsel with a dulcimer," and "caverns measureless to man". Only 54 lines long because its composition was interrupted by a visitor from Porlock, FTP, what is this poem about a pleasure dome built along the Alph river in Xanadu, a work by Samuel Taylor Coleridge about the grandson of Genghis?;;Kubla Khan(, or A Vision in a Dream. A Fragment.)
Biology;;It uses a pair of aspartate residues to perform its most important function, using a parallel evolution scheme similar to that seen in HIV protease. Created as an inactive "proenzyme," it initially has a block of 44 extra amino acids that cover the active site groove until it has reached its destination. The second enzyme to be crystallized, after urease, and the first to be synthesized, by Theodor Schwann in 1836, it is completely inactive above pH levels of 6, which explains the need for hydrochloric acid as a catalyst. FTP, name this enzyme of the stomach which degrades whole proteins into their peptide constituents.;;pepsin
United States History;;Moore v. Dempsey’s ruling guaranteeing important rights for defendants was an important step in ending them, while Gaines v. Canada attempted to force the Supreme Court to overturn them completely. The cause of riots in Wilmington and Tulsa, they were named for a song written by Thomas Rice. Smith v. Allright overturned "white primaries", but they were not completely overturned until Brown v. Board of Education.  For 10 points, name these segregation laws in the American south established after the Civil War.;;Jim Crow (law(s))
Geography;;It was first explored by Lazare Picault in 1742 and is composed of two main island groups: forty central mountainous islands and 70 outer, coralline islands. It also claims the Chagos archipelago, which has put it in dispute with one of its former colonizers. Seselwa is its official language, but both English and French are just as likely to be used. The larger islands include Silhouette, Praslin, and La Digue, but 90% of the population, as well as the capital, is found on the main island of Mahe. FTP, identify this island republic 1,000 miles east of Kenya with capital at Victoria.;;Seychelles
World History;;One of the causes of this war was the issue of sovereignty for Gascony. It was temporarily ended by the Treaty of Troyes, which forced Charles VI to disinherit his son, even though the English had earlier given up their claims to the throne in the Treaty of Bretigny. The English dominated the early phases of the war with their naval victory at Sluys and land victories at Calais, Crecy, and Poitiers, but much of the conquered territory was regained by Joan of Arc after Agincourt. FTP, what was this war of the 14th and 15th centuries that lasted longer than its name indicates?;;(The) (Hundred|100){1}? Years (War)
Literature;;This author’s work The Meeting at Telgte is a retelling of the Thirty Years War, while plays include Flood and Max. He wrote essays decrying reunification that were collected in the volume The Future of German Democracy, and fictionalized in novels like The Call of the Toad, but he is probably better known for novels like Local Anesthetic and The Flounder. FTP, identify this writer of the Danzig Trilogy, which begins with the novel The Tin Drum?;;(Gunter) Grass
Astronomy;;In 1864, William Huggins showed how these objects could be distinguished from stars on the basis of their spectra. The specific examples known as Herbig-Haro objects are classified as emission types of these objects, while the example Trifid is a combined emission and reflection type. The dark kind includes such examples as the Coalsack and the Horsehead, while other famous types include the Ring, Lagoon, and Crab. FTP, what are these clouds of stellar gas and dust?;;nebula(e|s)
Psychology;;This man developed the kerplunk experiment, in which the subject is trained to run into a wall, and while working for Maxwell House, he helped develop the coffee break. He argued that thoughts were nothing more than sub-vocalized speech that could be monitored through movements in the larynx. He held that the results of his most famous experiment proved that mental illness was the result of "habit distortion". Dismissed from the faculty of Johns Hopkins due to sexual impropriety, FTP, identify this psychologist most famous for his Little Albert experiment and as the founder of behaviorism.;;(John) Watson
Music;;The most famous set of examples of this type of musical composition was the subject of a famous series of performances by Leopold Godowsky. They began to develop with the collections published by Muzio Clementi, while those by Karl Czerny and Rudolphe Kreutzer are frequently used by aspiring pianists and violinists. Unique examples are the one's dubbed "tableauxs" by Rackmaninoff and the "Transcendental" ones by Liszt, but by far the most famous are a set of 27 by Chopin that includes examples nicknamed "Black-key" and "Revolutionary". Named for the French for  "study", FTP, what are these compositions designed to explore technical problems?;;etude(s)
Literature;;His first collection, "The Seashell Game", demonstrated his masterful use of the "loneliness ideal". He grew up as a companion of lord Todo Yoshitada at Ueno Castle, but has a name meaning banana-plant hut. After studying under Kitamura Kigin, he published works like A Visit to Kashima Shrine and The Records of a Weather Exposed Skeleton describing his many travels. FTP, identify this 17th century writer best known for mastering the haiku form.;;(Matsuo) Basho|Munefusa
Religion/Mythology;;In Indian religion, its fruit or consequence is called phala. It can be changed by the acquisition of punna, achieved via dana, or "giving", sila, or adhering to moral precepts, and bhavana, or meditation. In Jainism, it is regarded as a fine substance that produces the chain of birth and death, while in Buddhism it plays a role in the time spent between lives, being burned off until a small amount is incorporated into the next life. Meaning "act", FTP, what is this central tenet of Indian religions, the influence of past actions on future reincarnations?;;ka(r|m){1}?ma(n)
Chemistry;;This mineral’s botyroidal form, known as kidney ore, is named for the shape of the masses it forms. The oolitic formation can be seen in sedimentary rocks and has a reddish brown color and earthy luster. The tiger type contains alternating bands of the namesake mineral as well as red jasper. A trigonal oxide, its name comes from the blood-red color of its valuable constituent. FTP, identify this mineral with formula Fe2O3, the most important ore of iron.;;hematite
World History;;Solovetsk was a major example of one. They distributed papers like The Northern Miner and Reshaping, and were essential in the construction of the Dneprostroi power station, the industrial center of Magnitka, and the Belomor Canal. Perhaps up to 400,000 people passed through the system, which was supposed to reeducate and rehabilitate, and which included hundreds of installations in Eastern Europe and Russia. Founded in 1930 by the OGPU, FTP, what was this system of forced labor camps, known through a Solzhenitsyn novel about its "archipelago"?;;Gulag(s)|Main Administration of Corrective Labor Camps
Philosophy;;In On the Fall of the Devil, he argued that the sin of the angels stemmed from the conflict between a desire for justice and happiness. In On Truth, he argued for a teleological notion of truth, a notion he used to define free will in On Freedom of Choice. Inheriting his most famous post from his teacher Lanfranc, he became famous for his doctrine of "faith seeking understanding", and presented his "four proofs" in the Monologian and the Proslogian. FTP, identify this man, made Archbishop of Canterbury in 1093, most famous for his ontological proof of God’s existence.;;(St(.)|Saint) Anselm
Art;;This painting is displayed in the main hall at the Huntington Gallery across from Thomas Lawrence’s portrait of Sarah Barrett Moulton so as to contrast and highlight its most prominent feature. Completed in 1770, its subject wears clothes from the previous century in homage to the paintings of Van Dyck. Standing out against a brown and green landscape, the subject looks out confidently at the viewer with his left arm akimbo and his right hand holding a feathered hat. Depicting the son of a hardware merchant named  Jonathan Buttall, FTP, what is this portrait by Gainsborough named for the color of the boy’s costume?;;(The) Blue Boy
United States History;;This man’s final bid for the senate was defeated by John Gordon in 1872. Famed for giving what became known as the "Cornerstone speech," this Whig published a number of books, including a memoir of his five-month confinement at Fort Warren. From his estate, Liberty Hall, in Crawfordville, he championed policies such as the unconditional discharge of Federal prisoners, and later headed a commission to the Hampton Roads conference. FTP, identify this Georgian who opposed many of Jefferson Davis’ decisions as vice president of the Confederacy.;;(Alexander) (Hamilton) Stephens
Religion/Mythology;;Also known as Khenty-Imentiu, or "chief of the westerners," some Pyramid Texts give him a daughter in the form of a celestial serpent who purifies the monarch. This deity’s cult was centered at Cynopolis, and priests of his were responsible for the Opening of the Mouth ceremony. He held steady the scales that measured mortal hearts against the feather of Ma’at, leading to Osiris the souls of those who passed the test. FTP, identify this Egyptian god of embalmings and death, often depicted as a jackal.;;Anubis
Physics;;In quantum mechanics, this law has been formulated using the concepts of quantum collapse and the Ergodic Hypothesis. The grouping of microstates into macrostates led to Boltzmann’s statement of it, known as the H Theorem. The first statement of it, now called the Kelvin-Planck theorem, says that not all of the heat extracted from a hot reservoir can be used for work, and the Clausius form says that heat cannot flow spontaneously from a colder body to a hotter body. FTP, what is this numbered law of thermodynamics stating that the entropy of an isolated system increases over time?;;(The) (Second|2nd){1}? Law (of Thermodynamics);;H Theorem|Kelvin-Planck (Statement)|Clausius (Statement)
Literature;;The patriarch of this novel’s central family loses money in an attempt to ship ice-boxed lettuce to New York, but later his son takes advantage of a food shortage and saves the fortune with the help of Will Hamilton. Late in the novel, Abra Bacon becomes fed up with her husband’s self-righteousness and seeks out his brother, thus repeating the painful love triangle of the previous generation, which saw the prostitute Cathy Ames shoot her husband Adam Trask and leave him for his brother Charles. Based on the story of Cain and Abel, FTP, what is this John Steinbeck novel now in the news for its selection for Oprah’s Book Club?;;East of Eden
World History;;It was suggested to James I by Raymond of Pennafort, and the resulting Bull "Declinante jam mundi" ordered Archbishop Esparrago to begin.  The Council of Lerida confided it to the Dominicans and Franciscans, and its terms were defined by the Synod of Tarragona in 1242.  Officially declared by Sixtus IV in 1478, it was overseen by the Consejo Supremo, while Miguel de Morillo and Juan de San Martin oversaw it in Seville. Organized by Tomas de Torquemada, it was not abolished until the revolution of 1820.  For 10 points, name this Holy Office that attempted to root out heresy in Spain.;;(Spanish) Inquisition
Literature;;The protagonist’s husband has been saving up to purchase a gun so he can shoot larks on the plain of Nanterre, but is despondent when he must spend the money on a dress. The heroine is the daughter of artisans, though she longs to be higher class, and is thus too jealous to visit her childhood friend Mademoiselle Forestier.  Invited to a ball at the house of the Minister of Education, the protagonist finally goes to see Forestier, and after the disaster at the ball, she finds a shop at the Palais Royal to replace the title object. After years of hardship and lost youth, she meets Forestier, who tells her the title object was an imitation. FTP, identify this short story about Mathilde Loisel, written by Guy de Maupassant.;;(The) Necklace
Art;;During his time at Harvard with Marcel Breuer he expanded on the ideas set forth in his 1932 manifesto, a collaborative effort with Henry Russell-Hitchcock. At home around museums, he designed the art gallery at Dumbarton Oaks and the sculpture garden at the Museum of Modern Art. After 1967, the buildings he and his partner John Burgee worked on, including International Place in Boston, the Dade County Cultural Center, and the Crystal Cathedral in California, began to challenge his earlier principles. But he is more famous for the work he did under the influence of Mies van der Rohe such as the AT&T Headquarters and the Glass House in New Canaan. FTP, identify this American exponent of the International Style and designer of the Seagram Building.;;(Philip) (Cortelyou) Johnson
Religion/Mythology;;In one tradition, men who hold this title, not the ijma, or the community, determine matters of revelation. It has also been an honorific attributed to such men as Abu Hanifah and al-Ghazali. Because the tradition of ghaybah holds that the last one disappeared, there is no consensus as to how many of them there are. The Sabiyah Ismails acknowledge seven, while the Ithna Ashari acknowledge 12, one of which is hidden, and is the mahdi. FTP, identify this term denoting the head of a Muslim community, also given to men who lead prayers in mosques.;;Imam
Literature;;In the second part of this poem, the author examines at great length the pentangle emblazoned on the protagonist’s shield that symbolizes the virtues to which he is dedicated. It consists of 2,530 lines of alliterative verse whose stanzas all end with a metrical scheme known as the "bob and wheel". The protagonist exchanges kisses for the animals slain by Lord Bercilak during his stay at Bercilak’s castle, but deceitfully keeps a girdle that will protect him when he arrives at Green Chapel to complete a bargain that began when he beheaded a knight who burst in upon a celebration at King Arthur’s court. FTP, what is this great Middle English poem by the "Pearl" poet about a knight of the Round Table?;;(Sir) Gawain and the Green Knight
Art;;Etienne Falconet is often cited as the quintessential sculptor of this art movement whose early masters included Audran and Berain. Its name was apparently coined by a student of David as a term of derision. It was practiced in Italy by Guardi, Longhi, and Tiepolo, but enjoyed its greatest vogue in France, where Boucher, Watteau, and Fragonard created works typified by grace, playfulness, and intimacy. FTP, what is this 18th century art movement whose name is a combination of the terms rocaille and barocco?;;Rococo
United States History;;In addition to his achievements in Congress, this politician gained renown for his public addresses, notably the Bunker Hill oration and his speech on the deaths of Jefferson and Adams. He served as Secretary of State for a second time from 1850-52 after having alienated the antislavery movement with his eloquent support for the Compromise of 1850. Earlier, he had emerged as a champion of the federal government in his famous series of 1830 debates with Robert Hayne, and won acclaim as a lawyer for his arguments in the cases Dartmouth v. Woodward and McCulloch v. Maryland. FTP, who was this Massachusetts senator perhaps best known for his 1843 treaty with Ashburton?;;(Daniel) Webster
Noncomputational Math;;In group theory, his theorem states that any finite group whose order is divisible by a prime p contains an element of order p. He is known to students of complex analysis for his theorem stating that the integral over a closed contour of any holomorphic function without interior singularities is zero. Perhaps this Frenchman’s most lasting result holds that the inner product of two vectors is less than or equal to the product of their lengths. FTP, who is this discoverer of a famous inequality named for he and Schwartz?;;(Augustin-Louis) Cauchy
Religion/Mythology;;The ruler of Mount Sipylus, one story tells of the time he lied to both Pandareos and Hermes about his possession of a golden guard-dog stolen from a shrine of Zeus. The father of the great sculptor Broteas and Niobe with his wife Dione, he was said to have stolen nectar and ambrosia from the gods to give to his friends, but he is best known for killing his son Pelops and serving him to the gods. FTP, who was this mythological figure forced to spend eternity in Tartarus just out of reach of food and water?;;Tantalus
Literature;;A key moment in this story is the trip by the female protagonist to Madame Sofronie, where she acquires $20 to supplement her husband’s income, which has recently been cut by $10 per week. Her husband Jim soon returns home after purchasing a present his wife had often admired in a Broadway window, but soon learns that Della has sold her hair to buy him a chain for the watch he just sold. FTP, what is this story, the best-known work by O. Henry?;;(The) Gift of the Magi
Miscellaneous;;This author of Islam Observed and the essay collection Local Knowledge objected to structuralism, calling it "a sort of high-tech rationalism", and often focused his writings on the revolution in what he called "the way we think about the way we think". Beginning with his fieldwork in Java and Bali in the 1950s, he analyzed the role of symbols in society in works like The Religion of Java and Person, Time, and Conduct in Bali. FTP, who is the influential U.S. anthropologist perhaps best known for his essay collection The Interpretation of Cultures?;;(Clifford) Geertz
Geography;;By 1957, parliamentary democracy in this country had given way to what was known as "Guided Democracy", a semi-dictatorship based on the 1945 constitution. Some of its indigenous people established the Majapahit kingdom, which supplanted the earlier Srivijaya empire. Independence from the Dutch was proclaimed in 1945 by Mohammed Hatta and Achmad Sukarno, the latter of whom was deposed in 1967 by General Suharto. Troubles in East Timor have occurred in recent years in, FTP, what country whose capital is Jakarta?;;Indonesia
Chemistry;;This element is found with silicon in the mineral pentlandite and with silicon and iron in pyrrhoite. Usually forming compounds in the +2 oxidation state, the +3 state also exists, as seen in its black oxide. It is a highly effective catalyst, especially in a spongy form known as the "Raney" catalyst, and it is often purified by the Mond process. FTP, what is this silvery metallic transition element with atomic number 28 and symbol Ni?;;nickel
Music;;Luca Agnoli wrote the aria Vasto teatro è il mondo for this opera, but it is often replaced by Là del ciel nell'arcano profondo, which is sung by the royal tutor Alidoro.  The valet Dandini pretends to be Prince Ramiro and goes to Don Magnifico looking for a wife, eventually picking the title character over Clorinda and Tisbe, her haughty stepsisters.  FTP, name this Rossini opera retelling a popular fairy tale about a trip to a ball engineered by a fairy godmother.;;Cinderella|(La) Cenerentola
Literature;;The second work to feature this character sees him travel to England, where he engages in a series of debates about the nature of love, religion, and philosophy. In the first work, he visits Naples and attempts to woo Lucilla, but fails when she chooses the unworthy Curio, after which he is reconciled with his friend Philautus. A witty, pleasure-loving Athenian described in a work subtitled "The Anatomy of Wit", FTP, who is this creation of John Lyly, whose name describes the elaborate literary style his works introduced?;;Euphues
Literature;;Early in this essay, the author claims that by placing undue emphasis on names and customs, society is a conspiracy against the manhood of its members, who should not be ashamed of their instincts, which are from God. He then goes on to question the worship of the past, since the movements of history are the reflections of the personalities of individuals, but each individual has something original in his nature. His main argument holds that great men should be able to live as they would in solitude even while in the midst of the crowd, since "a foolish consistency is the hobgoblin of little minds", and "to be great is to be misunderstood". FTP, what is this essay in which Ralph Waldo Emerson advocates trust in the divine self?;;Self-Reliance
World History;;One notorious example of this type of event lasted for three days at Chisinau in 1903. Revived in Germany and Poland after Hitler took power, they had greatly increased in number after the abortive revolution of 1905, over 20 years after the first major outbreak of them following the assassination of Alexander II in 1881. With a name meaning "riot", FTP, what were these violent attacks on Russian Jews in the late 19th and early 20th centuries?;;pogrom(s)
Chemistry;;The strength of this property is often measured in units of Newtons per meter at 20 degrees Celsius, giving values like .028 for toluene, .425 for mercury, and .0728 for water. Symbolized gamma, it is usually weak in organic liquids like benzene and alcohols. It results from intermolecular forces, in that a molecule on the interior of a liquid experiences interactions with other molecules equally from all sides, whereas a molecule on the outside is only affected by those below it. FTP, what is this property of a liquid responsible for capillary action and the formation of liquid drops and meniscuses?;;surface tension
Literature;;He fought in World War I and worked on the staff of the Oxford English dictionary before becoming a professor of English literature at Oxford.  His scholarly works include A Middle English Vocabulary and the lecture series Beowulf: The Monster and the Critics, while lesser-known works of fiction are The Smith of Wooton Major and Farmer Giles of Hamm. He is best known for a series of works that includes the posthumously published work The Silmarillion. FTP, identify this novelist and philologist, the author of The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings.;;(J(.) (ohn)) (R(.) (onald)) (R(.) (euel)) Tolkien
Geography;;Two notable species that live in this mountain’s moorlands are the giant lobelia and the giant groundsel. One of its peaks, Shira, rises to only 13,000 feet, and is the remnant of an earlier volcano. A saddle at about 15,000 feet connects its two main peaks, the 16,900 foot high Mawensi and Kibo, whose height of 19,340 makes it the highest on the continent. FTP, what is this mountain found in Tanzania?;;Kilimanjaro
World History;;His most famous voyage was inspired in part to take over the territory at Nootka Sound, and his book describing the voyage was completed on his death by his lieutenant, Peter Puget, for whom this man named Puget Sound. After sailing on James Cook's second and third voyages, he visited the Hawaiian islands, where his presentation of the British flag to Kamehameha led to the Union Jack's inclusion in the Hawaiian flag. He then conducted a detailed survey of the western coast of North America from 1792-94. FTP, who was this British explorer for whom a large island off the coast of British Columbia is now named?;;(George) Vancouver
Biology;;Repetition of a section of DNA on chromosome 4 is linked with the myotonic version of this disease, and is characterized by the inability of the muscles of the hands and feet to relax properly. A common version called the fascio-scapulo-humeral type affects the face and shoulders, and is found in both sexes. Becker’s version is a more mild form of the main type, Duchenne’s, which appears between the ages of 3 and 5, causing progressive wasting of the legs and pelvis. FTP, what is this disease that causes atrophy of skeletal muscle?;;muscular dystrophy
Literature;;He wrote about his experiences in the Spanish Civil War in Beneath Your Clear Shadow and Other Poems. His idea that existential alienation can be overcome through erotic love and artistic creativity was a recurring theme in prose works like The Pears of the Elm, The Bow and the Lyre, and The Monkey Grammarian. His poetry collections Luna silvestre and Sun Stone helped him win the 1990 Nobel Prize in Literature. FTP, who is this Mexican writer, the author of The Labyrinth of Solitude?;;(Octavio) Paz
United States History;;His attempt to determine the signs of true, saintly belief are found in "A Treatise Concerning Religious Affections", while another major work was A Careful and Strict Enquiry into Freedom of the Will. He first gained fame for "A Faithful Narrative of the Surprising Work of God", but soon saw his strict Calvinism alienate him from other Puritans, resulting in his dismissal from his post as pastor of Northampton Church in Massachusetts. FTP, who was this leader of the "Great Awakening" best known for his sermon Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God?;;(Jonathan) Edwards
Religion/Mythology;;His rejection of the jealous goddess Clytie came back to haunt him, as Clytie told King Orchamus about this god’s love affair with the king’s daughter, Leucothoe, which resulted in Leucothoe being buried alive by her father as punishment.  The father of Pasiphae, Aeetes, and Circe, he became angry with Odysseus’s men after they killed and ate some of his sacred cattle.  FTP, name this Greek deity who appears every day in his horse-driven chariot to fulfill his duty as sun god.;;Helios
Literature;;The second part of this collection includes "The Bell of Atri," "Lady Wentworth," and "Kambalu," and the third part includes such stories as "The Mother’s Ghost," "Azreal," and the last tale, "The Rhyme of Sir Christopher".  The first part features a 22-part verse story entitled "The Saga of King Olav".  Featuring tales from such characters as the Sicilian, the Spanish Jew, and the Landlord, FTP, what is this Henry Wadsworth Longfellow collection that includes a poem about Paul Revere’s ride?;;Tales of a Wayside Inn
Geography;;It first became an independent republic in 1847 and subsequently was never established as a European colony. The country fared relatively well while nearly all of its neighbors were engulfed by fighting until 1980, when Samuel Doe led a military coup in protest of rising prices. His regime, however, would doom the nation’s economy, paving the way for a brutally crushed putsch that led to violent civil war. FTP, name this African nation that may be on the rebound with the departure of Charles Taylor.;;Liberia
Literature;;One of this author’s late works was the uncharacteristically comical novel The Paper Men. He won a Booker Prize for Rites of Passage, the first volume of his "sea trilogy" To the Ends of the Earth. He is better known for works like The Spire and Pincher Martin, highly symbolic works that helped him win the Nobel Prize in 1983. FTP, who was this English novelist who told of characters like Jack, Ralph, and Piggy in his first novel, The Lord of the Flies?;;(William) Golding
Biology;;Working by inhibiting angiogenesis, recent studies suggest that by acting against paraprotein it is effective in the treatment of Multiple Myeloma. Approved by the FDA in 1998 for use against leprosy, its marketer, Calgene, created the STEPS program for its safe and effective dispensation. Capable of causing phocomelia if given to persons of child bearing age, FTP, name this drug infamous for causing birth defects when given to women with morning sickness.;;Thalidomide
Religion/Mythology;;They were spared death due to the intervention of the goddess Iris after their defeat, which led the King of Thrace to tell the Argonauts how to pass the Sympleglades. Driven off by Calais and Zetes, they had originally been sent to defile the food of Phineas. Traditionally given names like Aello, Calaeno, and Okypete, FTP, what were these birds with the faces of old women?;;Harpies
World History;;In 1647 Masaniello led a revolt against its barons, while its final fate was decided at the battle of Volturno River in 1861. Its legitimacy had been bolstered in 1821 by the Congress of Laibach, at which Ferdinand I's absolute power was declared. Originally united in 1443 under Alfonso V, in the Peace of Utrecht it was ceded to the French Bourbons, who lost it 25 years later when Charles III reclaimed it. Finally taken as part of Garibaldi’s campaign, FTP, name this Italian kingdom under which a single ruler controlled both Naples and Palermo.;;(Kingdom of the) Two Sicilies
Miscellaneous;;Claiming that he was taught to act by James Best, the actor who played Roscoe P. Coltrane on the Dukes of Hazard, one of his first onscreen appearances was as an Elvis Impersonator in a 1988 episode of the Golden Girls. He is embroiled in a feud with Oliver Stone, whom he claims misdirected his story about Charles Starkweather that became Natural Born Killers. His first directing effort was 1987’s My Best Friend’s Birthday, but he remains best known for the film that won him the 1994 Palme D'Or at Cannes. FTP, name this director of Jackie Brown, Kill Bill and Pulp Fiction.;;(Quentin) Tarantino
Literature;;This novel’s epigram is taken from Romans 12:19, and reads "Vengeance is mine ... saith the Lord". Stephen is the title character’s brother, and is married to Dolly, while Constantine falls in love with Dolly’s younger sister Kitty. However, Kitty is interested in the wealthy Count Alexei Vronsky, who is in turn obsessed with the title character, who leaves her husband and child to be with Vronsky, only to throw herself under a train due to fears that he has lost interest in her. FTP, what is this novel by Leo Tolstoy?;;Anna Karenina
Art;;He developed the "zone system" for precisely determining the tone found in different parts of his scenes, while his interest in the variety of light and textures led him to join Willard Van Dyke in forming Group f.64 in 1932. Known for his collaborations with Nancy Newhall, he originally studied music, but in 1927 produced "Parmellian Prints of the High Sierras". The influence of Paul Strand can be seen in works like "Moonrise, Hernandez, New Mexico" that typify his use of "straight photography". FTP, who was this photographer known for his scenes depicting the mountains of the American west?;;(Ansel) Adams
Chemistry;;Formulated following the study of the dehydration of alcohols, when it is disobeyed Hoffman products arise. Not applicable when the leaving group is poor, when the base is bulky, or when conjoined dienes are formed, E1 reactions generally follow it, though E2 reactions have stereo-chemical requirements that deviate from it. FTP, identify this rule of organic chemistry that predicts that elimination reactions proceed to give the most highly substituted alkene.;;Zaitsev(') (s) (Rule)
World History;;The fifth ruler with this name was co-ruler with his brother for 14 years despite being mentally impaired. The sixth was deposed in favor of empress Elizabeth. The second was known as the "Meek", and succeeded his father, the first, who was known as "Moneybags". The most famous is the fourth, who established the Zemsky Sobor and a personal secret service known as the O-prich-ni-ki. FTP, give this shared name of several Russian Czars, the most infamous of which was known as "the Terrible".;;Ivan
Geography;;Located at the western terminus of the Manych Canal, in its western part lies the Arabat Spit, a sandbar that separates it from a system of marshy inlets called the Syvash. Approximately 210 miles long, the Yeya and Don flow into one its arms, the Taganrog Gulf. Bordering Russia and the Crimea, FTP, name this sea, the world's shallowest.;;(Sea of) Azov
Philosophy;;The influence of this school of philosophy grew in part from Panaetius of Rhodes’ travels with Scipio Aemilianus. It was rigorously systematic, especially in its definitive systematization by Chrysippus of Soli. They believed that "logos" was the universal animating principle and that a "life consistent with Nature" is the goal of life, to be achieved through wisdom and the restraint with which the term is now associated. Founded by Zeno of Citium, FTP, what is this ancient philosophy associated with Seneca and Marcus Aurelius whose name is now used to describe one who is impassive, especially in the face of difficulties?;;Stoic(ism|s)
Literature;;He desires to be an engineer or a chemist, but is held back in part by his un-sellable farm in Starkfield. He sees his cat break a pickle dish while his wife is gone to visit a doctor in Bettsbridge, making it impossible to hide his growing attachment to her cousin Mattie. When his wife Zeena orders Mattie to leave, he tries and fails to kill himself and Mattie by running their sled into a tree. FTP, identify this title character of a novel by Edith Warton.;;(Ethan) Frome
United States History;;In 1839 the Spanish invoked Article 9 of this treaty in its petition that the cargo and slaves of the Amistad be returned. In part, it guaranteed free navigation of the Mississippi and the right of deposit in New Orleans for 3 years.  Necessary to settle issues left unresolved by the Jay-Gardoqui Treaty and the Treaty of 1783, it is also called the Treaty of San Lorenzo. FTP, identify this 1795 American-Spanish treaty that set the southern US boundary at the 31st parallel.;;Pinckney(') (s) (Treaty )
Physics;;Derivable from the Vis-Viva Equation, if it is measured in kilometers per second, it is about 2.4 for the Moon and about 11.3 for the Earth. It can be found by setting the kinetic energy for an object equal to its gravitational potential energy, or as the square root of 2 G M over R. Elliptical orbits result for objects that do not achieve it, while those that exactly match it follow a parabolic trajectory.  Hypothesized to be infinite at the event horizons of black holes, FTP, name this term for the velocity necessary to overcome the gravitational pull of a body.;;Escape Velocity
Religion/Mythology;;A central tenet of this faith is the Ik Oknar, a statement emphasizing unity with the Primal Being. A traditional greeting shared among its adherents is "Waheguru Ji Ka Khalsa, Waheguru Ji Ki Fateh". Its members are initiated into Armit and must wear the five articles of faith at all times. Known as great warriors, their members have been an important part of the Indian army, but the desire for sovereignty led some of their members to kill Indira Gandhi. Taking its name from the Sanskrit for 'disciple', FTP, name this Indian religion that traces it origins to Guru Nanak.;;Sikh(ism)
Literature;;The need for this author to support his family prompted his prolific output of magazine articles collected as Selections Grave and Gay from Writings Published and Unpublished, which included The Last Days of Immanuel Kant and the famed critical essay On the Knocking at the Gate in Macbeth. Although he wrote the Gothic novel Klosterheim, he is better known for the articles The Glory of Motion and The Vision of Sudden Death, collected as The English Mail Coach, and the unfinished Suspiria de Profundis, whose remarkable dream visions are reminiscent of his most famous work. FTP, who was this author of Confessions of an English Opium Eater?;;(Thomas) De Quincey
Miscellaneous;;Thought to first manifest itself around age four, its existence would support Lawrence Kohlberg's theory of Gender Constancy. Its formulator held that one consequence of it gives rise to resentment of the daughter for her mother. In New Ways in Psychoanalysis, Karen Horney argued against it and created an analogous opposing theory, her central argument being that women covet the power monopolized by men, not the titular entity. FTP, name this Freudian theory that holds that woman have the unconscious desire to possess the male sexual organ.;;Penis Envy
United States History;;He remarked that he didn't know whether he was running for the presidency or the penitentiary due to the fierce attacks to which he was subjected as the nominee of the Liberal Republicans, when he polled 86 electoral votes but died before the electoral college. He lost much of his following for opposing Lincoln's renomination and for signing the bail bond of Jefferson Davis, but earlier his editorials touting abolitionism and other Republican causes led him to be known as the greatest newspaper editor of his day. FTP, who was this founder of the New York Tribune, known for the advice "Go west, young man"?;;(Horace) Greeley
Literature;;The "title" (main) character of this novel briefly travels with a Punch and Judy show, while her brother Frederick schemes to have her marry Dick Swiveller so that he may inherit her fortune. She and her grandfather are befriended by the waxworks owner Mrs. Jarley and taken in by Mr. Martin after they are forced to leave London when the dwarf Daniel Quilp collects on gambling debts. Centering on the orphan Little Nell Trent, FTP, what is this Dickens novel named for the store confiscated by Quilp?;;(The) Old Curiosity Shop
Chemistry;;This element forms compounds in which it has oxidation states of 1, 3, 5, and 7. When combined with ethylene it was an important component of leaded gasoline that removed lead deposits, and, like chlorine, it combines with silver to produce a light-sensitive compound important for its use in photographic film, light-sensitive glasses, and fire retardants. Its major commercial source is deep brine wells in Michigan and Arkansas. A dense, dark-red liquid at room temperature, it is named for the Greek for "stench". FTP, what is this halogen with atomic number 35 and symbol Br?;;bromine
Music;;Hindemith based his "Symphonic Metamorphoses" on a theme by this composer. In 1803 his father placed him under the tutelage of Abbé Vogler. Forced to focus on composing and conducting after he ruined his singing voice by accidentally drinking nitric acid, his first successful opera, Abu Hussan, followed failures such as Silvana and Das Waldmadchen, and he died in England two months after the premier of his Oberon. FTP, identify this German Romantic composer famous for the opera The Freeshooter.;;(Karl) (Maria) (von) Weber
World History;;It was forced into early engagements near Plymouth and Portland Bill after departing from La Coruna. Its mission was deemed necessary due to the Treaty of Nonsuch, but was hampered by the death of its intended leader, the Marquess de Santa Cruz. Intending to join an army under the Duke of Parma, it was effectively opposed by Charles Howard’s forces, and was unable to force close fighting to board the British ships, partly due to the inexperience of its leader, the Duke of Medina-Sidonia. Decisively defeated in 1588, FTP, what was this great naval force sent to engineer an invasion of England?;;(the) (Spanish|Invincible) Armada
Religion/Mythology;;According to Hesiod, one figure of this name was the wife of the Titan Thaumas. According to Euripides, the better known woman of this name was ordered to marry her cousin Pylades after having failed in a scheme to kill Helen, leading her to hold Helen’s daughter Hermione ransom until Apollo delivered her brother Orestes from madness. FTP, who was this daughter of Agamemnon who joined Orestes in the murder of Aegisthus and Clytemnestra?;;Ele(c|k){1}?tra
Chemistry;;This compound and its more complicated relatives often form spontaneously when chemicals like butadiene and diethyl ether are left exposed for long periods of time, and it often forms mild oxidizing agents like sodium perborate. An extremely weak acid, it can be made in large quantities by electrolysis of KHSO4/H2SO4 solutions. It is a strong oxidizing agent, leading to its use as a bleaching agent and as a mild antiseptic. FTP, what is this compound with formula H2O2?;;hydrogen peroxide
Literature;;His prose poems exploring urban, bourgeois life were often written from the perspective of the flaneur, an idea elucidated in his essay The Painter of Modern Life. He got his start introducing the works of Poe to Europe through his classic French translations. His decadent lifestyle led to his premature death a year before the publication of his ambitious poetry collection Paris Spleen, but he remains best known for a controversial collection whose use of subtle nuances and striking images laid the foundations for modern poetry.  FTP, who was this author of The Flowers of Evil?;;(Charles) Baudelaire
Music;;The "Children’s Chorus" is a feature of this opera, whose "Card Trio" is sung while the title figure draws the ace of spades, symbolizing her impending death. Act II opens at the inn of Lillas Pastia, where the title figure is introduced to Escamillo, leading to a rivalry for her between Escamillo and a corporal who throws away his career and his relationship with the chaste Micaela, and who kills the protagonist when she rejects him for the bullfighter. FTP, what is this opera about a gypsy employed in a cigarette factory, the masterpiece of Georges Bizet?;;Carmen
World History;;He died due to a coup led by the head of his Praetorian Guard, Macrinus. Remembered in part for his sumptuous baths whose impressive remains can still be seen in Rome, he promulgated the constitutio Antoniniana, which made virtually all the free men in the Roman Empire full citizens. Earlier, he killed his brother Geta so that he could rule alone. FTP, name this son of Septimius Severus named for the long, flowing cloak he preferred to wear.;;Caracalla|(Marcus) Aurelius Antoninus
Biology;;These organisms come in three major categories: crustose, foliose and fruticose. They sometimes reproduce by releasing small bodies called soredia or by the detachment of outgrowths known as isidia. Belonging to the phylum My-co-phy-co-phy-ta, their hardy nature allows them to thrive in extremely cold and exposed regions, but some species are extremely sensitive to air pollution, leading to their use as indicator species.  FTP, name this symbiotic combination of a fungus and an alga.;;lichen(s)
Art;;His late interest in photography can be seen in works with Durieu like Draped Model and in his own portrait done by Nadar.  Late works like The Hunt show the Romantic spirit he exemplified his whole artistic life, as seen in his painting of Paganini, the Death of Sardanapalus, and The Massacre at Chios.  FTP, name this French artist, most famous for Liberty Leading the People.;;(Eugene) Delacroix
Literature;;The final pages of this novel include diary entries that follow a discussion between the protagonist and Cranly about the reasons for the protagonist’s departure, as well as a scene in which the play The Countess Cathleen is booed off the stage. The first of its five parts begins with the protagonist’s memory of "baby tuckoo" and other important events from his childhood, described from the child’s perspective. It ends with his conviction to "forge in the smithy of (his) soul the uncreated conscience of (his) race," prompting his decision to leave Ireland. FTP, what is this novel about the development of Stephen Daedalus, a semi-autobiographical work of James Joyce?;;(A) Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man
Religion/Mythology;;The leadership of this religion prefer to be called Muwahhidun, or Unitarians. Initiation from lay status, or jahil, to clerical status, or aqil, is restricted, and members are required to conceal the true nature of the religion. The sacred scripture, the Kitab al-hikma, is a collection of letters written by Cairo Hamza, who joined Muhammad al-Durazi in proclaiming the divinity of the caliph al-Hakim. FTP, what is this offshoot of Islam centered in Lebanon, Israel, Jordan, and Syria?;;Druze
Literature;;With Merleau-Ponty, this thinker founded the journal Les Temps Modernes, which he edited. Three years after the publication of his main philosophical work, he produced the essay Existentialism is a Humanism, in which he continued his analysis of man’s attempts to deal with reality through what he called "bad faith". He held that man is nothing at birth and condemned to be free, and distinguished two types of being, "being-in-itself" and "being-for-itself", in 1943’s Being and Nothingness. FTP, who was this French thinker who also expressed his existentialist views in the novel Nausea and the play No Exit?;;(Jean-Paul) Sartre
United History;;He was born with the name Thunder Rolling Down Mountains, but is best known by the name his father gave him when he converted to Christianity in 1838. After he reluctantly agreed to leave the Grande Ronde valley and move to a new reservation in Idaho, some of his warriors attacked a local white settlement. He then won several engagements against the US army during his attempted retreat to Canada, which ended with his surrender to Nelson Miles only 50 miles from the border in 1877. FTP, name this chief of the Nez Perce Indians best known for his speech declaring "I shall fight no more forever"?;;(Chief) Joseph
Noncomputational Math;;Versions of this device include the R-type and D-type, while one of the most versatile versions is called the J-K Master-Slave type. Since it is important that they operate synchronously, most types include a clock input, with groups often controlled by a single clock line. It will maintain its state indefinitely until an input pulse called a trigger causes it to switch its state from 1 to 0 or from 0 to 1. Also called a bistable gate, FTP, what is this basic type of computer circuit that shares its name with a type of footwear?;;flip-flop (circuit)
Miscellaneous;;This term was originally used to denote an inanimate object supposed to possess magical powers. Adorno claimed that culture had been turned into one of these by capitalism, while Marx used it in economics to describe the appeal of useless goods in capitalism. It is better known for its use in psychology, especially its treatment by Freud in Three Contributions to the Theory of Sex, where he tried to explain the fact that it is seen mainly in males. FTP, what is this condition in which objects and nonsexual body parts are used to achieve sexual gratification?;;fetish
Literature;;This author gained financial success with the novel Change. Famously described as a racist by Chinua Achebe, English was his third language, and his lack of fluency is shown in An Outcast of the Islands.  He collaborated with Ford Maddox Ford on several novels, but is better known for individual efforts like The Secret Agent, Nostromo, and Lord Jim, while his best known work is a tale told on the Nellie by Charlie Marlow.  FTP, name this author of Heart of Darkness.;;(Joseph) Conrad
World History;;He was proclaimed prince regent in 1921 due to his father’s mental illness, and after surviving an assassination attempt, ascended to the throne in 1926, soon after which he saw his country devastated by one of the worst earthquakes in modern history. A leading expert on jellyfish who published authoritative monographs on marine biology, he did not approve of military expansion, but did not have the power to oppose Tojo and the militarists. He became a figurehead after he was forced to renounce his divinity, but became the world’s longest reigning monarch before his 1989 death. Succeeded by Akihito, FTP, who was this emperor of Japan?;;(Emperor) (Hirohito|Showa){1}?
Physics;;The version of this process known as the "cumuliform" type acts vertically in the atmosphere to produce dramatic weather effects. Its two major versions are governed by the dimensionless Grashof and Peclet numbers, and both major types also depend on the Prandtl number. The natural version depends on the tendency of fluids to expand when heated, in contrast to the forced version. FTP, what is this process in which heat is transferred by the movement of a fluid, the counterpart of radiation and conduction?;;convection
Geography;;Its origins are obscure, but it probably became a distinct political entity when Sheptoon La-Pha became king. In 1865 it signed the Treaty of Sinchulu with Britain, under which it gained a subsidy in exchange for being under Britain’s political "guidance", a role that passed to India in 1947. The Duars Plain is found in the south, while in the north is the Greater Himalayas. FTP, what is this sovereign kingdom bordered by India and Tibet and whose capital is Thimphu?;;(Kingdom of) Bhutan
Literature;;Gookin is one of the participants in the central event of this work. The protagonist is surprised when a mysterious man claims to have known his father and his grandfather and recounts an occasion when his father set fire to an Indian village.  The man goes on to say that the deacons of many churches have drunk communion wine with him. Then, the man with a staff like a black serpent takes him to a secret meeting in the woods, where the title character’s life is ruined by seeing his wife Faith at a witches’ meeting. FTP, what is this short story by Nathaniel Hawthorne?;;Young Goodman Brown
World History;;During the 1500s, the headship of this royal house passed first to the Montpensier branch and then to the line of Marche-Vendome. It was founded when the heiress to the titular lordship married Robert of Clermont, the sixth son of Louis IX. Much power was wielded by the junior branch, the Conde line, while Philip V of Spain established a ruling house in Spain that still holds nominal power today. Louis-Philippe was the last French king from, FTP, what dynastic family that included Louis XIV and Louis XVI?;;Bourbon(s)
United States History;;A lawyer before William Howard Taft appointed him Secretary of War, he later served as Secretary of State under Herbert Hoover. While there he shut down the Black Chamber, the American cryptanalysis group, famously saying "Gentlemen don't read other people's mail". He later took full advantage of reading other people's mail during World War Two. For ten points, name this man who was Secretary of War under Franklin Roosevelt, known for his doctrine stating that the U.S. would not recognize gains achieved by armed aggression.;;(Henry) Stimson