Noncomputational Math;;When the parameter is set to one, it can be expanded as a series whose coefficients are Stieltjes constants, and it can be evaluated using Parseval's theorem. A generalization of it is called the Hurwitz function, and it resembles a p-series. When evaluated at 2, it gives the solution to the Basel problem, and Ramanujan showed that it is equal to minus one twelfths when evaluated at negative one. 1.5 million roots have been shown to lie on the critical strip, but it is not known whether all roots have a real part 1/2, and this function is closely associated with the prime number theorem. For 10 points, identify this function named for a German mathematician who has a namesake hypothesis.;;Riemann zeta (function);;zeta (function)
Literature;;He meditates on a cobblestone thrown at his grandmother on her wedding day because she married a Catholic in his elegies, "Clearances," which are found in his collection Haw Lantern, while his other works include Wintering Out and Station Island. The speaker of one poem comments, "Between my finger . . . the squat pen rests; as snug as a gun" while observing his father digging, and in the title poem of one work Mrs. Walls' mundane explanation of reproduction contrasts with his adventures in the "flax-dam" gathering frog spawn. For 10 points, identify this Irish poet of Death of a Naturalist, who translated Beowulf.;;(Seamus) Heaney;;
World History;;He fought with William the Rich until the Treaty of Venlo gave him the Duchy of Guelders, and with the help of his sister Eleanor, the Queen of France, he secured the Peace of Crepy.  He defeated Barbarossa to capture Tunis, and he defeated the Schmalkaldic League at Muhlberg with the help of the Duke of Alba.  His general Charles of Lannoy secured the Treaty of Madrid for this man by defeating Francis I at Pavia.  The son of Philip the Handsome and Joanna the Mad, he issued an edict condemning Martin Luther after calling the Diet of Worms.  For 10 points, name this Habsburg father of Philip II who ruled both Spain and the Holy Roman Empire.;;Charles V|Charles I (of) Spain;;Charles
Literature;;In one of this author's stories, a mother prevents her daughter Dee from taking the family quilts from her younger sister Maggie; that work is "Everyday Use". This author wrote about Tashi, who murders the female circumciser M'Lissa, and in another work Brownfeld has an affair at the Dew Drop Inn with his father's lover Josie. In addition to Possessing Secret Joy and The Third Life of Grange Copeland, in another work Corrine and Reverend Samuel take in Nettie, while the protagonist is forced into an abusive marriage with Mr. blank before having a relationship with Shug Avery. For 10 points, name this author who wrote about Celie in The Color Purple.;;(Alice) Walker;;
Literature;;One character in this play is wary of going to the city because he heard a story of a man dying from eating fifty pancakes. Another character attempts to dismiss the old maid Anfisa and tries to force refugee victims of a local fire out of the house under the pretense of protecting her baby Bobik. In the last act Baron Tuzenbach is killed by Solony in a duel over one central character, while Captain Vershinin's transfer to another post leaves one title character trapped in her marriage to Kulygin. For 10 points, Irina, Olga, and Masha are the title characters of which Anton Chekhov play?;;(The) Three Sisters|Tri sestry;;
World History;;He oversaw the transition of the throne to his brother Pedro after the death of Duarte and pacified Leonor of Aragon after her temper tantrum at Alemquer castle, and Gil Eanes rose to fame under this man. As an advisor to Edward, he agreed to give Zala ben Zala's son back in exchange for the captured Ferdinand at the failed invasion of Tangiers, though he was successful earlier in the capture of Ceuta. He was appointed governor of the Algrave province, and this son of Joao I established a colony at the Vila do Infante near Cape Vincent which produced such innovations as the caravel. For 10 points, identify this Portuguese prince best remembered for his love for exploring.;;Henry (the) Navigator|(Infante) Henrique (of) (Portugal) (Duke) (of) (Viseu)|Henry (the) Seafarer;;
Earth Science;;Its translational motions are commonly called Slichter modes, and early models for it included a 450 km thick F-layer on its exterior. An important discovery about its differential rotation was made by Dziewonski, and it was hypothesized by Inge Lehmann in 1936. The cause of faster propagation of seismic waves parallel to earth's rotation axis in this region is uncertain, and its interactions with the region above it generate the earth's magnetic field according to the geodynamo theory. For 10 points, identify this region composed mainly of a iron-nickel alloy, which may be found below the outer core.;;inner core;;core
Literature;;This poet asks in one poem, "What to make of a diminished thing"? and the speaker of another poem discusses a "luminary clock" that "proclaimed the time was neither wrong nor right" before asserting that he is "acquainted with the night". In addition to "Oven Bird" he wrote about a boy who has his hand cut off by a saw in "Out! Out!," while Silas is the title character of one poem, who is eventually found by Warren "huddled against the barn-door". The speaker of another poem says his apples will never disturb his neighbor's pine cones despite the maxim "good fences make good neighbors". For 10 points, name this poet of "Death of the Hired Man" and "Mending Wall".;;(Robert) Frost;;
Art;;This man's works such as Israel and the Law and Frieze of Prophets were painted for the Triumph of Religion series at the Boston Public Library. He painted portraits of Frederick Law Olmstead and Lady Agnew of Lochnaw, in addition to depicting Evelyn, Mabel, and Mildred Vickers in The Misses Vickers. He also depicted soldiers holding rifles walking in a file with bandages over their eyes in Gassed, while a better known work shows two girls lighting Chinese lanterns and is called Carnation, Lily, Lily, Rose. Better known for a scandalous depiction of Virginie Gautreau, for 10 points, identify this American artist of Madame X.;;(John) (Singer) Sargent;;
Earth Science;;Ancient forms of this material have been found to contain tetravalent uranium. Glendonite is an example of this material which retains the shape of ikatite, which is itself a hydrated form of this mineral. Vaterite and aragonite are polymorphs of this substance, which is used as the standard for 3 on Mohs hardness scale, and exhibits perfect rhombohedral cleavage along 3 planes. A special example of it found in standing waters in caves is called Dogtooth spar, and it is also found in marble and limestone. For 10 points, identify this mineral that is mostly made of calcium carbonate.;;calcite;;
Biology;;A Meckel's diverticulum is a small congenital bulge found on this organ, and Giardiasis is caused when the Giardia protozoan coats the inner lining of this organ. Cortisol can inhibit the loss of sodium in this organ, which is the most posterior organ controlled by the vagus nerve. One part of this organ contains lymphoid tissue known as Peyer's Patches. Another part of this organ contains Meissner's plexus and Brunner's glands and receives secretions from the liver and pancreas via the Sphincter of Oddi. Like the esophagus, this organ transports food via peristalsis. Containing the ileum, jejunum, and duodenum, for 10 points, name this organ between the stomach and the colon.;;(the) small intestine;;duodenum|jejunum|ileum|intestine
Literature;;This author wrote a bizarre work that juxtaposes a biography of James Buchanan with the titular President in Memories of the Ford Administration. One novel by this author discusses Piet Hanema's philandering, while another culminates when a Buick stalls on an icy hill, and relates the sacrifices that George Caldwell makes so his son can be an artist. This author of Couples and The Centaur wrote a work that deals with a Magi-Peel salesman whose wife Janice drowns their baby Rebecca June, and who is a former high school basketball hotshot. For 10 points, name this man, who wrote about a man surnamed "Angstrom" in his trilogy that begins with Rabbit, Run.;;(John) (Hoyer) Updike;;
Music;;This man's second symphony uses the folk song "Long, Long Ago" as one theme, and he left an unfinished Universe Symphony.  A tremolando underlies the second movement of his fourth symphony, which draws from "The Celestial Railroad," and he synthesized jazz, rag, "Hello My Baby," and Sousa's "Washington Post" in a piece meant to evoke the nightlife of New York. He composed a work in which a solo trumpet asks the "Perennial Question of Existence," and another that contains the movement "Putnam's Camp".  Central Park in the Dark and The Unanswered Question are by, for 10 points, this American composer of Three Places in New England.;;(Charles) Ives;;
Chemistry;;This method's breakdown is the subject of the DeRosier problem. The zone of equilibrium in this technique is known as a "theoretical plate," and one type of this process uses a spinning band of Teflon. One setup for using this technique is called the Perkin triangle, which can be used when air-sensitive compounds are subjected to the "vacuum" type of this. One technique for performing this can use a Vigreaux column, or the cheaper Liebeg condenser. Many types of this process do not work with deviants from Raoult's Law, or azeotropes. For 10 points, name this method of separating mixtures based on differences in volatilities, which has a "fractional" type.;;distillation;;
Literature;;One episode in this novel sees a man decide to stop praying after he bonks his nose on the ground and precious gems fall out of it.  The protagonist's grandparents met because he was her doctor, but he was only allowed to see various parts of her body through a sheet with a small hole cut in it. The protagonist's wife is referred to as a "dung princess," and another character married to Wee Willie Winkie dies after childbirth. Mary Pereira causes the central child-swapping in this work, which includes characters like William Methwold, Aadam Aziz, and the Brass Monkey.  For 10 points, name this novel about Saleem Sinai, who was born at the title hour, by Salman Rushdie.;;Midnight's Children;;
United States History;;As a lawyer, this politician argued on behalf of the Second Bank of the U.S. in the Supreme Court case Osborn v. U.S. He pierced John Randolph's coat in a duel, and he used Friedrich List's ideas to develop his protectionist economic system. This man finished fourth in an election year that saw William Crawford earn votes despite suffering a debilitating stroke, and he swung the House of Representatives to John Quincy Adams over Andrew Jackson in a move that lead to his appointment as Secretary of State in the "Corrupt Bargain". For 10 points, name this man known as the "Great Compromiser," a longtime Kentucky senator behind the Compromise of 1850.;;(Henry) Clay;;
Religion/Mythology;;One realm associated with this figure is generally believed to be the planet Jupiter, and was called Nibiru. His chariot was drawn by four horses named Trampler, Haste, Pitiless, and Killer, and this figure's father led Mummu by a nose-rope just before his birth. He built a palace called Esharra, and his weapons include the Abuba, Imhullu, and a net that Anu gave him. This figure killed Kingu, whose blood Ninhursag used to create the first human. His father is a water deity called Ea, and he earned the Tablets of Destiny after killing a dragon that represented the sea.  For 10 points, name this patron god of Babylon, the slayer of Tiamat.;;Marduk|Bel;;
Literature;;The protagonist of this work earns a pile in a loaning business started with principle won from an essay contest.  The protagonist was once beaten with a stump when he claimed that Byron was better than Tennyson, and gets in a long debate with the Master of Studies over using the word "tundish" instead of "funnel". This work includes an argument in which Mr. Casey claims to have hocked a tobacco-laced loogey in the face of a Catholic, much to Dante Riordan's chagrin.  Its protagonist is spurred to holiness by Father Arnall's hellish sermon, and it begins with a story about a "moocow" and "Baby Tuckoo". For 10 points, name this work about Stephen Dedalus, by James Joyce.;;(A) Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man;;
World History;;Like another polity under Margaret, this polity was harassed by the pesky Likedeelers, who arose from the defeated Victual Brothers. This polity acquired a London steelyard in a deal brokered with Henry IV at Utrecht. It fought a war with the Netherlands that ended when Christopher of Batavia crushed a peasant uprising, leading to the Treaty of Copenhagen. It set up posts known as kontors, and this polity captured Visby, which led to the signing of the Treaty of Stralsund with Valdemar IV, granting it fifteen percent of Denmark's shipping profits. For 10 points, name this northern European trading alliance.;;(the) Hanseatic League|Hansa;;
Art;;One of the figures at the left of this painting stares at the title figure while clutching a large vase. The central figure's bare foot pokes out from behind some blue satin in front of a green pillow stacked atop a red pillow in the bottom center of this work. A bare-chested, toga-clad man unrolls a scroll in the bottom right, and he stands next to a single white column. The central female rests her hand on her breast in front of her brown braided ponytail, and is looking down at an enormous baby that is sprawled out across her lap. For 10 points, name this work by Parmigianino that depicts the infant Christ held by a lengthily-trunked Mary.;;Madonna of the Long Neck|Madonna with the Long Neck;;Madonna dal Collo Longo
Philosophy;;Henri Bergson wrote a dissertation on this man's "Conception of Place," and Porphyry penned the Isogage, a commentary on one of this man's works. Roger Bacon's Opus Major and Opus Minor criticized this man, and he wrote a work that states that young men are not well-suited to listen to discussions of right and wrong.  Another of his works defines nature as a principle of change, while another contrasts the theories of Hippodemus and Plato. He also wrote a work that emphasizes plot and claims that recognition is the key to producing catharsis. For 10 points, name this philosopher of the Nichomachean Ethics, Physics, Politics, and Poetics.;;Aristotle;;
World History;;Henry Knighton's chronicle provides a harsh primary source view of this group, who were the namesake of a "pit" of corpses in Thorpe Wood. John Scrivener was one of this group's leaders, and Thomas Harding was executed for his involvement with them. This group was targeted for extermination when Sir John Oldcastle used its ideals as support for a rebellion against Henry V, and one offshoot of this group petitioned Parliament with the "Twelve Conclusions," which were posted on the door's of St. Paul's. For 10 points, name this group that called for the reform of the Catholic Church in Britain, led by John Wycliffe.;;Lollard(s);;Wycliffite(s)
Physics;;Laszlo Tisza proposed a model to explain the first instance of this phenomenon. One material that exhibits this property has a curiously negative-sloping liquid-solid line on a phase diagram, and therefore can undergo Pomeranchuk cooling. Substances with this property can produce a Rollin film, and one model to explain this property posits an excitation that forms a roton. Quantum soundwaves remove internal resistance to movement in a model of this property postulated by Lev Landau, who proposed that it takes place below the "lambda point". For 10 points, name this property exhibited by certain Helium isotopes that occurs when all viscosity vanishes.;;superfluid(ity);;
Pop Culture;;This is the surname of the Dodge Viper-driving alter-ego of Sherman Klump in the Eddie Murphy vehicle The Nutty Professor. Another character with this surname frequently masturbates with a lightsaber, and takes her surname from a Teresa Graves blaxploitation film entitled Get Christie this surname!.  One family with this surname has produced an Oregon Athletic Hall of Famer named Stan, a man co-credited with writing "Fun, Fun, Fun" named Mike, and a fifth overall NBA pick who was traded from the Grizzlies for O.J. Mayo. For 10 points, name this surname shared by Drawn Together's Foxxy and former UCLA star forward Kevin.;;Love;;
Earth Science;;In certain situations, the Ergun and Forchheimer expressions effectively model these entities, and the Richards equation can model transport within them. The confined type lies completely within the vadose zone, and their yield per unit decline in hydraulic head is known as "storativity". Sodium intrusion is a common problem in these entities if they are located in coastal areas. Massive examples in the U.S. include the Mahomet and the Ogallala ones, and when these entities meet the surface, artesian wells form. For 10 points, name these porous rocks that contain underground water reservoirs.;;aquifer(s);;
Music;;Act I of this opera sees a man standing watch keep from falling asleep by singing a ditty about "my girl," who would "like the trumpery" of storms. One aria translates as "Will that day" and sees Erik pine for his lost love, who is introduced in a scene that sees a chorus of spinners sing "Spin, spin fair maiden". One character proposes a marriage to his daughter in the aria "May you my child," and the title character tells of his fate in the aria "Die Frist ist um". Daland offers his daughter Senta to the title character of this opera, who is cursed to spend seven years at a time at sea. For 10 points, name this opera about the title ghost-sailor, by Richard Wagner.;;(The) Flying Dutchman|(Der) fliegende Hollander;;
Sociology;;This man argued that labor leaders are appeased by "bread and butter" policies, and thus work with business leaders in his The New Men of Power. One of his works was based on conversations he had with Che Guevara and Fidel Castro, while another attempted to reform his discipline to be more social and personal. This author of Listen Yankee and The Sociological Imagination discussed the "salesmanship mentality" that causes alienation in a work about "The American Middle Classes," and he detailed the relationships between the military, corporate leaders, and politicians in another. For 10 points, name this American sociologist who wrote White Collar and The Power Elite.;;(Charles) (Wright) Mills;;
World History;;This man allegedly was buried in a coffin of pure ivory in Gur-e Amir, and his legendary calligrapher Omar Aqta supposedly wrote the entire Quran on a ring. His grandson Shah Rokh tried to reunite his empire, which was expanded when he beat Mahmud Tughluq at the Second Battle of Panipat. He kidnapped the artisans of Damascus and fought the Knights of Rhodes at Smyrna, and he supported Tokhtamysh against Russia. Also conducting a notorious sacking of Dehli, for 10 points, name this fourteenth century Turkic conqueror, noted for constructing giant-ass pyramids of human skulls, and for being crippled.;;Tamerlane|Timur (the) (Lame)|(Emir) Timur;;
Literature;;The Two Admirers attempt to get a peek at the title character in this man's work The Leader, and he wrote a work in which Jack and Roberta are ordered to go to "the hatching," The Future is in Eggs. One of his works sees the title character lure victims to their drowning death by offering to show them "A picture of the colonel". In addition to The Killer, one of his plays deals with the dinner party conversations between the Fire Chief and the title character, who always wears her hair in the same style, while another features Berenger, who refuses to turn into the title beast. For 10 points, name this absurdist playwright who wrote The Bald Soprano and Rhinoceros.;;(Eugene) Ionesco;;
Religion/Mythology;;This belief teaches that the Earth and moon split apart sometime after the creation, which occurred at least 76 trillion years ago, and it also asserts that Earth was once home to a supercontinent simply called "Asia". It holds that a passage in Ezekiel about a wheel "gleaming of beryl" is actually describing the "Mother Plane," a spaceship that cost fifteen billion dollars in gold to construct. This religion's creation story holds that 6,000 years ago, a scientist named Dr. Yakub grafted a light race into existence, and its theology also claims that God appeared in July 1930 to W. Fard Muhammad. For 10 points, name this offshoot of a major monotheistic religion, led by Louis Farrakhan.;;(the) Nation of Islam|Ummah al-Islamu;;NOI
Geography;;This state is home to Don Knacht's backyard island castle in its fine town of Junction City, while its namesake "Cosmosphere" and underground salt museum are both found in this state's city of Hutchinson. This state's largest city is home to an independent minor league baseball team called the Wingnuts, and Forts Larned and Scott are located in this state. Its largest city's suburbs include Derby, El Dorado, and Maize, and that city includes the Quaker-aligned Friends University. The Missouri River forms a few miles of this state's border with Missouri, and some of its cities include Lawrence and Lecompton. For 10 points, name this state, home of Wichita and Topeka.;;Kansas;;
Literature;;One chapter of this novel takes on two opposing voices, one of which praises Sir Ernest Oppenheimer and another which regrets that Beresford has such great oratory skills. John Harrison, who is Mary's brother, is left a sizable check for his boy's club, while its protagonist leaves Mrs. Lithebe's house after Johannes Pafuri and Matthew are acquitted for lack of evidence. Its plot had been set in motion after Theophilus Msimangu sent a letter revealing that Gertrude was ill, causing its protagonist to discover that Absalom had shot Arthur Jarvis. As a result, Reverend Stephen Kumalo's son is hanged at the conclusion of, for 10 points, which novel by Alan Paton?;;Cry(,) the Beloved Country;;
Religion/Mythology;;Alopen wrote a series of these texts with titles like Cause, Effect, and Salvation that are collectively known as the "Lost" ones of Jesus.  One of these texts claims that even four lines of it incorporated into one's sabhana will lead to blessing, and takes the form of a dialogue between Subhuti and another person.  Another of these texts tells a story about a man who convinces his children to leave a burning house by bribing them with toys, illustrating upaya, or "expedient means," and claims that the Bodhisattva must strive for Buddhic wisdom.  For 10 points, identify these religious texts, such as the Mahayana Diamond and Lotus ones, as well as the Kama one, a love manual.;;sutra(s);;
World History;;An uprising in this locale against Joseph Radetzky was known as this city's "Five Days".  The Diet of Roncaglia was called after a defeat of this city, though forces from here would later win the Battle of Legnano.  The Treaty of Campo Formio recognized it as capital of the new Cisalpine Republic under Napoleon.  Charles VIII of France was encouraged to invade Italy by a ruler of this city whose swarthy complexion resulted in him being called "Il Moro," and it was home to a coalition that fought Frederick Barbarossa, the Lombard League.  For 10 points, name this city whose Duchy was established by the Visconti family and later ruled by Sforza family.;;Milan;;
Literature;;One character in this work tells a story about being courted by Edgar Atkins Teagarden from Jasper, Georgia, and every Saturday, he would bring her a watermelon with his initials carved into it, while dining at "The Tower," which is run by Red Sammy Butts, who declares the title phrase. A story about a house with a secret panel leads to an incident where Pitty Sing leaps out of her basket and lands on Bailey's shoulder. Hiram and Bobby Lee take the children John Wesley and June Starr into the woods despite the pleas of the grandmother, in, for 10 points, this short story about a family that is murdered by the Misfit, written by Flannery O'Connor.;;(A) Good Man is Hard to Find;;
Noncomputational Math;;In an April fool's column, Martin Gardner claimed that "e to the pi radical 163" is one of these. The Eisenstein ones are proper supersets that are extended with complex numbers. They form an Abelian group when endowed with addition and a commutative ring when endowed with addition and multiplication, but they are not a field, as they lack multiplicative inverses. As a set, they have cardinality "aleph 0", although they cannot be enumerated monotonically. The floor and ceiling functions yield, for 10 points, what type or numbers represented with a bold "Z," the set that is exactly the union of the natural numbers, their additive inverses, and zero.;;integer(s);;
Religion/Mythology;;Pausanias claimed that this figure was raised by either Temenos or by the daughters of Asterion, and she was once seduced on the mountain of Thornax. She once sent a plague to ravage Aegina, after which the island's ants were turned into men. She also ordered Tethys to prevent Ursa Major and Minor from dropping below the horizon, as she held a grudge against Callisto. This cow-eyed deity also turned Lamia into a child-eating monster and ordered Argus to guard Io, and her children with her husband include Hebe and Ares. The peacock is sacred to, for 10 points, which daughter of Cronus and Rhea, the wife of Zeus and queen of the Greek gods?;;Hera;;Juno
Geography;;This city's shopping district is located south of Folkungagatan and is cleverly called "SoFo," and its Normmalm district houses its Royal Opera House. An obelisk designed by Jan Louis Desprez is found on Slottsbacken street, which also houses the Royal Palace designed by Tessin. Home to the Moderna Museet, it is the namesake of a large archipelago containing Beckholmen and Vaxholm. The Riddarfjarden bay juts into this largest city located near Lake Malaren, which also overlooks the Baltic Sea. Often called "Venice of the North," for 10 points, identify this city home to the annual Nobel Prize banquet and capital of Sweden.;;Stockholm;;
United States History;;This man's presidency saw the establishment of the Naval Academy at Annapolis by his first Navy Secretary, George Bancroft.  He was nominated with the help of Robert Walker, his future Treasury Secretary and tariff namesake, who reinstated the need for support of two-thirds of convention delegates.  He was thus able to win the nomination over James Buchanan, who became his Secretary of State, as well as pre-convention favorite Martin Van Buren.  He then won the general election over Henry Clay.  For 10 points, name this man whose term saw the signing of the Oregon Treaty and the Treaty of Guadeloupe Hidalgo, a "dark horse" who was elected in 1844.;;(James) (Knox) Polk;;
Art;;A man in armor stands in a boat kissing a naked woman in his Deliverance of Arsinoe. Angels radiate out in circular rows in his largest painting, Paradise, which was executed with help from his son Domenico, and a figure sucks at a woman's breast, causing stars to fly out, in his Origin of the Milky Way. He painted the ceiling of Scuola di San Rocco, and St. Mark descends from the sky in an orange cape in his Miracle of the Slave. Another of his works is housed in the San Giorgio Maggiore and depicts angels circling a chandelier and depicts the title act on a diagonal axis. For 10 points, name this late Renaissance painter of The Last Supper whose name means "little dyer".;;Tintoretto|(Jacopo) Robusti;;
Philosophy;;Nelson Goodman created two portmanteaux words that describe these entities in his article "Fact, Fiction, and Forecast," and George Berkeley argued that these entities are the "proper and immediate objects of sight... are not without the mind" in his Essay Towards a New Theory of Vision. John Locke used the example of light falling on porphyry to demonstrate how these entities are secondary qualities in his Essay Concerning Human Understanding, and a blank in their spectrum was offered by Hume as a counterexample to his "Copy Principle". For 10 points, name these entities, the subject of a theoretical treatise by Goethe, examples of which include red, and blue.;;color(s);;
Noncomputational Math;;This man proposed a number system that used 2i as a base, and he wrote a paper about the evolution of refrains from rich ballads entitled "The Complexity of Songs". This primary developer of the MMIX em-mix architecture names a string-searching algorithm with Morris and Pratt, and his solution to the exact cover problem is known as "Algorithm X". He developed a method of displaying repeated exponentiation called his namesake "up-arrow notation," and he sends reward checks for errors found in his books. For 10 points, name this "father of algorithm analysis" and developer of the typesetting language TeX tek, the author of The Art of Computer Programming.;;(Donald) (Ervin) Knuth;;
Pop Culture;;On this show, Joel Murray portrayed a character who plays Mozart on his pants zipper, Freddy Rumsen. The office of a Robert Morse-portrayed character on this show contains a print of The Dream of the Fisherman's Wife, and that character once advised the protagonist not to fire a character who envied Ken Cosgrove's writing ability, Pete Campbell. It used The Decemberists' The Infanta in the opening of one episode, which showed Betty, Joan, and Peggy dressing for their days as housewife, office manager, and copy writer. For 10 points, name this AMC drama set in the 60s, which stars Jon Hamm as Don Draper, an employee at the Madison Avenue ad firm Sterling Cooper.;;Mad Men;;
World History;;Matthew Marryott inspired an alteration to them contained in Knatchbull's Act, while the creation of Select Vestries was allowed by ones named for William Sturges Bourne.  One of them contained the so-called "bastardly clause", and books on them were written by Beatrice and Sydney Webb.  An amendment to one of them created the Speenhamland system, and they were replaced by the Local Government Act of 1929.  The Old one was passed under Elizabeth I, while the New one of 1834 ended outdoor relief and led to a scandal at Andover, one of many workhouses.  For 10 points, name this series of British laws that established a welfare state.;;Poor law(s);;workhouse(s)
Miscellaneous;;With Herve Raynaud, this man wrote about the axioms of diversity, symmetry, and positive responsiveness.  He is credited with developing the first learning-by-doing model, and he co-authored Existence of a Competitive Equilibrium for a Competitive Economy with Gerard Debreu.  A type of risk aversion is named after Pratt and this man, and he developed a result similar to the Gibbard-Satterthwaite theorem which relies on independence of irrelevant alternatives and non-dictatorship.  For 10 points, name this author of Social Choice and Individual Values, who stated that some voting systems cannot fairly rank candidates in his namesake "Impossibility Theorem".;;(Kenneth) Arrow;;
Chemistry;;In the Corey-Bakshi-Shibata catalyst, an atom of it is attached to a pyrrole ring, an oxygen atom, and a toluene group. This element's acids are combined with amines and ketones in the Petasis reaction and in combining alkyl halides through the Suzuki coupling. Complexes containing it are called sido or arachno according to Wade's rules, and a more famous reaction using it is sometimes named for Herbert Brown. Mined from the ore Uletite, its silicate was once used in making hard glass for manufacturing laboratory equipment. For 10 points, name this element that participates in an anti-markonikov addition reaction to alkenes, with atomic number 5 and symbol B.;;Boron;;
Literature;;The protagonist of this novel created a richly patterned tapestry called Maia, a discourse on the theme of Mind and Art ranked with Schiller's Simple and Sentimental Poetry. Later, that protagonist drinks a glass of pomegranate juice and soda water while watching musicians perform in the gardens. He remains in the Hôtel des Bains, even after his bags have returned from being mistakenly sent to Como, and he follows a governess around the title locale before watching his love suffer injury from Jaschiu. The protagonist becomes enraptured with the Polish boy Tadzio.  For 10 points, name this novel about Gustave von Aschenbach's demise in Italy, by Thomas Mann.;;Death in Venice|(Der) Tod in Venedig;;
Music;;The last movement of the third one was originally marked "Allegro gurriero" before being changed to "Allegro Vivacissimo". The last movement of the fourth one incorporates a tarantella and a noted  Saltarello Presto, while another one was composed following a visit to Holyrood. The second containing three orchestral movements followed by nine for soloists is titled "Lobesgang". The strings play the "Dresden Amen" in one written to celebrate the anniversary of Luther's Augsburg Confession, while another one was written during a trip that also inspired the Hebrides Overture. For 10 points, name these compositions which include the Reformation, Scottish, and Italian.;;symphonies (of) (Felix) Mendelssohn|(Felix) Mendelssohn's symphonies;;
World History;;This dynasty saw a revolt by black slaves called the Zanj which was checked by al-Muwaffak. They received support from converts to Islam called the mawlas, and one general who served this dynasty formed the rival Tahirid dynasty in Khorasan. One ruler from this dynasty promoted the unpopular Mu'tazilist doctrine, and the Bamarkids rose in prominence during this dynasty. It came to power after a victory over Marwan II at the Battle of the Zab, and it shifted its capital from Damascus to Baghdad in 762. For 10 points, identify this Caliphate that saw its end during Hulagu Khan's conquest of 1258, and which succeeded the Umayyad dynasty.;;Abbasid (dynasty|caliphate);;
Biology;;One variant phenotype of this group is known as the "weak D". One nomenclature for identifying it was developed by Fisher and Race, which uses the letters c, d, and e to mark its alleles, while an older nomenclature is named for Weiner. Phillip Levine connected this set of factors to a condition that is currently prevented by the drug Rhogam, known as erythroblastosis fetalis or hemolytic disease of the newborn, in which a mother produces antibodies to this factor. Originally discovered in a namesake species of monkey, for 10 points, name this blood group that is usually notated by a plus or minus when noting one's blood type.;;Rh (blood) (group)|Rhesus (factor);;
Literature;;The title character of one of his poems sends "his Train / To take a House in Warwick Lane" before trying to seize the title character for "Pluto's hall". In addition to "Death and Daphne," he described man as "a topsy-turvy creature" in "A Meditation upon a Broomstick". He foretold the death of John Partridge in Prediction for the Ensuing Year by Isaac Bickerstaff, argued against poorly minted copper coinage in The Drapier's Letters, and wrote about the brothers Jack, Peter, and Martin, who each inherit a coat in The Tale of a Tub. For 10 points, name this author of "A Modest Proposal" who described the lands of Brobdingnag and Laputa in Gulliver's Travels.;;(Jonathan) Swift;;
Physics;;In 1975, Vujanovic extended Noether's theorem to this type of system, and the presence of a term proportional to the quantity "x-squared minus one" results in the Van der Pol oscillator not being this type of system.  These systems have Hamiltonians that do not explicitly depend on time, and Helmholtz decomposition shows that one negative term can represent this type of field. Fields of this type have no curl, and can be described as the gradient of a scalar potential.  For 10 points, identify this adjective which refers to systems in which the amount of work done is independent of the path, and describes fields such as the gravitational and electric fields in which no energy is lost.;;conservative;;
Philosophy;;This thinker asked "what is it to dwell"? in "Building, Dwelling, Thinking" and considered the effects of a "destitute time" on the works of Rilke in "What Are Poets For"?, both of which appear in his Poetry, Language, Thought.  He discussed the path provided by the Greek word philosophia in What is Philosophy? and also wrote about Kant and the Problem of Metaphysics, though he is better  known for a work which introduced ontological hermeneutics and discussed a concept related to presence in the world, dasein.  For 10 points, name this Nazi-loving author of Being and Time.;;(Martin) Heidegger;;
Pop Culture;;Acts of Gord once depicted one of these devices stating "This is all I am good for," being used as a doorstop. The RANDnet online service was established for one add-on to this system, a Disk Drive that featured such games as Doshin the Giant. Sports games for this system included Mike Piazza's Strike Zone, as well as one which featured such teams as the "Foxboro Patriots". Its exclusive games included the original BattleTanx and Blast Corps, as well games like Conker's Bad Fur Day and the first two Banjo-Kazooie games. For 10 points, identify this console, the home to such first-person shooters as Perfect Dark and GoldenEye 007, the successor to the SNES.;;(the) Nintendo 64|N64|N(intendo) Roku Ju Yon;;
Physics;;For elements with low atomic numbers, the Auger process competes with the fluorescence that is characteristic of this process. Potassium-argon dating methods are valuable since all of the argon arises from potassium by this radioactive transition rather than chemically. The lighter isotopes of transition metals, such as silver-105, tend to decay by this process. Positron emission competes with this process, which results in neutron and a neutrino, the latter of which gets ejected. Despite the change in atomic number, the total number of nucleons is conserved. For 10 points, name this process that sees the nucleus taking a namesake negatively charged particle from the K shell.;;electron capture;;K(-)capture
Miscellaneous;;This person's time spent assisting Sobhuza II of Swaziland led to a work on race relations in Africa edited posthumously by Phyllis Kaberry as The Dynamics of Culture Change.  This author wrote an essay discussing belief in ancestral spirits who impregnate bathing women, "Baloma," which appears in a collection with "Magic, Science, and Religion".  This person founded a school of anthropology that Radcliffe-Brown would extend to a "structural" variety, functionalism.  His Coral Gardens and their Magic draws on his experience in the Trobriand Islands, while his most famous book discusses the Kula ring.  For 10 points, name this author of Argonauts of the Western Pacific.;;(Bronislaw) Malinowski;;
Religion/Mythology;;One of this figure's offspring attacked Leto or Artemis in Panopaeus, but was killed and sent to Tartarus, where snakes devoured his liver; that son of this deity was Tityus. Another of this deity's sons was conceived with Aether; Thaumas, Ceto, and Phorcys were among the sons of this goddess and that son Pontus. The dragon Campe guarded other offspring of this goddess in Tartarus, but this goddess's grandson later released those sons, the Hecatonchires and the Cyclopes. She created an adamantine sickle to aid her grandson in overthrowing her most famous son, Cronus. For 10 points, identify this daughter of Chaos and mother of the titans, the Greek goddess of the Earth.;;Gaia|Gaea|Ge(a);;
Music;;In this opera the audience is asked to consider actors' "souls since we are men of flesh and bone" and "rather than our poor costumes" in the prologue "Si Puo"? In "Stridono lassu," the soprano yearns for the freedom of birds, so she could pursue her romance with Silvio, and after his advances are driven off with a whip Tonio eavesdrops on a plan to elope. The tenor laments that he must "put on the costume" and "Laugh . . . though his love is broken" in the aria "Vesti la Giubba" before he appears in a play about Colombina's affair with Arlecchino. Nedda is stabbed by her husband Canio, at the end of, for 10 points, this opera titled after clowns, by Leoncavallo.;;(I) Pagliacci;;(The) Clowns
World History;;This man was the governor of the Kaffa region during his grandfather's reign, and he banished the concubine Gulbehar from his kingdom. He signed the Peace of Amasia with Tahmasp, who kept control of Tabriz, though late in his life, he lost a campaign against the Knights of St. John in Malta. He employed Sinan as the chief architect, married Roxelana, and was often called "kanuni". Though his navy led by Barbarossa suffered heavy losses in his capture of Rhodes, he defeated Louis II in the 1526 Battle of Mohacs, but he failed in his siege of Vienna. The son of Selim the Grim, for 10 points, name this ruler of the Ottoman Empire who is often called "the magnificent".;;Suleiman I (the) (Magnificent)|Suleiman (the) Lawgiver;;Suleiman (the) Magnificent|Suleiman Kanuni
Literature;;He wrote about an artist hired to paint a marriage portrait, who realizes that Walter Ludlow will attack Elinor in "The Prophetic Pictures". In one of his stories, Annie Hovenden's child crushes the mechanical butterfly created by Owen Warland, and in another Mr. Medbourne, Mr. Gascoigne, and widow Wycherly temporarily regain their youth. Along with "The Artist of the Beautiful" and "Dr. Heidegger's Experiment," he told of Elizabeth, who breaks her engagement to Parson Hooper because he wears a shroud. For 10 points, name this author of "The Minister's Black Veil," who wrote about a man who sees his wife Faith meet the Devil in "Young Goodman Brown".;;(Nathaniel) Hawthorne;;
World History;;This man took advantage of an Ottoman siege of Chocim to win a war featuring battles like Dirshau and Mewe, and he inherited the throne in the middle of the Kalmark War.  He signed the Truce of Altmark with Sigismund III, who his father had overthrown, and his greatest victory came with the help of Lennart Torstenson and involved an encirclement of Pappenheim.  The son of Charles IX, he used combined arms tactics to win battles like the Lech and Breitenfeld, where he defeated the Catholics.  For 10 points, name this Lutheran ruler who died at the Battle of Lutzen, a king of Sweden known as the "Lion of the North".;;Gustavus (II) Adolphus|Gustav (II) Adolf;;
Art;;This artist created the Fountain of the Bees for the Barberini family and sculpted busts like Damned Soul and Blessed Soul. His works in the Galleria Borghese include one that depicts the three title figures fleeing from Troy, and one that depicts a woman turning into a tree. In addition to Aeneas, Anchises, and Ascanius and Apollo and Daphne, he designed the oval church of Sant'Andrea al Quirinale. He sculpted a work in the Piazza Navona which includes representations of the Nile and the Ganges and one which shows an angel pointing a spear at the title figure. For 10 points, name this Italian sculptor of The Fountain of the Four Rivers and The Ecstacy of Saint Theresa.;;(Gianlorenzo) Bernini|(Giovanni) (Lorenzo) Bernini;;
Biology;;The Mitsuda test describes of the ability of a body to participate in a cell mediated immune response against this disease, and preparations named for Dharmendra are used in that test. Lucio's name is appended to an acute form of it. It can be classified into paucibacillary and mutlibacillary based upon skin smear results, and the tuberculoid form of it results in localized skin lesions. Armadillos also harbor its causative agent, and it is sometimes named for Hansen. Resulting in skin lesions and nerve damage, for 10 points, name this disease which, like tuberculosis, is caused by a mycobacterium, and is also associated with certain "colonies" where its patients were isolated.;;leprosy;;Hansen('s) (disease)
Literature;;He attends a hunting party which ends early when Geoffrey Clouston accidentally shoots James, a sailor who was stalking this man after he heard a prostitute refer to him as "Prince Charming". His mother Margaret of Devereux dies of grief after his grandfather Lord Kelso has his father murdered in a duel, and he blackmails the chemist Alan Campbell to help dispose of a body, and his philosophy is shaped by a "yellow book" given to him by Lord Wotton. For 10 points, name this character, who forsakes the actress Sibyl Vane after being a model for painter Basil Hallward in a novel by Oscar Wilde, and has a namesake "picture" that ages in his place.;;Dorian Gray;;
Music;;This composer began one work with the opening dedication, "To the City of Venice, in praise of its Patron Saint, the Blessed Mark, Apostle" in Canticum Sacrum. Furbo performs a fake resurrection to reignite Pimpinella's devotion for the title character of one of his ballets, and a double fugue starting in the oboes begins the second movement of a work, which has each movement dedicated to one of the hortatory virtues. Along with Pulcinella and Symphony of Psalms, one of his works features the "Procession of the Sage" and "The Evocation of the Ancestors," and begins with a noted bassoon solo.  For 10 points, name this composer of Petrushka and The Rite of Spring.;;(Igor) (Fyodorovich) Stravinsky;;
Literature;;One work by this man opens by describing "seafarers" who "tell of the Eastern isle of bliss". In another poem by this man, the sounds of a flute on a spring night inspire recollections of the gardens of home.  In a third work, he noted that he was glad to "make the moon and my shadow into friends". The addressee of another of his works went to "the river of swirling eddies" when the title figure was sixteen, and he asked "Which was the real-the butterfly or the man"? in "Chuang Tzu and the Butterfly". Mahler adapted his Chinese Flute into Das Lied von der Erde. For 10 points, name this Tang Dynasty poet of "The River Merchant's Wife," a close friend to fellow poet Du Fu.;;Li Po|Li Bai|Li Bo|Li Tai-bo|Rihaku (too);;
Chemistry;;Allan Franklin reinterpreted this experiment's data in response to accusations of selective result reporting by Gerard Horton, and it was also questioned by Felix Ehrenhaft.  One of its performers later verified Einstein's theory of the photoelectric effect, and its results were low by about one percent due to an incorrect value for the viscosity of air.  Parallel voltage plates created a uniform electric field and the voltage was adjusted to the level necessary to cause the particle to suspend in air.  For 10 points, name this 1909 experiment which measured the charge of the electron, performed by Robert Millikan.;;(the) (Fletcher)(-)(Millikan) oil-drop (experiment);;
World History;;While serving as Chancellor of the Exchequer  this man reset the ten year rule and caused a general strike in support of coal miners when he enacted a return to the gold standard.  He was involved in a scandal surrounding the Sidney Street Shootings as Home Secretary, and he supported close cooperation with the United States through the "special relationship".  During World War I he was disgraced for his role in the Gallipoli Campaign as First Lord of the Admiralty, and he won a Nobel Prize in Literature in part for a history of World War II.  For 10 points, name this Prime Minister who succeeded Neville Chamberlain.;;(Sir) (Winston) (Leonard) (Spencer-)Churchill;;
Religion/Mythology;;In one story, he made the bitter waters at Marah sweet by throwing in a tree that God showed to him. During one battle, the Amalekites were vulnerable as long as his hands remained in the air, prompting two other men to hold up his arms until the sun went down. At the request of God, he once cast his staff to the ground, causing it to become a snake, a feat later replicated by his older brother. The younger son of Amram and Jochebed and the brother of Miriam, he brought a variety of plagues on the land of Egypt to convince the pharaoh to release the Israelites. For 10 points, name this brother of Aaron who received the Ten Commandments from God on Mount Sinai.;;Moses|Moyses|Moshe|Musa;;
Geography;;The Kasungu National Park is located on this country's western border, and the Chizumulu and Likoma islands belong to it. This country's major primary language is sometimes called Chewa, while Tumbuka and Yao are each spoken by one million people in this country. The Zomba plateau is located to this country's south, and the Shire River, which empties into the Zambezi, flows north of its economic center of Blantyre. Also consisting of Lake Malombe, a lake named for it borders Mozambique and Tanzania. Previously called Nyasaland, for 10 points, name this country, a southeast African nation that is the ghost-rat capital of the world, with political capital at Lilongwe.;;(the) (Republic) (of) Malawi;;Nyasaland
United States History;;The decision in this case claimed that the character of an act depends on its circumstances, citing Aikens v. Wisconsin.  The precedent established by this case was altered in the case whose dissent introduced the marketplace of ideas, Abrams v. U.S., and was officially established in Brandenburg v. Ohio after being repeatedly cited by Louis Brandeis.  Its plaintiff, a general secretary of the Socialist party, was charged with violating the Espionage Act for distributing anti-draft pamphlets.  For 10 points, name this 1919 Supreme Court case with a majority opinion by Oliver Wendell Holmes that placed limitations on the First Amendment with the "clear and present danger" test.;;Schenck (v.) (United) (States)|(United) (States) (v.) Schenck|Schenck (v.) (U.S.);;
Noncomputational Math;;There exists a real number A such that the floor of the quantity A to the three to the n gives one of these numbers for every positive integer n according to Mills' Theorem. Two to the quantity p minus one is congruent to one modulo p squared is satisfied by the Weifrich type of these. The Lucas-Lehmer Test is used to determine if a number fits a specific category of these and every even number can be written as the sum of two of these according to Goldbach's conjecture. Euclid showed that there are infinitely many of, for 10 points, what type positive integers, with two being the smallest member, which are only divisible by one and themselves.;;prime (numbers);;Mills (theorem)
Literature;;In one of this author's stories, Ruby Fischer reads an article about a woman of the same name, who is murdered by her husband.  In another story, Phoenix Jackson buys medicine for her grandson. Robbie leaves her husband George after he jumps in front of a train to save a mentally handicapped nephew in her novel about the wedding of Troy Flavin and Dabney Fairchild. "A Piece of News" and "A Worn Path" are found in her collection A Curtain of Green, while Wanda Fay Chisom enrages Laurel McKelva Hand, who returns to Mount Salus to attend the funeral of her father in another book. For 10 points, name this author of Delta Wedding and The Optimist's Daughter.;;(Eudora) Welty;;
Literature;;The Dead Man and the Dead Woman are invited by Aroni to appear at the Gathering of the Tribes in this man's A Dance of the Forests, and his other works include the chaotic Requiem for a Futurologist. He wrote poems based on Gulliver's Travels, Ulysses, and Hamlet in his collection A Shuttle in the Crypt, produced during the same prison stay as his memoir The Man Died. One work by this man describes the love triangle between Lakunle, Baroka, and Sidi, while in another, Simon Pilkings orders Sergeant Amusa to prevent the ritual suicide of Elesin Oba. For 10 points, identify this Nigerian playwright, the author of The Lion and the Jewel and Death and the King's Horseman.;;(Akinwande) (Oluwole) (Wole) Soyinka;;
Pop Culture;;Garon Michael donned one to play drums to Phil Collins's In the Air Tonight in a Cadbury commercial.  Fester Bestertester was pummeled by a certain animal in Don Martin's Don Martin Bounces Back! after he mocked the January 31st national holiday for them. One was allegedly used as a disguise by Theo Epstein when he resigned as Red Sox GM in 2005, and a study by Simons and Chabris that had people count the number of times a basketball was passed showed that subjects would fail to see a person dressed in one because of inattentional blindness. For 10 points, name these full-bodied costumes that allow wearers to portray a certain kind of ape.;;gorilla suit(s);;
Literature;;One character in this novel is blackmailed by a man named John Barsad.  Jerry Cruncher nicknames himself "resurrection man" because he steals fresh corpses to sell to medical students. One character is discovered spending nine straight days making shoes in a fit of temporary insanity by Jarvis Lorry, who works for Tellson's Bank. That character was unjustly imprisoned for eighteen years because he refused to cover up St. Evremonde Brothers' rape, and Miss Pross shoots Madame Defarge to protect the secrecy of Lucie Manette's escape from Paris. For 10 points, name this novel in which Sydney Carton takes the place of the condemned Charles Darnay by Charles Dickens.;;(A) Tale of Two Cities;;
Astronomy;;Their spectra are similar to those of Seyfert Galaxies, and the BL Lac objects were once classified as a type of these. The spectra of many of these objects contain a series of absorption lines at the Lyman alpha transition wavelengths. 3C 273 was the first of these objects discovered by Sandage and Mathews in the Virgo cluster, and its spectrum indicated its redshift implied it had 90% of the velocity of light. Some of these objects have been measured to be as far away as thirteen billion light years. For 10 points, name these objects, believed to be an accretion disk powered by a supermassive black hole, and the oldest, farthest, and brightest objects detected in the night sky.;;Quasar|Quasi Stellar (Object)|Quasi Stellar (Radio) (Source);;AGN|active galactic nucleus
United States History;;This group's creation was inspired by the book Stride Towards Freedom.  A speech critical of Kennedy's planned civil rights bill was given during the March on Washington by its leader, John Lewis, who also oversaw the organization of the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party for the 1964 Democratic Convention.  Initially started in Greensboro, North Carolina, it was formally organized in a conference led by Ella Baker at Shaw University.  After the Watts Riots, it began to reject civil rights legislation and was taken over by its militant branch.  For 10 points, name this civil rights organization that supported "black power" under the leadership of Stokely Carmichael.;;Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee|SNCC|Snick;;
Philosophy;;He contrasted the lifestyle of "the fleet nomads of desert lands" with the intellectual ideas of Kotzebue and Schiller in his poem "The Bedouin," and he critiqued Bruno Bauer and the Young Hegelians in a work he co-authored titled The Holy Family. During a trip to Manchester while working for a textile firm he took notes on the working class life that culminated into his first book, The Conditions of the Working Class in England in 1844, and his best known collaboration ends with the section "Private Accumulation" that talks about the "economic original sin" and critiques capitalism. For 10 points, name this philosopher, who edited Das Kapital after Karl Marx's death.;;(Friedrich) Engels;;
Physics;;The Abbe number is defined in terms of this quantity, which can be found using Cauchy's or Sellmeier's equation.  It is equal to the square root of the product of the relative permeability and the relative permittivity of the material, and metamaterials could have a negative value for this quantity.  The arctangent of the ratio between two materials' values for this gives Brewster's Angle.  It also appears in an equation that follows from Fermat's Principle, Snell's Law, and it is defined as the ratio of the speed of light in a vacuum to in a medium.  For 10 points, name this property which governs a namesake effect in which a beam of light is bent as it passes between mediums.;;Index of Refraction|Refractive Index;;
World History;;This ruler's architect Rabirius built his private residence, the Domus Augustana, and he reinstituted the Ludi Capitolini.  He celebrated a triumph over the Chati and gave himself the title Germanicus, and later he formally added the provinces of Upper and Lower Germania to the empire. This man declared himself censor for life, and his prefect Cornelius Fuscus oversaw a disastrous war with Dacia.  More notably, he recalled Agricola from Britain and after a revolt led by Saturninus, began to purge the senate.  He was assassinated in 96 CE and succeeded by Nerva.  For 10 points, name this last of the Flavian emperors, who followed his elder brother Titus.;;Domitian|(Titus) (Flavius) Domitian(us);;
Literature;;One character has a dream of a chained bear being attacked by a greyhound, and Bramimonde changes her name to Juliana at the end of this work. Ivor and Samson are among "The Twelve Peers," while the meek Thierry miraculously defeats Pinabel in a duel. King Marsile sends a tribute to save the city of Saragossa with his envoy Blancandrin, who plots with Ganelon to betray his stepson. Archbishop Turpin and Oliver are killed standing beside the title character, who "bursts both the temples of his brain" while blowing his horn Oliphant. For 10 points, the wielder of Durandal is ambushed by the Saracens in what epic poem about a paladin of Charlemagne?;;(The) Song of Roland|(La) Chanson de Roland;;
Religion/Mythology;;This figure's wife once sent a ring to his mother's handmaiden Fulla. Thor killed the dwarf Lit shortly after the giantess Hyrrokkin arrived to help with one of this god's possessions. He lived in the land of "fewest baneful runes," which is home to his hall Breidablik. He sent Draupnir back to Asgard with his brother Hermod, who'd been denied in his petition on this god's behalf by another god disguised as Thokk. This owner of Hringhorn, husband of Nanna, and father of Forseti was avenged by Vali after his death. For 10 points, identify this son of Odin and Frigg, who died after Loki tricked his blind brother Hoder into killing him with a mistletoe dart, the most beautiful of the Aesir.;;Baldur|Balder;;
Music;;This instrument is featured in the second movement of Rautavaara's Dances with the Winds. It restates the intermezzo motive for the third and last time after the flute cadenza in the Concerto for Orchestra, having ended the previous movement in a duet with the horn. Concertos written for it include a modern one by Lowell Liebermann, as well as some by Vivaldi that were originally performed on a Baroque instrument with a similar but smaller range, the sopranino recorder. Starting the fugue in Britten's A Young Person's Guide to the Orchestra, for 10 points, name this instrument that plays a famous solo in The Stars and Stripes Forever, and is often described as a small flute.;;piccolo;;
Chemistry;;Compounds studied by this technique may be mixed with mineral oil to form a nujol mull, and potassium bromide pellets can also be mixed with solid analytes in another variation. This technique is only useful with compounds that see a change in dipole moment, which is why homonuclear diatomics cannot be studied using this technique. The spectrum produced by this technique has a region unique to each molecule called the "fingerprint" region, and carbonyl containing groups have a characteristic response to it at around 1700 wavemumbers. For 10 points, name this spectroscopic technique that uses light shorter than microwaves but longer than red visible light.;;IR (Spectroscopy)|Infrared (Spectroscopy);;
Art;;In one of his works, three nude women can be seen in room with his most famous work in the background of the painting, and his series of "concert café" paintings such as At the Concert Europeen notably use the Conté crayon. He also depicted performers doing the can-can in his Le Chahut, and another painting sees a boy standing in the water with his hands near his mouth as another boy rests his legs in the water. In addition to Bathers at Asnieres, he is best known for a work depicting several people relaxing near a waterway as a woman with a large behind has a monkey on a leash. For 10 points, name this pointillist painter of Sunday Afternoon on La Grande Jatte.;;(Georges-Pierre) Seurat;;
Literature;;Two characters in this novel are shunned from their home country after they throw a newly wed couple off their sled to divert a pack of hungry wolves chasing them. The title character is enthralled by the music of the Blind D'Arnault, who plays at Mrs. Gardener's hotel, and later she avoids being raped by Wick Cutter. Lena Lingard convinces the narrator to visit the title character after she has been abandoned by her fiancée Larry Donovan, and later she marries Anton Cuzak after moving back to Nebraska. For 10 points, identify this novel in which Jim Burden describes his encounters with the Shimerda family written by Willa Cather.;;My Antonia;;
World History;;One member of this house gained hereditary lands in the Treaty of Krakow, which made him a vassal of the king of Poland.  A second member of this house replaced Alexander John Cuza and established this house's Sigmaringen branch, which ruled in Romania, and after the deposition of Isabella II, another member of this house was offered the throne of Spain but declined due to French opposition.  This house split into Swabian and Franconian branches, and its members came to prominence as Murgraves of Brandenburg.  For 10 points, name this family which included Frederick the Great and two Kaiser Wilhelms, and which ruled Prussia and the unified Germany.;;(House) (of) Hohenzollern;;
Geography;;The "Salt Pan" is a section of the Cienaga de Zapatas Park, which is located in its Matanzas province. The longest river in this country partly forms the border between the Holguin and Granma provinces after originating in the Sierra Maestra, and the chain of islands extending from its Hicasos peninsula to the Nuevitas bay is called the Sabana-Camaguey archipelago. Isla de la Juventud is located south of the Gulf of Batabano off the Caribbean coast of this country, whose cities include Pinar del Rio and Santiago. Located south of the Straits of Florida, for 10 points, identify this country whose easternmost province is Guantanamo and whose capital is Havana.;;(Republic) (of) Cuba;;
Philosophy;;This writer discussed nasal reflexes and the concept of "Hamlet the hysteric" in a series of letters written to Wilhelm Fliess.  One of his works argues that the murder of the title figure is the basis of the Jewish faith while another argues that the title structured society infringes on individual desires, leading to the title misery.  In addition to Moses and Monotheism and Civilization and its Discontents, he explored incest in primitive cultures in Totem and Taboo and discussed the concepts of id, ego, and superego in Beyond the Pleasure Principle.  For 10 points, name this writer of The Interpretation of Dreams, the founder of psychoanalysis.;;(Sigmund) Freud;;
Music;;Enrico Caruso legendarily added an extra high C at the end of this opera's aria "Di quella pira". One character sings about her mother who was burned alive in "Stride la Vampa," and she later confesses that to get her vengeance she stole her enemy's son but accidentally threw her own son into the fire. The Duchess Leonora drinks poison after selling herself to secure the freedom of the title character, and the opera ends when the gypsy Azucena reveals the title character is actually Count di Luna's brother. For 10 points, name this opera concluding with Manrico's execution that features "The Anvil Chorus," composed by Giuseppi Verdi.;;(Il) Trovatore|(The) Troubadour;;
Biology;;The Kidd glycoproteins present on their surface act as urea transporters. Spectrin and ankyrin are found in the cytoskeletal network of these cells and antibodies on their surface are detected by the direct Coombs test. They express high levels of CD47, which prevents phagocytosis by macrophages in the spleen, and kidneys release EPO which stimulate the production of these. Excess production of them results in polycythemia, and their count is depressed in anemia. Produced in the bone marrow, they are biconcave and lack nuclei. For 10 points, identify these cells that contain hemoglobin, and help transport oxygen to tissues.;;red blood cell(s)|RBC(s)|erythrocyte(s);;
Religion/Mythology;;Upon ascending to his highest office, he married Aseneth, the daughter of a priest of On. He gave his first son by Aseneth a name meaning "oblivion," while his nephews were given names like Belah, Ashbel, Gera, and Ehi to honor him. He planted a silver cup in one of his brothers' bags in order to test them; Judah would loyally demand that this man sacrifice him instead of Benjamin. He tricked his dying father into blessing his son Ephraim before his other son Manessah, and was appointed Viceroy of Egypt after advising the storage of grain based on his analysis of the Pharaoh's dream. For 10 points, name this first son of Rachel and Jacob who had a multicolored coat.;;Joseph|Yosef|Yusuf;;
World History;;One of its rulers traded blows with the Aetolian League before signing the Treaty of Phoenice, in which he renounced an alliance formed with Hannibal after Cannae.  Lucius Aemilius Paulus defeated another of its rulers at Pydna after his aforementioned father had lost at Cynoscephalae.  Another ruler of it introduced the sarissa, a twenty foot pike, which allowed him to win at Crocus Field and Chaeronea before being killed by his bodyguard Pausanias.  His son would expand this place's control at battles like Granicus, Issus, and Gaugamela, where he defeated Darius III and conquered Persia.  For 10 points, name this kingdom home to Phillip II and Alexander the Great.;;Macedon;;
World History;;Under the leadership of Nicholas Geffard, this country signed a treaty allowed missionaries from the Vatican greater freedoms. The Boukman rebellion occurred in this country, and from 1849 to 1859 it was ruled by Emperor Faustin I. Jean Boyer led this nation after the death of Alexander Petion, who clashed with a man who established an independent northern kingdom, Henri Christophe. Another leader of this country came to power after the resignation of Paul Magloire, and that man's advisor Clement Barbot organized the secret police, the Tontons Macoutes. For 10 points, identify this nation which saw a successful slave rebellion led by Toussaint-L'ouverture.;;(Republic) (of) Haiti|(Repiblik) Dayti(;)|(Republique) (d')Haiti;;
Religion/Mythology;;Ellis Davidson proposed that this character was in league with the Vanir because he also "knew the future well".  A Norse kenning for "head" is "sword of this man," and a kenning for "sword" is "head of this man".  His own sword was Hofund, and he has three nicknames that mean "Bent Stick," "Wind Shelter," and "Golden-Toothed".  The nine daughters of Aegir may have been the nine mothers of this character, who fathered the progenitors of mankind and allegedly could hear grass grow.  For 10 points, name this "white god," a member of the Aesir who will sound the Gjallerhorn at Ragnarok, and who guards the Bifrost bridge.;;Heimdall(r);;
World History;;The most important source for this man's life is Priscus, and the Battle of Nedao saw one his sons killed by Ardaric, who had earlier allied with this ruler as leader of the Gepids.  His other allies included Valamir, leader of the Ostrogoths, and he planned to attack the Visigothic kingdom of Tolouse with Valentinian III.  He succeeded his uncle Rua with his co-ruler and brother Bleda, and trouble started when Honoria sent this man an engagement ring and he demanded half the Western Roman Empire as a dowry.  He was defeated by Theodoric I and Flavius Aetius at the Battle of Chalons.  For 10 points, name this "Scourge of God," the most famous leader of the Huns.;;Attila (the) (Hun);;
Religion/Mythology;;The text "Transmissions of the Lamp" describes the lineages of this religion's followers. The "Wake-up" and "Bloodstream" sermons are attributed to one of its founders, who is said to have descended from the man who developed it after hearing the Flower Sermon. Its six patriarchs include Sengcan the author of the Plaform Sutra, Huineng, and it was brought to China by Bodhidharma. Two of its "five houses" include the Soto and the Rinzai, which differ on the way achieve satori, and it uses texts like The Gateless Gate and The Blue Cliff Record. For 10 points, identify this sect of Buddhism, which is noted for its use of koans and meditation.;;Zen (Buddhism)|Chan|Dhyana;;Buddhism
Literature;;The main narrative of this poem is interrupted by a "loud uproar" and "vesper bell" that bids the title character to pray, while he notes later that "He prayeth best, who loveth best/ All things both great and small". The title character falls asleep and dreams of buckets filled with dew, after he had previously blessed a nest of writhing sea snakes. In the opening section, the title character seizes "one of three" wedding guests and recounts his long journey at sea, including the ill-advised shooting of the Albatross. For 10 points, name this poem by Samuel Taylor Coleridge.;;(The) Rime of the Ancient Mariner;;
Art;;It has been nicknamed "the forest," because each beam in its construction came from a different tree. A later addition to it was performed by Bellu, who created a second spire on an octagonal base supported by four transept pillars. One of its windows, designed by Jean de Chelles and Pierre de Montreuil, has corner pieces that represent the descent into Hell and the resurrection of Christ. Unlike that South Rose Window, its transept and famous spire were rebuilt in the 1800s in an effort led by Eugene Viollet-le-Duc. Originally constructed under the orders of Maurice de Sully and found on the Ile de la Cite, for 10 points, name this Gothic cathedral located in Paris.;;(the) (Cathedral) (of) Notre Dame (de) (Paris);;
Physics;;One result of this effect was explained by the creation of quasiparticles in a quantum fluid by Laughlin, and Dyakonov and Perel predicted a version of it dependent on spin.  It can be used to find hole density in a semiconductor, and von Klitzing showed that under certain situations this effect is quantized.  This effect distinguishes between a negative current and a positive current flowing in the opposite direction, and it creates a Lorentz force, resulting in the deflection of charge carriers by a magnetic field.  For 10 points, name this effect in which a potential difference is created across a conductor by a perpendicular magnetic field.;;Hall (Effect)|fractional quantum Hall (effect)|quantum Hall (effect);;
United States History;;In one election, this man defeated Hal Suit after overcoming a man he labeled "Cufflinks Carl" in the primary.  His presidency saw a scandal involving his budget director, Bert Lance, and he threatened military response to Soviet action near the Persian Gulf in his namesake doctrine.  During his presidency, the United States entered into full diplomatic relations with China and ceded the Panama Canal to Panama.  He also signed the SALT II agreement and brokered the Camp David Accords, though he is better remembered for poor handling of the Iran hostage crisis.  For 10 points, name this former Georgia Governor, the U.S. President from 1977 to 1981.;;(James) (Earl) (Jimmy) Carter(,) (Jr.);;
Chemistry;;This compound is the starting ingredient in an industrial process where it complexes with palladium tetrachloride and is attacked by a water molecule to form an alcohol intermediate; that process gives acetaldehyde from this compound and is called the Wacker process. The catalytic activity of a titanium-aluminum complex in promoting the polymerization of this compound was discovered by Karl Ziegler, and the simplest cyclic ether is a derivative of this compound called oxirane. The diol of this compound is commonly used as an antifreeze agent and is known at its namesake glycol. For 10 points, identify this chemical, the simplest alkene with formula C2H4.;;ethylene|ethene;;C2H4
Music;;This composer had the violin play 2/4 against the persistent 6/8 beat of the orchestra in his work for Pablo Sarasate, Introduction and Rondo Capriccioso, while a Nubian love song he found in Luxor inspired his fifth piano concerto in F Major subtitled "Egyptian". In one work a violin enters playing an A chord against an E-flat chord tuned down a half step, which is answered by a xylophone solo representing a skeletons dance, and another work has movements titled "Characters with Long Ears," "Fossils," and "The Swan". For 10 points, name this composer of Danse Macabre and Carnival of the Animals.;;(Camille) Saint-Saens;;
Philosophy;;The central figure in this work dreams of a woman "clothed in a white raiment" who tells him that he will die in three days. The title character claims that Simmias and Cebes have offered to support his plans, and he argues that it is morally wrong for a man to intentionally orphan his children The central figure maintains that the disapproval of the majority should not be a motivating factor, and offers a hypothetical conversation with the laws of Athens illustrating that he is bound by an "implied contract". For 10 points, identify this Platonic dialogue in which Socrates refuses to escape from prison with the title character.;;(the) Crito;;
Astronomy;;Walter Baade found a second type of Cepheid variable stars in its globular cluster because they are much fainter than ones in this object's Population I regions. SN 1885, the first supernova to be discovered outside the Milky Way was discovered here by Ernst Hartwig, and the brightest globular cluster in the local group, Globular One, is located in it. Simon Marius, the first to observe it through a telescope, described it as a "candle shining through horn". It shares its name with a constellation whose alpha star is Alpheratz. Called M31 in the Messier Catalog, for 10 points, identify this large spiral galaxy closest to the Milky Way.;;Andromeda;;
Pop Culture;;One character of this name was transformed into a rabbit when travelling to the Sacred Realm as a result of actions that occurred during the Imprisoning War, during which another figure of this name became engaged to a water princess, Ruto. Aryll is kidnapped due to a resemblance to his sister, and this figure rescues her by defeating the Helmaroc King after travelling the Great Sea. One incarnation of this character is accompanied by Tatl, while another breaks the curse of the Great Deku Tree. For 10 points, give the name of these characters who generally use such tools as the Hookshot, and the Master Sword to defeat Ganon and rescue Princess Zelda.;;Link(,) (Sworn) (Brother) (of) (Gorons)|Rinku;;Hero of Time|Hero of Wind|Waker of Winds|Hero of Twilight|Hero of Men
Literature;;One of this writer's narrators comments that woodcocks remind him of a mad woman who froze after being abandoned in a forest tied to her bed by vindictive soldiers, and a group of repentant prostitutes inspire an entire church congregation to weep during Constance's confirmation in "Madame Tellier's Establishment". The title character of one work gives her wine to nourish Mrs. Carre-Lamadon, before she is coerced into sleeping with a Prussian officer and another story ends when Jeanne Forestier reveals to Matthilde Loisel that the title object is a fake. For 10 points, name this author who penned "Ball of Fat" and "The Necklace".;;(Guy) (de) Maupassant;;
World History;;In the late seventeenth century, this polity was bankrupted by an unsuccessful attempt to establish a colony in Panama, the Darién Scheme.  The death at sea of The Maid of Norway set off a succession crisis here known as the "Great Cause," which was won by a man nicknamed "Empty Coat".  That man, John Balliol, was taken captive after the Battle of Dunbar by England's Edward I, known as the "Hammer" of this kingdom's people.  This kingdom ceased to exist in 1707 with the Acts of Union, when it was subsumed into Great Britain. For 10 points, name this kingdom whose kings included Kenneth MacAlpin and Robert the Bruce.;;(Kingdom) (of) Scotland|(Kingdom) (of) (the) Scots;;
Geography;;The Dolores and Virgin Rivers are tributaries of this larger river, and it flows by the Vermillion Cliffs National Monument. Fort Collins is located to the East of the Poudre Pas Lake, where this river begins. One can go gambling in the casino at Lake Havasu City which lies along this river, while Interstate Highway 10 crosses it near the city of Blythe. The Gila River is a tributary of this river which empties into the Gulf of California, while Lake Powell lies on it due to the creation of the Glen Canyon dam. For 10 points, identify this long river in the American Southwest which shares its name with a state and also passes through the Grand Canyon.;;Colorado (River);;
Religion/Mythology;;In Ojimbwe myth, the grandson of Nokomis, Manabohzo, successfully disguised himself as a rabbit in order to obtain this object from an old man and his daughter. In the Aeneid, Latinus seeks out an oracle after seeing a wreath made of it on the head of his daughter, Lavinia. In Hinduism, this is believed to have seven tongues and carry prayers and soma to heaven, and is personified by the messenger Agni. Temples to the Roman goddess Vesta featured virgin priestesses assigned to guard an eternal one. For 10 points, name this substance, which was stolen against the will of Zeus and given to man by Prometheus.;;fire|flame;;
Literature;;A female author from this country wrote Miss Sophie's Diary. One author from this country wrote the collection Call to Arms, which included a work about a man who fears cannibals, A Madman's Diary, and one about a man who has a lot of "spiritual victories," The True Story of Ah Q. Another author from here wrote the absurdist plays Signal Alarm and Bus Stop and the novel Soul Mountain, for which he won the 2000 Nobel. This country's Four Great Classical Novels include one about 108 bandits and one about the pilgrimage to India of a monk. The origin of Outlaws of the Marsh and Journey to the West, for 10 points, identify this country of Lu Xun and Gao Xingjian.;;(People's) (Republic) (of) China|Zhongguo|Zhonghua (Remin) (Gongheguo);;
Biology;;In an important experiment, its beta subunits were bonded to nickel on a glass surface, and an actin filament attached to its gamma subunit was observed. Its mechanism was elucidated in an experiment when sunlight was shone towards artifical vesicles containing bacteriorhodopsin, and it is inhibited by DCCD and oligomycin. The gamma subunit of the F0 rotates as protons pass through, and the proton motive force releases the product of this enzyme. For 10 points, identify this enzyme present in the mitochondrion, which uses chemiosmosis to catalyze the production of a high energy molecule by phophorylating ADP.;;ATP synthase|adenosine tri-phosphate synthase;;
Literature;;This author wrote about Father Fish who mentors Richard, a schoolboy who crushes a snake after skipping an Easter vigil to go swimming at the end of his novel The Morning Watch. One of his stories subtitled "Summer 1915" was used for a Samuel Barber work, and he wrote about the tenant families the Woods, Gudgers, and Wicketts in a book featuring the photography of Walker Evans. In addition to "Knoxville" and Let us Now Praise Famous Men, in one novel Andrew Lynch tells Rufus that he saw a butterfly land on the coffin of Jay Follet. For 10 points, name this author, who wrote A Death in the Family.;;(James) Agee;;
Economics;;This must decrease as rival firms' aggregate output increases in order for Cournot competition to hold, and if a strictly positive subsistence level is introduced to a CES function, this quantity becomes non-monotonic. It is given by price times the quantity 1 minus 1 over demand elasticity, showing that its sign is an indicator of elasticity. In oligopolies, this curve has a jump due to the kinked demand curve, and in monopolies, a deadweight loss is caused because this curve, and not demand, determines quantity sold. For 10 points, name this curve that generally marks equilibrium where it meets marginal cost, and which measures the added revenue of an additional unit sold.;;marginal revenue;;MR
Philosophy;;Margaret Atherton wrote about "How this man Can Maintain that Snow is White," and in one work he argued against belief in fluxions while another discusses a "visual language".  In addition to writing The Analyst and Alciphron, he notably argued against abstraction of ideas and presented the likeness principle, while his "master argument" claimed that it is impossible to conceive a non-conceived object.  The author of Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge, he believed that "to be is to be perceived".  For 10 points, name this Irish philosopher, the author of Three Dialogues Between Hylas and Philonus.;;(George) Berkeley;;
Literature;;He wrote about Una Golden who marries Edward Schwirtz instead of Walter Babson in The Job, and a man discovers he is the descendent of Xavier Pic in Kingsblood Royal. In one work, Doremus Jessup tries to stop the political career of Buzz Windrip, while another of his characters survives a fire that destroys the "Waters of Jordan Tabernacle" and Sharon Falconer, after he seduces Lulu Baines at the Mizpah Seminary. This author of It Can't Happen Here and Elmer Gantry, also wrote about Erik Valborg's affair with Carol Kennicott, who fails to reform Gopher Prairie. For 10 points, name this author of Babbitt and Main Street.;;(Sinclair) Lewis;;
Music;;This composer depicted a peasant dreaming of summer while dying in a blizzard in the "trepak" section of his cycle Song and Dances of Death, and his vocal works include Sunless and The Destruction of Sennacherib. The title character of one opera has visions of a child he thought was executed at Uglich and is eventually overthrown by the monk Grigori, who becomes the False Dmitri. Another work features sections titled "The Market at Limoges" and "The Old Castle" that are connected by the "Promenade" theme. For 10 points, name this Russian composer of Boris Godunov and Pictures at an Exhibition.;;(Modest) (Petrovich) Mussorgsky;;
Biology;;A beta-sheet sandwich structure is common to all types of these whose Fab and Fc regions can be separated by papain based on their crystallizability. Their effector functions are increased through CSR, while somatic hypermutation occurs in their variable regions and renders a higher affinity for binding sites. They are used in the ELISA process, and Kohler and Milstein got the Nobel in Medicine for producing the monoclonal varieties of these. They can easily change isotypes, of which humans have five, and they attach to epitope of their targets by induced fit. For 10 points, name these y- shaped proteins produced by B Cells, that target and attack foreign antigens.;;antibodies|immunoglobulin(s);;
Economics;;He defended Say's law by arguing against the possibility of general gluts, and he called for a stable monetary policy in Proposals for an Economic and Secure Currency.  A concept developed by Robert Barro which states that equilibrium consumption is invariant if the government is financed by tax increases or deficit spending is known as his "equivalence," and he also introduced diminishing marginal returns. In another work, he criticized Malthus' theory of rent, and that work also introduced the theory of comparative advantage.  For 10 points, identify this economist who wrote Principles of Political Economy and Taxation and advanced the "iron law of wages".;;(David) Ricardo;;
Literature;;In one his stories a man eats a bewitched pellet that he stole from a museum, which allows him to understand animals. He wrote about Hans Giebenrath, who mysteriously drowns after he is sent home from the Maulbronn seminary in Beneath the Wheel, and in another work Pistorius Pistorius introduces the occult god Abraxas to Emil Sinclair, who later goes to live with Max Demian. The protagonist of another novel is taught to dance by Hermine and is induced by the saxophonist Pablo to enter the Magic Theater. For 10 points, name this man, who wrote about Harry Haller in Steppenwolf, and also penned Siddhartha.;;(Herman) Hesse;;
World History;;He fled to Hispania after his father committed suicide, and he later commanded the right wing of the Sullan forces at the Battle of the Colline Gate.  He refused the help of the king of Armenia on a notable campaign, which culminated when his testudo, or tortoise formation, was decimated by the enemy's horse archers.  That campaign, which he undertook after his defeat of Spartacus and appointment as governor of Syria, was his invasion of Parthia, during which he was killed after his defeat at Carrhae.  For 10 points, name this Roman politician known for his wealth and association with Pompey and Caesar in the first triumvirate.;;(Marcus) (Licinius) Crassus;;
Pop Culture;;One version of this man was known as Enrique and served as the Grand Inquistor of Earth-311.  His Earth-9997 incarnation ruled a city in the Savage Land before being depowered by the removal of the Earth's vibranium.  He placed the Red Skull in "the long dark" with only ten gallons of water, and one version of him led the last resistance against the infected superheroes of the Marvel Zombies universe.  His most well-known incarnation was presumed dead after Cassandra Nova attacked Genosha with a fleet of Sentinels.  For 10 points, name this alter-ego of Erik Lensherr, leader of the Brotherhood of Evil Mutants, master of magnetism, and frequent enemy of the X-Men?;;Magneto;;(Erik) Lensherr|(Erik) Magnus
United States History;;James Alexander Walker ran on the American Party ticket in this election, while the Prohibition Party nominated Green Clay Smith.  The running mate of the Democratic Party nominee later served as Cleveland's first vice president; that was Thomas Hendricks.  The Republic convention saw Roscoe Conkling withdraw from the running in order to prevent James G. Blaine from getting the nomination.  The governor of Oregon declared one of his electors ineligible, and several electors refused to vote for a certain New Yorker.  For 10 points, name this election which saw an Electoral Commission decide the defeat of Samuel Tilden by Rutherford B. Hayes.;;(United) (States) (Presidential) (Election) (of) 1876;;
Religion/Mythology;;A Mayan example of these ate the heads of the men that Hurakan destroyed and was known as Camulatz. A three-legged one in Asian myths was variously known as Samjoko or Yatagarasu. One of these was the counterpart of Behemoth and Leviathan called Ziz. An Egyptian example of them rested on the benben pillar, and another assisted Prince Zal with the birth of Rostam. In addition to the Bennu and the Simurgh, other examples include the elephant-eating Roc and a group of part-brass ones that were the target of Heracles' sixth labor, the Stymphalian ones. For 10 points, name these creatures whose other mythical exemplars include the phoenix and Raven.;;bird(s);;
Literature;;This work discusses a "high and urgent purpose in my soul" that inspires Frank Drummer to attempt to memorize the entire Encyclopedia Britannica, and another section centers on a woman, who declares that "no mother would let her baby suck / diseased milk" after being dismayed by the advice of Reverend Wiley and Judge Somers. Several sections refer to the industrialist Thomas Rhodes, and Lucinda Matlock concludes that "It takes life to love Life" after reflecting on her existence from her grave. For 10 points, name this poetry collection about the residents of a Midwestern town by Edger Lee Masters.;;Spoon River Anthology;;
Chemistry;;He is the namesake of reaction where a sugar reacts with an alcohol in the presence of a Lewis acid catalyst to yield a glycoside. During his time at Strasboug, he discovered the similarity between hydrazobenzene and phenyl-hydrazine, and the latter compound and a ketone are used to synthesize indole in a reaction named for him. He also names a reaction where a tetrahedral intermediate is formed upon the nucleophilic attack of an alcohol group which is followed by elimination of a hydroxyl group, and 2-dimensional structures used to represent sugars are this man's namesake "projections". For 10 points, identify this German chemist who lends his name to an esterification.;;(Hermann) (Emil) Fischer;;
Music;;Ira Gitler first coined the term "sheets of sound" to describe the style of this jazz musician, who ended one album with the "musical narration" of a poem that begins "I will do all I can to be worthy of Thee, Oh Lord". He collaborated with McCoy Tyner and Elvin Jones in his namesake quartet on albums such as First Meditations and Gleanings, and his famous chord substitutions based on major third cycles known as his namesake "changes" are first seen in the track "Lazy Bird" on Blue Train and later seen in "Countdown" and "Naima". For 10 points, name this saxophonist, whose albums include Giant Steps and A Love Supreme.;;(John) (William) Coltrane;;
Religion/Mythology;;This religion's scriptures include the four books of Athlyi, which form the Holy Piby, as well as The Promise Key. Its members reject "-isms" and use words such as livification, overstanding, and upfulness. Ingesting shellfish, pork, or alcohol is prohibited because they turn the temple of the body into a cemetery, according to its diet, called I-tal. Its holidays include "reasonings," and adherents are taught to reject "Babylon" and that corruption can be burned out of the heart by smoking ganja, or cannabis. For 10 points, name this religion whose prophets include Marcus Garvey, which believes that Jah, or God, took the form of Haile Selassie.;;Rasta(fari) (movement)|Rasta(farianism);;
Biology;;This event sees the non proteolytic dissociation of a majority of cohesins from chromosomes by Polo-like kinase in Xenopus. Plant cells sometimes also need a phragmosome to split large vacuoles during it, and this stage sees the use of Gamma Tubulin to drive the centrosomes apart. The nuclear membrane and nucleolus disappear during this stage, which also sees the connection of two sister chromatids at a centromere. The chromatin material condenses into chromosomes in, for 10 points, which first stage of mitosis, which is followed by metaphase?;;prophase;;prometaphase
World History;;One ruler with this given name defeated Arduin of Ivrea to end the brief separation of Italy and Germany, and was succeeded by Conrad II, the first Salian king, and became the only German king to be canonized.   Another ruler by this name succeeded Conrad I as ruler of East Francia and established a line of Saxon kings of Germany through his son Otto the Great.  A third ruler by this name started a conflict ended by the Concordat of Worms, the investiture controversy.  For 10 points, give the shared name of the unifier of the German tribes known as "the Fowler" and the Holy Roman Emperor who went to Canossa to beg forgiveness from Pope Gregory VII.;;Henry;;Henry II
Literature;;This person and Charles Tomlinson built sonnet sequences upon each other's lines in Airborn. One of his works describes the government of his country as "The Philanthropic Ogre", and he examined contemporary poetry in The Pears of the Elm and The Bow and the Lyre. His best-known prose work has chapters entitled "From Independence to the Revolution" and "The Day of the Dead," and a trip to Galta in India inspired a work about Hanuman, The Monkey Grammarian. His most famous long poem consists of 584 lines, matching with the 584 days of the Aztec calendar. For 10 points, name this Mexican author of Sunstone and The Labyrinth of Solitude.;;(Octavio) Paz (Lozano);;
Art;;His last work, based on Réne Thom's catastrophe theory, depicts three integral signs and is titled The Swallow's Tail. An optical illusion transforms the first of the titular animals seated on a lake into larger mammals in his Swans Reflecting Elephants. One of his paintings depicts an elephant in the background and two tigers over a naked woman in the foreground. This creator of Lobster Telephone also painted The Hallucinogenic Toreador and a "disintegration" of his most famous work which depicted the Cadaques and three melting clocks. For 10 points, name this surrealist artist of The Persistence of Memory.;;(Salvador) Dali|(Salvador) (Domingo) (Felipe) (Jacinto) Dali (i) (Domenech);;
Physics;;The edge named for this phenomenon describes the feature of a spectograph caused by it, and its namesake suppression counteracts that edge.  Dense galactic clusters perturb the Cosmic Microwave Background Radiation through an inverse form of this, the Sunyaev-Zeldovich effect.  Plank's constant divided by a particle's rest mass times the speed of light gives its namesake wavelength, and the derivative of its cross-section is given by the Klein-Nishina formula. For 10 points, name this effect which describes a decrease in the wavelength of a photon when it collides with an electron, an American physicist's namesake scattering.;;Compton (Scattering)|Compton (Effect);;
World History;;The Frenchman Robert Hubert falsely confessed to causing it on behalf of the pope, and it sparked anti-Dutch violence since it occurred during the Second Anglo-Dutch War.  Thomas Bloodworth failed to take action against it, but gunpowder was ordered to be used by Charles II.  A column called the Monument stands at Thomas Farriner's bakery on Pudding Lane, where it began shortly after midnight.  Samuel Pepys recorded it in his diary, which also covered the plague that occurred in the same year.  For 10 points, name this disaster that began on September 2, 1666 and burned down St. Paul's Cathedral.;;(The) (Great) Fire (of) London;;
Geography;;Lesser known cities in this state include Jalandhar, which is notable for producing surgical products. Its largest city, Ludhiana, is notable for having many manufacturing plants, and is thus called "the Manchester" of this state, while other cities in this state include Barnala and Patiala. An open hand serves as the official logo of the capitol city of this state, and Le Corbusier served as the architect of that city, Chandigarh. Bordering the states of Haryana and Rajasthan, much of this state gets water for agriculture from the "five rivers", and its city of Amritsar contains the Golden Temple. For 10 points, identify this Indian state, the birthplace of Sikhism.;;Punjab;;
Philosophy;;One part of this work uses the example of ordinary people calling a whale a fish, while scientists defining a whale as a mammal in a discussion of the difference between nominal and real essences. Book Two distinguishes between primary and secondary qualities in objects, and argues that sensations form the foundation for simple ideas, which build into complex ideas of two types: mode and substance. Arguing against the Cartesian belief in innate ideas, this work claims that knowledge derives from experience. Asserting that men are born with minds like a blank slate. For 10 points, identify this work by John Locke.;;(An) Essay Concerning Human Understanding;;
Literature;;One of this author's protagonists seeks his father in a classified ad before strangling Karima.  In another of his works, a young man kills his boss on the same day that his country's president is shot.  This author of The Search and The Day the Leader Died wrote about Hamida, who is lured into prostitution by Ibrahim Faraj in one work, and another novel centers on sons that are cast out of their father's house who live in an alley. Midaq Alley and Children of Gebelawi, for 10 points, are works by this author of Sugar Street, Palace Walk, and Palace of Desire, which comprise his Cairo Trilogy.;;(Naguib) Mahfouz;;
Pop Culture;;One example of his action occurred because of confusion over whether O.J. Simpson or Chad Ogea oh-JAY-ah was in a car chase.  The CHARLEE Foundation benefits from the sale of a wine that replaces the third word of this phrase with "Merlot".  An internet parody of this action saw its progenitor placing Yellow Pages on charcoal, a riff on one example of this action that saw a barbeque grill reach a $99,999,999 price on eBay.  This behavior led to such incidents as high-fiving a fan after making a catch in Baltimore and taking potty breaks in the Green Monster.  For 10 points, name this behavior that stems from the whackiness of a certain Dodgers' outfielder.;;Manny being Manny;;
Religion/Mythology;;This text is often paired with the Testimonies of Three Witnesses and Eight Witnesses. One section of this work centers on a group of people whose rulers included Coriantumr and Jared. Its first section details a man who receives a "ball of curious workmanship" after he and his father receive the "Tree of Life" vision. In addition to the books of Ether and Nephi, it describes the colonization of the Americas by the descendents of Lehi, and it contains an account of Jesus Christ's visit to the Americas after his death and resurrection. Originally inscribed in "Reformed Egyptian" on gold plates and translated by Joseph Smith, for 10 points, name this founding text of a Utah-based religion.;;(The) Book of Mormon(:) (Another) (Testament) (of) (Jesus) (Christ)|(The) Book of Mormon(:) (An) (Account) (Written) (by) (the) (Hand) (of) (Mormon) (upon) (Plates) (Taken) (from) (the) (Plates) (of) (Nephi);;
United States History;;During the Civil War, this state saw Confederate raiders rob the St. Albans bank, and in 1883 it was the site of a copper mine riot called the Ely War.  Connecticut's Roger Griswold brawled with a representative of this state, Matthew Lyon, and it copied Pennsylvania's Constitution when it became a breakaway republic during the Revolution.  This was the only state carried by Anti-Masonic candidate William Wirt in 1832, and a group from this state opposed the New York annexation of the New Hampshire Grants and captured Fort Ticonderoga.  For 10 points, name this state which saw the Battle of Bennington, home to Ethan Allen and the Green Mountain Boys.;;Vermont;;
Economics;;A variation to this concept that includes perturbations in decision models is known as trembling-hand perfect.  This concept holds when certain sets are non-empty, convex, compact subsets of a Euclidean space by the Kakutani Fixed Point Theorem, and the utility function is continuous and quasi-concave.  A Bayesian one is found by anticipating the plans of others, and they were worked on by Harsanyi and Selten as well as their namesake, who introduced them in the paper Non-Cooperative Games.  For 10 points, name this idea in which each player's strategy choice is a best-response to the strategies played by his rivals, a game theory equilibrium named for a schizophrenic.;;Nash (equilibrium);;
Music;;The soprano in this opera reminds herself that she "must always be free" in the aria "E Strano! E Strano...Sempre Libera" after the tenor proclaims his love in "Un di felice, eterea". The baritone sings "Di Provenza il mar" to convince his son to return to Provence, but instead he crashes a party hosted by Flora Bervoix, where he wins money in cards from his rival Baron Douphol. In the last act, the title character sings "Adio del passato" after reading a letter from Giorgio apologizing for breaking up her romance with his son, who impressed the title character by singing the Brindisi. For 10 points, Alfredo Germont is the lover of Violetta in what Verdi opera about a courtesan?;;(La) Traviata;;
Literature;;One of his protagonists refers to his sister as the "Dark Girl of Long Alley" and steals a gun from her Nazi lover to bury in a secret location. The title character of another work battles with the "fruit thieves," dies by fastening himself to the anchor of a balloon, and refuses to eat his sister's snail soup. Those novels about Pin and Cosimo are The Baron in the Trees and The Path to the Nest of Spiders.  In another of his novels, Medardo of Terralba is split in half by a cannonball, and in another a plot about swapping suitcases devolves into a romance between Ludmilla and "The Reader". For 10 points, name this author of The Cloven Viscount and If On a Winter's Night a Traveler.;;(Italo) Calvino;;
World History;;This ruler was the first to settle Germanic barbarians in the Roman Empire, and he auctioned off many palace valuables to pay for the empire's wars. His reign saw a great plague, and also saw Parthia invade Armenia, an action stopped by a man who would later declare himself emperor when this man was reported dead, Avidius Cassius.  He was long advised by Fronto, the childhood tutor of this man and his co-emperor Lucius Verus.  He fought against the Marcomanni and died while on campaign in Germania, after which the war was ended prematurely by his son Commodus.  For 10 points, name this last of the five good emperors, the author of some Stoic Meditations.;;Marcus Aurelius (Antoninus) (Augustus);;Marcus (Annius) (Verus)|Marcus (Annius) (Catilius) (Severus)
Noncomputational Math;;The volume of a simplex in n dimensions can be given by the Cayley-Menger type of this function, and this function can be generalized to non-square entities using the Cauchy Binet formula. The linear independence of a set of solutions to a differential equation is given by a nonzero value for the Wronskian type of this, and changing variables when integrating a function over its domain involves the use of the Jacobian type of this function. One of these for a two-by-two matrix is used in Cramer's rule to find the solution to a system of two equations. For 10 points, name this scalar function of a square matrix, denoted by single or double bars around a matrix.;;determinant;;det
Literature;;One man in this work points out his father's snoring by quoting Othello: "The Moor, I know his trumpet".  That character quotes Baudelaire when he's courting a comically obese prostitute named Fat Violet, and also questions the aptitude of "a cheap old quack," who "hardly only charges a dollar," Doc Hardy.  A servant in this play is a "buxom Irish peasant" named Cathleen, who sneaks sips of alcohol.  James is an actor who can only play one role, Jamie fatally infects Eugene when he enters the infant's room, and Edmund is diagnosed with tuberculosis.  For 10 points, name this play in which Mary is addicted to morphine, a work about the Tyrone family by Eugene O'Neill.;;Long Day's Journey Into Night;;
Chemistry;;A formula developed for one type of this process scales the inverse of the magnetic field intensity, and was observed when its namesake was using a magnetic arc to separate uranium isotopes. Another form of this process is explained by the Ludwig-Soret effect, which results in a temperature gradient parallel to the concentration gradient. A set of equations, which relate flux to the gradient of concentration also governs this process, and its rate is inversely proportional to the square root of the molar mass according to Graham's Law. For 10 points, identify this process, wherein particles move from regions of high concentrations to areas of lower concentrations.;;diffusion;;
Music;;In this work, thirty-six measures of the organ playing the B flat pedal culminates in the section "Accende Lumen Sensibus," while the composer emulated the polyphony of Bach's motet Singet dem Herrn ein neues Lied in the opening movement. In the finale, Doctor Marianus praises Mater Gloriosa, who is the personification of this symphony's unifying theme of the "Eternal Feminine". The first movement is based on the medieval hymn "Veni, Creator Spiritus," while the second movement is a setting of the final scene of Goethe's Faust. Featuring a chorus of over eight hundred at its premiere, for 10 points, name this Mahler symphony that requires many performers.;;Symphony of a Thousand|Mahler('s) (Symphony) (Number) 8 (in) (E) (major)|Mahler('s) 8th (Symphony);;8th Symphony|Symphony (Number) 8
World History;;A leader of one party in this conflict had earlier defeated his brother at the Tugela River, and this conflict began when Henry Bartle Frere issued an ultimatum to the opposing side. It also saw 139 British successfully defend an attack by 4,000 soldiers at Rorke's drift. Its last battle on July 4th, 1879 saw the death of the losing side's ruler at Ulundi, though forces under Lord Chelmsford faced a major defeat at Isandlwana. The polity, which lost this conflict was led by Cetshwayo. For 10 points, identify this conflict between the British and an empire, which once counted Shaka as its ruler.;;(Anglo-)Zulu (war);;
Geography;;Birqat Karun is a lake found in the Al Fayyum region of this country. The Ras Mohammed National park is found at the southern tip of a peninsula belonging to this country, and the disputed Hala'ib triangle lies at the southwest corner of this country. The Kebira Crater is located along the western border of this country which is home to the Gilf-al-Kibr plateau. The Qatarra Depression contains several brackish oases, and manmade features include the Great and Little Bitter Lakes as well as a large dam on the First Cataract at Aswan that holds back Lake Nasser. Containing the cities of Luxor and Alexandria, for 10 points, identify this country with its capital at Cairo.;;Egypt|(Al-)Masr;;
Religion/Mythology;;He was once attacked and wounded by Parasurama, and in his incarnation as Vighnaraja, he rides the naga king Shesha. Garuda was once tasked with reacquiring an item this figure lost after being gazed upon by Sani. He is often depicted riding on a mouse, and the goad he holds in his upper right hand is used to remove obstacles from mankind. One story claims this figure married two women after he beat his brother Karttikeya in a race around the world. He was supposedly born from the dirt his mother wiped off of her leg while she was trying to take a bath in privacy from her husband. For 10 points, name this son of Shiva and Parvati, a Hindu god with the head of an elephant.;;(Lord) Ganesh(a)|Ganapati|Vinakaya|Lambodar|Pillaiyar;;
Biology;;Studies on one of these structures from a giant squid led Hodgkins and Huxley to a Nobel Prize for their experiments. Their extension is guided by growth cones found at their ends, and they begin tapering near a namesake hillock. In some cases, these branch out to form collaterals, which end in telodendria, and ones with a smaller diameter can aggregate to form a Remak bundle. Nodes of Ranvier appear along these structures that are insulated by myelin containing Schwann cells, which allows for the speedy conduction of action potentials. For 10 points, identify the long, slender projection of a neuron, often contrasted with dendrites.;;axon(s);;
Literature;;The speaker compares the "shrill delight" of the title figure to moonbeams "Keen as the arrows / Of that silver sphere" which are transparent in light of the "white dawn," but although they are "hardly seen, we feel that it is there". The title figure is later compared to a "rose embowered," a "glow worm- golden," and a "poet hidden / In the line of thought". In the final stanza the speaker asks, "teach me half the gladness / That thy brain must know," so "the world should listen" to the "harmonious madness" of the title creature's song.  For 10 points, name this poem about a bird which begins, "Hail to thee blithe spirit," written by Percy Shelley.;;To a Skylark;;
Art;;The Manningtree altarpiece features this artist's The Risen Christ, and in another work the titular animal action is performed by jumping over an obstacle as people look on from a barge. In addition to Leaping Horse, he painted several works about life near his hometown of East Bergholt, while another series depicts the title structure at Leadenhall "from the River," and "from the meadows" with an overarching rainbow. His most famous work shows the title object near Flatford Mill on the River Stour and depicts Willy Lott's cottage. The painter of Salisbury Cathedral, for 10 points, name this English landscape artist whose best-known painting is The Hay Wain.;;(John) Constable;;
Physics;;The tensor analog of this quantity can be diagonalized by defining a coordinate system along the principal axes, and its middle eigenvalue corresponds to unstable motion according to Euler's Equations of Motion.  The deflection of a cantilevered beam is inversely proportional to Young's modulus and this quantity.  It is given by "cross-sectional area times the square of the radius of gyration", and it can be found by the parallel axis theorem.  For a sphere it is equal to "two-fifths m r squared", while it has half the value for a disc that it has for a ring.  For 10 points, name this quantity symbolized "I", the rotational analog of mass.;;(mass) moment of inertia;;angular mass
World History;;The Declaration of St. Germain ended much of the fighting in this conflict and during it the arrest of Pierre Broussel led to a mass barricade demonstration.  It was interrupted by the Peace of Rueil, and one of its prominent participants, Marshall Turenne, pursued the Prince de Conde into the Spanish Netherlands.  Divided into parts named for the Parliament and the Nobles, it occurred during the regency of Anne of Austria.  Followed by the Franco-Spanish War and sparked by dissatisfaction with the policies of Cardinal Mazarin, it drew its name from the children's slings used by participants.  For 10 points, name this peasant uprising during the early rule of Louis XIV.;;(La) Fronde|Frondes;;
Music;;In one work, this composer adapted the opening theme from the first section "Arietta" into a waltz for the last segment entitled, "Remembrances," and he wrote an "air" in andante religioso for a work written "in old style" dedicated to a playwright. In addition to Lyric Pieces and the Holberg Suite, one of his works has sections titled "Anitra's Dance" and "Morning Mood" and a sharp cymbal crash represents the destruction of a mountain as trolls are chasing the title character in the movement, "In the Hall of the Mountain King". For 10 points, name this composer, who wrote the Peer Gynt Suites, a noted Norwegian.;;(Edvard) (Hagerup) Grieg;;
World History;;One attack on this place was thwarted when the Sicilian pirate Margarito of Brinidisi made off with some unattended ships. It would later change hands after the battle of Tremetusia, when Isaac Comnenos took Berengaria captive, leading to an invasion by Richard I. It was briefly held by the Templars before they sold it to the reigning king of Jerusalem, Guy of Lusignan. Famagusta was the last of its strongholds to fall to the Ottomans, under whose control the native Greek majority were repressed by the Turkish minority. For 10 points, name this island, which was invaded by Turkey in 1974 and remains divided along ethnic lines today.;;Cyprus;;
Philosophy;;This man claimed that if Hamlet were reported in a newspaper, it wouldn't be transcendent, showing that "the expression of the object" of art can transform tragedy into beauty. In one work he offered sprit, truth, essence, and matter as the four categories of reality, and he argued that no real knowledge can be gained in an "instant of awareness" in a work that asserts belief does not derive from reasoning, but is an inevitable idea necessary for a man to act. This thinker wrote A Sense of Beauty and Realms of Being. For 10 points, name this author of Skepticism and Animal Faith, who said, "Those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it".;;(George) Santayana;;
World History;;This ruler allied his kingdom with Spain in the Treaty of Medina del Campo, and his chancellor John Morton raised funds from the nobility with a namesake fork. He executed the Earl of Warwick, the last man to bear the name Plantagenet. He ended a rebellion at the Battle of Stoke, defeating Lincoln and the pretender Lambert Simnel, and he faced another rebellion from Perkin Warbeck, who claimed to be the younger son of Edward IV. He came to power with the help of Northumberland and the Stanleys, who switched allegiances at Bosworth Field. For 10 points, name this man, who overthrew Richard III and ended the Wars of the Roses, the first Tudor king of England.;;Henry VII;;Henry Tudor
Literature;;One man in this work is offended when he cannot find the source of a name engraved on a cigarette case, and later quips that only relatives or creditors ring in a "Wagnerian manner" after his aunt finds that all of the cucumber sandwiches are gone. One character tells a man she just met that they've been engaged three months, and writes letters three times a week in her diary. Another character gets Reverend Chasuble to rechristen him. Miss Prism's revelation that she left a baby in a bag in a cloakroom leads Lady Bracknell to approve Gwendolen Fairfax's marriage to Jack Worthing. For 10 points, name this play about the significance of a certain name, by Oscar Wilde.;;(The) Importance of Being Earnest;;
Geography;;Fort Good Hope lies along this river, which is located west of the Franklin mountains after passing by Wrigley. The Laird River joins it near Fort Simpson, and Richards Island is the largest island located near its delta, which lies to the west of Richardson Mountains and is bounded by Shoalwater Bay. It initially flows to the west, south of Horn Plateau, but turns north, running parallel to its namesake mountains eventually emptying into the Beaufort Sea. It originates at the Great Slave Lake, and is named for a man, who initially called it "Disappointment River" after navigating its course in 1789. For 10 points, name this longest river in Canada.;;Mackenzie (River);;
Physics;;Sutherland's formula gives this quantity for ideal gases, and like thermal conductivity, it can be found by applying Green-Kubo relations to the Navier-Stokes transport coefficients. Euler's fluid equations assume a zero value for this quantity, and the Grashof number is inversely proportional to its square. The no-slip condition generally exacerbates its effects, and it has dynamic and kinematic varieties. The Reynolds number is inversely proportional to this quantity, and it is constant for Newtonian fluids. For 10 points, identify this quantity, the ratio of shear stress to shear velocity, used as a measure of a fluid's resistance to flow.;;viscosity;;
United States History;;This man clerked for Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr. and served as an assistant to the son-in-law of Woodrow Wilson, Francis B. Sayre, which he described in his autobiography Recollections of a Life. He met with a man he knew as George Crosley, while Igor Gouzenko and Elizabeth Bentley helped identify him. Along with Harry Dexter White, he was implicated by the Moynihan commission using information from the Venona project. He was the subject of the "pumpkin papers" as well as a testimony by Whittaker Chambers that accused him of espionage. For 10 points, name this state department official convicted of perjury in connection to being a Soviet spy.;;(Alger) Hiss;;
Philosophy;;Descartes proposed a thought experiment in which all one has of this is due to a demon, and Quine's argument that no statement can be truly analytic allows him to support a doctrine holding that certainty in this is impossible, called fallibilism. The Gettier problem questions the traditional formulation that a statement's truth and its belief implies that it is this, while another philosopher discussed how this can be derived either through statements about "relations of ideas" or through "matters of fact" in Hume's fork. For 10 points, identify this concept defined as the intersection of what is true and believed, the theory of which is called epistemology.;;knowledge;;epistemology
World History;;This man first made a name for himself by capturing the Aristobulus II and taking the city of Pelusium, both while serving under Aulus Gabinius. His stepfather was executed for his part in the Cataline conspiracy on orders from Cicero, who would go on to make a series of speeches against this man modeled after Demosthenes's Philippics before this man had him proscribed. At Pharsalus he commanded the victorious left flank and led a cavalry charge to secure victory for Caesar, and during Caesar's campaigns in Africa he controlled Rome as Master of Horse. For 10 points, name this man whose defeat at Actium by Octavian led to his suicide along with Cleopatra.;;(Mark) Antony|(Marcus) Antonius;;
Literature;;One of his title characters has a vision of Enceladus' attack on the Mount of Titans before he drinks poison with his sister Isabel Banford. In another of his novels, Charlie Noble rejects Frank's loan, and the title character pretends to be an employee of the Seminole Widow, Orphan Society, and a beggar named Black Guinea; those works are Pierre; or the Ambiguities and The Confidence Man. One of his characters irritates Nipper and Ginger Nut, formerly worked at the Dead Letters Office, and uses the refrain "I would prefer not to," while another quarrels with Claggart aboard the Indomitable. For 10 points, name this author of "Bartleby the Scrivener," Billy Budd, and Moby Dick.;;(Herman) Melville;;
Computer Science;;A dissimilarity characteristic for these objects is defined by Otter's theorem and is useful for analyzing Husimi ones. Rosa's conjecture concerns whether they may be gracefully labeled. The 2-3 version is a special variety of the B version of them. The zig, zig-zig, and zig-zag steps are used in creating the "splay" type of them, which uses much less memory than the AVL and red-black varieties. Kruskal and Prim name algorithms for finding their minimum spanning variety. For 10 points, name this class of graphs without double edges or cycles, which, in computer science, is a data structure that has a binary search variety, whose bottommost nodes are called leaves.;;tree(s);;
Religion/Mythology;;Jacobus de Voragine's Golden Legend relates that this figure was a king of Canaan inspired by a hermit to take up the occupation for which he was most famous. He was martyred during the persecutions of Decius, where he was decapitated and his large body was dragged through the streets, and in some stories he is described as a dog-headed cannibal. The most famous legend surrounding this figure centered on a child who turned his staff into a palm tree after this man helped him cross a raging stream. For 10 points, name this patron saint of travelers, who once carried a very heavy Christ child across a river, an act from which his name is derived.;;(St.) Christopher|(St.) Christoforos;;
Biology;;The presence of Schuffner's dots indicates infection by members of it, and its erythrocytic stage proceeds from merozoite to trophozoite to schizont and follows repeated segmentation at the end of the liver stage. Immunity to the disease it causes is conferred by carrying an allele of sickle-cell anemia, therefore demonstrating the heterozygote advantage. Varieties that infect birds are carried by Culex, and a phase of male gametogenesis called exflagellation was used to observe its falciparum species. This microorganism is commonly transmitted by the Anopheles mosquito. For 10 points, identify this genus of protazoa that causes malaria.;;Plasmodium;;
Art;;One of this man's works contains a naked man holding a bucket showering himself on a plain, while another features a man in a red uniform holding a cherry tree while a boy holds an axe. In addition to Sultry Night and Parson Weems' Fable, he depicted a white church in the middle of a dark town as a man on horseback hurries to the left in one painting, and another work shows the title figures standing in front of a copy of Washington Crossing the Delaware. For 10 points, name this painter of The Midnight Ride of Paul Revere and Daughters of Revolution, an American regionalist best known for a portrait of his dentist and his sister in American Gothic.;;(Grant) Wood;;
Economics;;Generally, output shocks cause this quantity to move in the same direction as deflated stock prices, but move in opposite ways from normal stock prices. Serletis treats variations in it as being a random walk, and Keynes notably believed this quantity was unstable, changing with the interest rate. It may be determined nationally as the ratio between the GDP and the money supply, while Irving Fisher believed it is stable and independent of the other variables in his quantity theory of money, where it can be given by his equation of exchange as "PT over M". For 10 points, give this term denoting how often a unit of money is spent over a time interval.;;velocity (of) (money);;
Literature;;He described art as an expression of human drive in his On the Aesthetic Education of Man. In one of his plays Eboli offers false testimony to the Duke of Alva against the title character, who is distraught because his beloved, Elizabeth de Valois, has married his father Philip II, while another of his plays sees Davison punished by Elizabeth regarding the death warrant of the title figure. In addition to Don Carlos and Mary Stuart, he wrote about the struggles of two aristocratic siblings, Karl and Franz Moor. For 10 points, name this author of The Robbers, who wrote about the enemy of Gessler in William Tell and also wrote "Ode to Joy".;;(Friedrich) (von) Schiller;;
Chemistry;;The efficacy of the Boord olefin synthesis prevents ones with vicinal alkoxy groups from being synthesized. Particularly hindered ones react by single-electron transfer, but normally their namesake reaction uses two equivalents of them to generate a six-membered ring for a transition state. Reactions involving them must be carried out in aprotic solvents, and the only way to produce ones incorporating fluorine requires a metal powder named for Rieke. For 10 points, name these organometallic reagents, most commonly used as nucleophiles for reducing carbonyl groups to alcohols, which could be known as alkyl or aryl magnesium halides.;;Grignard (reagant(s));;alkyl magnesium halide(s)|aryl magnesium halide(s)
Religion/Mythology;;The northlander Trendhorn got his eye put out by a chess piece when he was spying on this figure, while Fergus mac Roich was prevented by his geis from pursuing her. She was heard to cry out while still in her mother's womb, leading the druid Cathbad to prophesy that she would bring about the downfall of her house. Though she was the daughter of Feidlimid, the king decreed that she must be raised by Leabharcham, and she eventually fell in love with the brother of Ardan and Ainnle, Naoise mac Uisnech. For 10 points, identify this woman, who committed suicide after being recaptured by Conchobar mac Nessa, a Celtic figure whose beauty brought about much sadness.;;Deirdre (of) (the) (Sorrows)|Derdriu;;
Literature;;In this author's first novel, Eugene Dawn is driven to insanity by his work on the Vietnam Project. In his next novel, Magda, the daughter of a sheep farmer, clashes with her father for taking a black mistress. In addition to Dusklands and In the Heart of the Country, he wrote a work in which Susan Barton meets Friday and Cruso, Foe. He is better known for a novel about Melanie's affair with Professor David Lurie, which leads to the title condition, and another about the titular hare-lipped gardener, who escapes from a "retraining camp" hospital and returns to Cape Town. For 10 points, name this South African author of Disgrace and The Life and Times of Michael K.;;(John) (Maxwell) Coetzee;;
Earth Science;;The Noril's-Talnakh type of these structures are ultramafic examples thought to have been created by plume magmatism. The "bell jar" type of these are special cases of the bysmalith type, and dedimentary ones may develop when excessive lithostatic pressure allows fluid pressure to rise high enough to crack a stratum of rock and carry sediment up the crack. Especially large ones are frequently called batholiths, but the best known varieties are mostly vertical and mostly horizontal, called, respectively, dikes and sills. For 10 points, give the term that usually denotes a formation of crystallized magma underground, a deposit of plutonic igneous rock.;;intrusion(s);;
Religion/Mythology;;Legendarily this first gained prominence when St. Dominic was told to spread it around Toulouse to combat the Albigensian heresy, a fact assumed by Supremi Apostolatus Officio and later encyclicals about it by Pope Leo XIII. It was first officially recognized by the Catholic Church in 1520 by Leo X, and in 2002, John Paul II added a fourth set of mysteries to this prayer, which had consisted of three sets of five each connected by the "Gloria Patri" and the "Pater Noster". For 10 points, name this Catholic prayer consisting of fifteen decades of Hail Marys counted on a chaplet, also known for its namesake beads.;;(the) rosary;;
Art;;He never finished the chalice that Clement VII had commissioned, though he did create a button for that Pope's cape. He created a medallion depicting Atlas Supporting the Sphere, and he also sculpted a statue of Mars for Fontainebleau and a statue of Ganymede Riding the Eagle. Personifications of the winds ring the base of another of his works, which also features reclining gold models of Neptune and Ceres, while the first title figure of his most famous work holds the sword with which he decapitated the other title figure. For 10 points, identify this murderous Mannerist goldsmith who sculpted Francis I's Salt Cellar and Perseus with the Head of Medusa.;;(Benevenuto) Cellini;;
Miscellaneous;;When appended with a "y," this adjective replaced "Plenty" in "Good n' Plenty" to describe a version of that candy with red licorice, and it also describes a cereal that has come in novelty "fiesta" and "Bronto bright" versions.  A terrible brand of children's gum that comes with temporary tattoos and has a zebra mascot is called the "stripe" of this. General Mills makes this in "roll-ups" and "by the foot," and it also appears "on the bottom" in some Dannon yogurts.  A form of this word modifies the non-cocoa type of Pebbles cereal. For 10 points, name this adjective, which describes a type of "loop" advertised by a fellow, who will follow his nose wherever it goes, Toucan Sam.;;fruit|fruity|froot;;fruitylicious
Literature;;A text, supposedly by Robert of Torigny, tells of this character's "Rise," and notes that he once caused an embarrassing situation between Guenivere and Arthur when he pushed Arthur into the River Usk. This man accepts Gromer Somer Joure's challenge to figure out what women want in a story reminiscent of the Wife of Bath's Tale about his wedding to Dame Ragnelle.  In another story, this character wears the symbol of a pentangle and rests at Lord Bertilak's castle, where his chastity is thrice tested, before setting out to bear the brunt of an axe-blow. For 10 points, name this knight of the Round Table, who got into a beheading contest with the Green Knight.;;(Sir) Gawain(e)|Gwalchmei|Gawan|Gauvan|Walewein;;
Geography;;The Pigeon and Little Pigeon rivers empty into the river that marks its southern boundary, and Brookville Lake and Hamilton Lake are located along this state's eastern border. The Wyandotte caves are located in the Harrison-Crawford State Forest at its southeast. This state's town of Bedford calls itself the "limestone capital of the world" and one can visit the Dan Quayle Vice-Presidential Museum in the city of Huntington. The Wabash River forms part of its western border with Illinois, and other notable cities include Evansville, Terre Haute, and South Bend. For 10 points, identify this state home to the Hoosier National Forest.;;Indiana;;
World History;;In Rabbinic sources, this ruler's name is accompanied by "may his bones rot," and early in his reign he had Lusius Quietus and three other senators executed.  His original choice as successor was the tubercular Lucius Ceionius Commodus, who became Aelius Caesar.  He twice avoided war with Parthia and he put down Bar Kokhba's Revolt, but he also defified his drowned lover, the Greek youth Antinous. He built an extensive series of palisades between the Rhine and Danube after ceding much of the land his predecessor had conquered. For 10 points, name this emperor who was followed by Antoninus Pius, succeeded Trajan, and built a massive wall across Britain.;;Hadrian|(Imperator) (Caesar) (Traianus) Hadrianus (Augustus)|(Publius) (Aelius) Hadrianus;;
Philosophy;;This work condemns "the original sin of reason" as one of the "four great errors".  It calls George Sand a milk cow, Dante a hyena, and describes The Imitation of Christ as exuding a Frenchman-like feminine smell in the section "Skirmishes of an Untimely Man". Its section on the "Improvers of Mankind" praises the Hindu Law of Manu, while this work begins with a list of 44 aphorisms, "Maxims and Arrows," before discussing the "Problems of Socrates," which includes introducing logic to supplant the Dionysian spirit. Subtitled "How to Philosophize with a Hammer," For 10 points, name this Nietzsche work, whose title parodies Wagner's Gotterdammerung.;;(The) Twilight of the Idols|Gotzen-Dammerung;;
Music;;This work features a 3/2 Vivace of its composer's earlier aria "Sento la Gioia" from the opera Amadigi, which provides the central melody for the celebrated "Alla Hornpipe" movement. The "Bouree" and "Air" movements of are found in the first section according to Samuel Arnold's authoritative edition of this work. Beginning with a French overture, it consists of three suites in F, D, and G major, while it is often paired with "Music for Royal Fireworks" in performance. For 10 points, name this series of pieces written to accompany the procession of the George I's royal barge on the River Thames by George Friedrich Handel.;;(the) Water Music;;
Chemistry;;This compound participates in the Griesenbaum reaction along with pentane, which results in a tetra-substitution in a five member ring. Indigo trisulfonate can be used to quantitatively assess the presence of this compound in water. It participates in a reaction that follows the Criegee mechanism, and is a 1,3 dipolar cycloaddition reaction occurring in the presence of dichloromethane that creates ketones or aldehydes from alkenes. Having a blue color, it is formed during lightning, while its name comes from its foul smell and halocarbons are able to catalyze the degradation of this compound in the atmosphere. For 10 points, identify this allotrope of oxygen with three atoms.;;ozone;;O3
Art;;Edgar Samuel cited its artist's portrait of George Gisze to suggest that its artist may have used a blown glass tube while painting it. One figure wears the Order of St. Michael and holds a dagger, while another clutches a glove in his right hand as his arm rests on a book which indicates that his age is 25. The curtain in the background is green, and the pattern of the tiles at the bottom of this painting is taken from the Westminster Abbey. Its center includes shelves with several musical and scientific instruments and it also features a distorted skull at the bottom. For 10 points, identify this painting featuring a diplomat and a bishop from France by Hans Holbein the Younger.;;(The) (French) Ambassadors;;
World History;;His government saw the passage of the Army Enlistment Act as part of the Cardwell Reforms as well as Forster's Education Act.  He quarreled with the Vatican over the subject of papal infallibility, and wrote the pamphlet Bulgarian Horrors and the Questions of the East as part of his Midlothian campaign. He lost the support of the Liberal Unionists to Lord Salisbury, and he was publicly blamed for the death of General Gordon.  He abandoned Charles Parnell, whom he had earlier supported as part of his plan for Irish Home Rule. For 10 points, name this "Grand Old Man" and four time British prime minister, the Liberal rival of Benjamin Disraeli.;;(William) Gladstone;;
Literature;;This poet wrote about a figure, who "when he cried the little children died in the streets" in "Epitaph on a Tyrant". One of his poems asserts that the "The death of the poet was kept from his poems," and another poem juxtaposes a lover's naïve comment that "love has no ending" against the clocks that "began to whir and chime" pronouncing "You cannot conquer Time".  This author of "In Memory of W.B. Yeats," and "As I Walked Out One Evening" wrote "We must love one another or die" in a poem that begins, "I sit in one of the dives / on Fifty-second Street". For 10 points, name this poet, who wrote "September 1, 1939" and "The Unknown Citizen".;;(Wystan) (Hugh) Auden;;
Noncomputational Math;;For a constant magnetic field, the energy of the anomalous Zeeman effect is proportional to a function of these values known as the Landé g-factor. In any system, there is one of these for each operator that commutes with the Hamiltonian and one given by the Hamiltonian's eigenvalues.  The radius of electron orbitals in the Bohr model is proportional to that value squared, and they are constant as additional electrons are added according to the Aufbau principle.  No two fermions can have the same value for these according to the Pauli exclusion principle. For 10 points, name these values, which describe among other things the shell, subshell, and spin values for an electron.;;quantum number(s);;(angular) (momentum) quantum number(s)
Literature;;The end of this novel features a discussion of Chijimi linens as well as a scene in which a main character falls and "the Milky Way flows down inside him with a roar," which follows the burning of a silk warehouse used as a movie theater. Its protagonist claims to be an expert on Western ballet, but has never seen an actual performance. While on a train to an onsen town, the protagonist encounters a tubercular man and a woman, who later offers to be his maid, Yukio and Yoko. For 10 points, name this Yasunari Kawabata novel in which the geisha Komako has an affair with Shimamura, while hanging out at hot springs in the titular wintery region.;;Snow Country|Yukiguni;;
United States History;;The operation that triggered this event was named after the Anadyr River to deceive military intelligence about its location. One party involved talked about burglars and those that caught the burglars in a telegram to Bertrand Russell, and its resolution was begun by a meeting between an ABC news reporter and Alexsandr Fomin. It resulted in the death of Rudolf Anderson, a U2 pilot, and a resolution was eventually reached with the removal of Jupiter missiles from Turkey, as proposed by Nikita Khrushchev. For 10 points, name this October 1962 event in which the United States and the Soviet Union were brought to the brink of war over Soviet weapons in Cuba.;;Cuban Missile Crisis;;
Chemistry;;A quantitative test for them involves the addition of alcoholic silver nitrate solution, which follows the Zeisel test where they are cleaved using strong acids. Anisole and THF are compounds with this functional group, and a special type of these can be produced by reacting alkenes with peroxy acids. They can be produced by reacting an alkyl halide with an alcoxide produced from an alcohol in the Williamson synthesis, and the Crown varieties are used as solvents for Grignard reagents. For 10 points, identify this functional group, where two carbon molecules are single bonded to an oxygen molecule, whose diethyl variety was once used as an anesthetic.;;ether(s);;
Literature;;One of his protagonists is chased by the "Man with Queer Feet" before experiencing a vision of Dick Humbird in a dark alley. That man's mother, Beatrice O'Hara, has an affair with Monsignor Darcy, who introduces him to literature with Thomas D'Invilliers. In another work the murder of Abe North leaves Nicole Warren hysterical, who later marries Tommy Barban after divorcing Dick Diver. In addition to writing about Amory Blaine in This Side of Paradise and Tender is the Night, another of his works ends when the protégé of Dan Cody is murdered to avenge Myrtle Wilson. For 10 points, what author wrote about Daisy Buchanan and Nick Carraway in The Great Gatsby?;;(F.) (Scott) Fitzgerald|(Francis) (Scott) (Key) Fitzgerald;;
United States History;;He first came to Washington to give a speech in the aftermath of the Chesapeake Affair, and he created the Bureau of Indian Affairs while serving as Secretary of War under Monroe.  In another role, he was replaced by Martin Van Buren after his wife Floride exacerbated the Peggy Eaton affair, and earlier he wrote an Exposition and Protest named for his home state that argued against the Tariff of Abominations. He served as vice president for both John Quincy Adams and Andrew Jackson, and late in life, he was unable to read his own speech against the Compromise of 1850.  For 10 pints, name this proponent of slavery and nullification, a senator from South Carolina.;;(John) (Caldwell) Calhoun;;
Literature;;In one section of this poem, it is noted that no "trembling harp," "tumbling hawk," or "swift horse" had "emptied the earth of entire peoples". Those lines come from its section named for the "Last Survivor," which is considered to be the third of its "four funerals". Its closing scene dedicates a barrow to that title figure, who as a youth allegedly lost a swimming contest with Breca in the North Sea. The title figure receives two weapons that eventually fail, acquiring Naegling from Hygelac and Hrunting from Unferth in, for 10 points, which epic poem in which the title figure fights a dragon after rescuing Heorot from the ravages of Cain's descendent Grendel?;;Beowulf;;
Astronomy;;These objects can have an internal boundary named for Cauchy, and they can also be extremal according to the Reissner-Nordstrom metric.  If the charge to mass ratio is any higher, they can violate the Cosmic Censorship Hypothesis. Their entropy was conjectured to be inversely proportional to the Planck length squared by Bekenstein, who sometimes names a process in which spontaneous pair production results in them giving off energy, known as Hawking radiation. For 10 points, name these objects, which occur above the Chandraseker limit, consisting of an event horizon surrounding a singularity, and which are so massive that no light can escape.;;black hole(s);;singularities
Literature;;He claimed that the west's pure-white skin allowed westerners to adopt bright lights, and exalted elegant toilets in one work, and he told of a beautiful woman who gets a "prostitute spider" emblazoned on her body in another.  This author of "In Praise of Shadows" and "The Tattooer" wrote of a centipede bite killing Tsuneko in a work by this author that sees Tadasu fantasize about breastfeeding.  In another of his works, Yukiko is the most westernized of the title characters.  In addition to "The Bridge of Dreams," he wrote a novel in which Kaname and Misako's marriage dissolves.  For 10 points, name this Japanese author of Some Prefer Nettles and The Makioka Sisters.;;(Junichiro) Tanizaki|Tanizaki (Junichiro);;
Religion/Mythology;;One story notes that this figure's lover had a sister named Belili, who heard this figure's lover lamenting, and spilled a handful of gems.  This deity had a holy city at Erech, and was subjected to sixty diseases, after which she demanded the bag containing the waters of life from Asu-shu-namir.  In one story, this personification of the planet Venus was forced to remove a piece of clothing as she passed through each of seven gates.  She may have caused the death of her lover, Tammuz, and all sexuality on earth stopped when she descended to meet Ereshkigal.  For 10 points, name this Babylonian goddess of war and love.;;Ishtar|Inanna|Astarte;;
Sociology;;This man explored what effect skyscrapers have on urban life in "Vertical City," and he studied people who communicate by repeating radioed messages, cyranoids.  He studied the responses to people cutting into lines or asking for someone to give up their seat on the subway, and he asked people to send packages to those most likely to know the target in his small world experiment.  Variations on his most famous experiment showed higher stress rates in women, though they were just as likely to continue operating the machine.  For 10 points, name this man who had people administer electric shocks in his obedience experiment.;;(Stanley) Milgram;;
Music;;He currently collaborates with flautist Bobby Millitello. He created a jazz version of "Someday My Prince Will Come" in his album based on Disney songs, and he is credited with bringing jazz to college campuses with his Jazz at Oberlin. His group's best known album features the tracks "Kathy's Waltz" and "Strange Meadowlark," and features a 9/8 time signature in a piece inspired by the zeybek folk dance, "Blue Rondo a la Turk". Joe Morello was originally supposed to play a drum solo in his most famous piece composed by saxophonist Paul Desmond and written in quintuple time. For 10 points, name this Jazz pianist, who featured "Take Five" in his album Time Out.;;(Dave) Brubeck;;
Chemistry;;A cruder form of it was proposed by Wilhelmy in 1858, and its namesake observed the implications of this statement when equilibrium of reactive and unreactive molecules is considered in the van't Hoff equation. A T to m term is sometimes introduced to it, as a quantity in it is approximated to be independent of temperature. That quantity accounts for the rate and orientation of collisions is called the pre exponential factor. One form of it states that the natural log of the equilibrium constant has a inverse relationship with one over T, and it allows one to relate the equilibrium constant with activation energy. For 10 points, identify this equation named for the Swedish chemist.;;Arrhenius (equation);;
Literature;;This man adopted his rival's play Berenice into Tite and Berenice, a work about Titus's marital follies.  Pauline and Felix decry the title character of another of his works for converting to Christianity, but when that Armenian gets martyred, they convert too.  This author of Polyeucte wrote of the Comte de Gormas's daughter, who confides in Elvira that she loves the title character, but demands that he duel Don Sancho to avenge her father. That work centers on Chimène and Rodrigue, who is given the title epithet after earning honor in war against the Moors.  For 10 points, name this author of Le Cid.;;(Pierre) Corneille;;
Art;;Inkwells and some scrolls can be seen lying to the left of a figure in this painting as a man dressed in orange has his right palm on the title figure's knee as he stares at the title character. A lyre can be seen behind the extended right leg of the title figure as well as a chain that lies partially on the floor. A figure in blue and brown stands in an archway leaning against the wall at its left, and in the center a man in red turns his head away from the title figure whose left hand points upward as he grabs a cup containing poison. For 10 points, name this painting by Jacques-Louis David, which shows the final moments of a philosopher about to consume hemlock.;;(The) Death of Socrates;;
Religion/Mythology;;One of this religion's texts follows the seeker through places named for Search, Knowledge, and Wonderment, before arriving in the "Valley of True Poverty and Absolute Nothingness". Along with The Gems of Divine Mysteries, that work, The Seven Valleys, was written by this religion's founder. After the death of this religion's Guardian, its Hands of the Cause announced the election of its ruling body, the Universal House of Justice. Haifa is the site of the tomb of one of its holy men, the Báb. Its texts include the Most Holy Book and the Book of Certitude.  For 10 points, name this religion, an offshoot of Shi'a Islam that venerates all major prophets and the Bahá'u'lláh.;;Baha'i (Faith)|Baha'i(sm);;
Noncomputational Math;;A theorem named for him states that for a polynomial of degree n with integral coefficients, there exists a maximum of n solutions to f of x equals 0 modulo p. In addition, this man proved that every positive integer can be represented as a sum of four squares. A theorem named for him states that the order of a subgroup must divide the order of the group, and he is also the namesake of a method of finding the optima of a function by introducing the parameter lambda. The namesake of an error function associated with Taylor series, for 10 points, identify this Frenchie, who also found a set of points where a tiny body remains stationary relative to two larger bodies.;;(Joseph) (Louis) Lagrange;;
United States History;;This man's video rental history was printed in the Washington City Paper, leading to the Video Privacy Protection Act.  Like Samuel Alito and William Rehnquist, his nomination to the Supreme Court was opposed by the ACLU, though his qualifications were highly praised by Warren Burger.  This man performed an action that William Ruckelshaus and Elliot Richardson refused to do, the firing of Archibald Cox in the Saturday Night Massacre, while serving as Solicitor General.  Florynce Kennedy used his name as a verb in 1991, arguing against Clarence Thomas's appointment.  For 10 points, name this Supreme Court nominee of Ronald Reagan, rejected by the senate.;;(Robert) (Heron) Bork;;
Literature;;A quote from this play about committing fornication that ends "the wench is dead" is used as the epigraph for T.S. Eliot's "The Portrait of a Lady".  "Laws were then most sure/When, like the Draco's, they were writ in blood," claims a character in this work, whose name is fittingly Machiavel. The title character sends a slave named Ithamore to kill all of the nuns in a nunnery, including his daughter Abagail, but eventually dies when he falls into his own boiling cauldron. For 10 points, name this work that may have inspired The Merchant of Venice, a play about the life of a Semite named Barabas by Christopher Marlowe.;;(The) Jew of Malta;;
Biology;;A hydroxyethyl derivative of this compound is a common intermediate in the synthesis of valine, leucine, and isoleucine. The transketolase activity of red blood cells is studied to measure the deficiency of this compound whose pyrophosphate form is a coenzyme used to decarboxylate pyruvate to form Acetyl CoA. In alcoholics its deficiency results in Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome, while a more common deficiency of it originally resulted from a switch to polished rice. Sometimes called aneurin, it consists of a pyrimidine and a thiazole ring, and that structure was correctly described by Casimir Funk. For 10 points, identify this vitamin, whose deficiency causes beriberi.;;thiamine|B1;;B
World History;;This man's military was first led by Saint Arnaud, and his advisors included the dukes of Persigny and Morny.  He was satirized in a work plagiarized to form The Protocols of the Elders of Zion, Maurice Joly's Dialogue in Hell Between Machiavelli and Montesquieu.  His rule saw a boom in railway construction and the implementation of Baron Haussmann's plan to renovate the streets of Paris.  He assisted Victor Emmanuel II against Franz Joseph at Solferino and he was able to briefly annex Mexico under Maximilian, but he was defeated and captured by Moltke at Sedan, ending the Franco-Prussian War.  For 10 points, name this French emperor, the nephew of his namesake.;;Napoleon (the Third|III){1}?|(Charles) Louis Napoleon (Bonaparte);;Napoleon
Philosophy;;In this work, the author suggests moving into a house of morality while rebuilding one's house of ideas and knowledge from its foundation.  This work details a four-part plan, including making complete lists, as a means towards understanding, supporting this rationalist approach over empirical observations.  It also modifies the position of skepticism to allow for an incontrovertible claim.  This work calls physics the "heart" and "soul of man" and argues for mind-body dualism.  Written four years before the author's Meditations on First Philosophy, for 10 points, name this 1637 work of René Descartes that contains the quotation, "I think, therefore I am".;;Discourse on Method|Discourse on the Method;;
Music;;One of this man's compositions includes a saucy dance in which one character asks "Got any money"? after which a disheveled old man chases her around saying "All that matters is love".  He wrote a symphonic poem for a former Regent-President of his country, and he wrote a piece for the Basel Chamber Orchestra called Music for Strings, Percussion and Celesta.  This composer of Kossuth and The Miraculous Mandolin also wrote a five-movement Concerto for Orchestra and an opera about Judith, who insists that the title character open the doors of his palace. For 10 points, name this Hungarian composer of the opera Duke Bluebeard's Castle.;;(Bela) (Victor) (Janos) Bartok;;
Pop Culture;;This man played Jim Hawkins in a 1990 film version of Treasure Island, three years after playing Jamie Graham in Empire of the Sun. He appeared as Pelagia's fiancée Mandras in Captain Corelli's Mandolin, voiced the title role in Howl's Moving Castle, and practiced Gun Kata as John Preston in Equilibrium.  He lost sixty pounds to play Trevor Reznik in The Machinist and appeared as yuppie-turned-serial-killer Patrick Bateman in American Psycho.  He tells Aaron Eckhart's character that "You're the symbol of hope I can never be" in a film that sees him chase Heath Ledger a lot.  For 10 points, name this actor who played the title role in The Dark Knight and Batman Begins.;;(Christian) (Charles) (Philip) Bale;;
World History;;When this ruler visited Rome at age five, Pope Leo IV dressed him in the robes and sword belt of a Roman consul.  He established a new legal code with the Book of Dooms, and at the Battle of Ashdown he defeated the forces of the man with whom he would later sign the Peace of Wedmore.  He personally translated from Latin works such as Bede's Ecclesiastical History and Boethius's Consolation of Philosophy.  The fifth son of Aethelwulf, he defeated Guthrum's forces at Edington, pushing them back into Northumbria and East Anglia and retaking London in about 885.  For 10 points, name this king of Wessex, the only "Great" English king.;;Alfred (the) (Great);;
Physics;;Transferred electron devices are a form of these components that utilize negative differential resistance and are generally named for Gunn.  A law giving their current is named for transistor-inventor William Shockley.  One of these and a MOSFET is used to form a synchronous rectifier, and four of these devices are arranged in a namesake bridge in full-wave rectifiers.  If these have a large enough negative voltage drop, they go into breakdown, though reverse-bias operation is possible in their Zener variety.  For 10 points, name these devices that normally consist of a p-n junction and only allow current to pass in one direction, and which also come in light-emitting types.;;diode(s);;Gunn diode(s)
Literature;;Characters created by this author include Jim, a child who is told by a lightning rod salesman that his house will be hit in the upcoming storm, and Douglas Spaulding, a twelve-year-old who convinces Mr. Sanderson to let him run errands for him in exchange for shoes which will help him explore the world. Another of his novels features ultra-fast "beetle" cars, and includes the characters Professor Faber, Clarisse McCellan, Captain Beatty, and Guy Montag. The author of Something Wicked This Way Comes and Dandelion Wine, for 10 points, name this author of The Martian Chronicles and Fahrenheit 451.;;(Ray) Bradbury;;
Geography;;The Chele La is this country's highest major mountain pass, and its small southern areas of deciduous lowland contain the Shiwalik Hills and its former capital, Punakha.  Its second largest city is Paro, and this country contains Gangkhar Puensum, which at 24,836 feet is the world's largest unclimbed mountain, although the slightly higher Kula Kangri is disputed with China. The states of Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, and Sikkim all border this country, and its rivers, which include the Drangme Chhu, lie in the Brahmaputra watershed. For 10 points, name this kingdom in the eastern Himalayas with capital at Thimphu.;;(Kingdom) (of) Bhutan;;
World History;;The buildup to this conflict saw one side occupied with the Uskok War, and the Smolensk War is sometimes considered an episode in it.  Gabor Bethlen took advantage of this conflict to carve out some land, and it also involved Maximilian I of Bavaria.  Christian IV signed the Treaty of Lubeck to end Denmark's involvement in this war, and the Battle of White Mountain ended its Bohemian Phase, which began with a Defenestration of Prague.  Commanders in this war included the Count of Tilly, Wallenstein, and Gustavus Adolphus.  For 10 points, name this war between Catholics and Protestants in the Holy Roman Empire that ended with the Peace of Westphalia.;;Thirty Years(') (War);;
Literature;;In one of his novels, Florentine Vivier murders Lord Frederick, leaving her son Hyancinth to Miss Pynsent, and in another novel Mrs. Bread gives the title character evidence that Madame de Bellegarde murdered her husband, which he could use to blackmail Claire de Cintré. In addition to writing The Princess Casamassima and describing Christopher Newman in The American, another of his works climaxes when Countess Gemini reveals that Pansy is the illegitimate daughter of Madame Merle and the title character's husband Gilbert Osmond. For 10 points, name this author, who wrote about Lambert Strether and Isabel Archer in The Ambassadors and The Portrait of a Lady.;;(Henry) James;;
Art;;This man's works include a number of buildings on Nuns' Island in Montreal and a building which features a translucent onyx wall, the Villa Tugendhat. While working at IIT, he designed the Farnsworth House, and his "skin and bones" architecture is exemplified by such works as the Lake Shore Drive Apartments. He and Lilly Reich created the Barcelona Chair for his German Pavilion, while another of his designs features three-position window blinds and the Four Seasons Restaurant, and is located on Park Avenue. For 10 points, identify this last chairman of the Bauhaus, who said "less is more" and collaborated with Phillip Johnson on the Seagram Building.;;(Ludwig) Mies (van) (der) (Rohe)|(Maria) (Ludwig) (Michael) Mies;;
Chemistry;;One quantity in this equation can be expressed as one minus theta over theta where theta is the Langmuir adsorption isotherm. It can be applied to calculate the net charge on a protein at a given pH and is considered an approximation of the law of mass action applied to one species. This equation is less useful in extremely dilute solutions and when dealing with extremely strong acids or bases, and it ignores the minor dissociation of water and also hydrolysis of bases. For 10 points, identify this equation which relates the log of the ratio of conjugate base over acid and pKa to pH which is useful in characterizing buffer systems.;;Henderson-Hasselbalch (Equation);;
United States History;;This act was limited by a Supreme Court decision for the Virginia Electric and Power co., and its constitutionality was upheld in a case involving the Jones & Laughlin Steel Corporation.   It was cosponsored by Massachusetts representative William Connery, and domestic servants and agricultural workers were explicitly excluded from this act.  It was amended in 1947 by an act that passed over President Truman's veto, the Taft-Hartley Act, and under this legislation, workers were allowed to choose the union they desired via election.   For 10 points, name this legislation that established a namesake board for governing labor disputes, a 1935 act named for a New York senator.;;Wagner(-Connery) (Act)|National Labor Relations (Act);;
Literature;;In one of this man's novels, the owner of the After the Show Retreat is married to the radical politician Yuken Noguchi. Another novel sets the Daphnis and Chloe story on Uta-Jima and stars the lovers Hatsue and Shinji. In addition to After the Banquet and The Sound of Waves, this author wrote a novel in which Fusako falls in love with Ryuji, the titular Sailor Who Fell from Grace with the Sea. More famously, he wrote a series of novels about Honda and Kiyaoki's births and rebirths, as well as a novel about Mizoguchi, a young monk who sets fire to the titular building. For 10 points, identify this author of The Sea of Fertility tetralogy and The Temple of the Golden Pavilion.;;Mishima (Yukio)|(Yukio) Mishima;;
Music;;In one of his operas, Mamud switches his favored son Melindo at birth with the son of the Sultana Rustena. Along with Truth and Ordeal, he featured a female chorus playing Assyrian soldiers in his oratorio based on the book of Judith, Juditha Triumphans.  He showcased four sets violin concertos alternating with a pairwise arrangement of keys in his L'Estro Armonico. His Mandolin Concerto in C Major is often paired with his most famous work, which comes from the collection of concerti grossi, The Contest Between Harmony and Invention. For 10 points, identify this Italian composer, who included the movements "L'inverno," and "La Primavera," in The Four Seasons.;;(Antonio) Vivaldi;;
Economics;;This economist posited an early form of the Quantity Theory of Money in Tract on Monetary Reform.  He proposed that recessions can get worse in the presence of near-zero nominal interest due to liquidity traps, and that an increase in GDP can result from initial investment through the multiplier effect.  He argued against reparations in a work critical of the Treaty of Versailles, The Economic Consequences of the Peace, and in another work for increased government spending to combat recessions.  For 10 points, name this writer of The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money.;;(John) (Maynard) Keynes;;
Literature;;This poem discusses a bough of cherries that is broken in an orchard by an "officious fool," who is rewarded with "a blush at least," while earlier the speaker argues that strangers cannot understand "the depth and passion" of an "earnest glance". The speaker laments the gift of his "nine hundred year old name", and later points out a Claus of Innsbruck statue of a sea-horse being tamed by Poseidon. The speaker "gave commands," which stopped "all smiles" of the title character, who now "looks as if she were alive" in a Fra Pandolf portrait on the wall. For 10 points, name this poem about the Duke of Ferrara's former wife, written by Robert Browning.;;My Last Duchess;;
Pop Culture;;One song on this album notes that the Hendersons will all be at the title event, a "show tonight on trampoline". In the last song on this album, the singer says he'd "love to turn you on" after noting that he "read the news today, oh boy". Those songs are "Being for the Benefit of Mr. Kite", and "A Day in the Life". This album opens a song that ends by introducing Billy Shears, who sings "With a Little Help From My Friends," and continues with songs like "When I'm 64", "Lovely Rita", and "Lucy In the Sky with Diamonds". For 10 points, name this album whose title group "hopes you will enjoy the show," a 1966 Beatles album with a cover featuring lots of famous people.;;Sergeant Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band;;
World History;;This man set up a new military treasury to pay veteran bonuses, and he exiled Lucius Antonius after a protracted siege of Perusia.  He led the Mutina campaign, and established the urban cohorts to check the Praetorian Guard.  This man married Scribonia in an attempt to prevent future conflict with Sextus Pompeius, and a temple in Ankara contains his own account of his deeds, the Res Gestae.  At times it was unclear whether he would be succeeded by his nephew Marcellus or by his friend and military commander Marcus Agrippa, and he was victorious at Philippi, defeating Brutus and Cassius and avenging his adoptive father.  For 10 points, name this first Roman Emperor.;;Augustus|(Gaius) (Julius) (Caesar) Octavian(us)|(Gaius) Octavius (Thurinus);;
Computer Science;;In 1999, McIlroy created an adversary for this algorithm that guarantees that it will run in worst-case time. Its worst-case runtime can be avoided by switching to heapsort after a certain recursion depth, a construction known as introsort. Like mergesort, it is easily parallelizable, and its runtime can be decreased by first selecting the median of the unsorted input list. It was invented by C.A.R. Hoare, and its second phase is the partition function, which splits the original list into lists of elements that are greater or less than the chosen pivot value. For 10 points, identify this divide-and-conquer sorting algorithm which runs in big O of n log n time, named for its speed.;;Quicksort;;
Literature;;The title character of this play asserts she wants one character to return with "vine-leaves in his hair" before threatening to burn another woman's hair off. One character buys a villa that once belonged to the Cabinet Member, Secretary Falk, with his Aunt Juliana's help, and he spends his honeymoon researching the domestic handicrafts of Brabant. Thea Elvsted plans to reconstruct a manuscript that was burned by the title character, who is later blackmailed by Judge Brack, who knows she loaned one of her father's pistols to Eilert Lovberg. For 10 points, the wife of George Tasman achieves a "beautiful death" by committing suicide in this play by Henrik Ibsen.;;Hedda Gabler;;
World History;;A force of these people defeated Eustathios Palatinos under Drogo, while another was crushed by Ilghazi at the Field of Blood.  Another force of them, supposedly fighting for Michael Doukas, invaded Greece before being driven out by Alexius I.  One of their leaders was ransomed by Danishmend Gazi after capturing and becoming the first king of Antioch during the first crusade. His father conquered much of southern Italy, establishing a royal line in Sicily.  In addition to Bohemond and Robert Guiscard, their leaders include a man known as "the bastard" before his defeat of Harold Godwinson at Hastings.  For 10 points, name these people led by William the Conqueror.;;Norman(s);;Italian Norman(s)|Italo-Norman(s)
Geography;;The Kirirom National Park is found in the Elephant Mountains which lie in this country's southwest region. One can visit the Rorka Kondal pagoda in the Kratie province, while the Baset and the Banom temples can be found in the city of Battambang. During the monsoon season, the most notable body of water in this country vastly increases in size due to the change in the flow of its namesake river, the Tonle Sap. Its capital sits at the confluence of the Tonle Sap and Mekong rivers. For 10 points, identify this Southeast Asian nation bordered by Vietnam, Laos, and Thailand, which has its capital at Phnomh Penh.;;(Kingdom) (of) Cambodia;;
Physics;;This man names an equation whose lattice method can be used to solve the Navier-Stokes equation and which is used to find the distribution function of a fluid.  The fraction of particles at a specific temperature is given as inversely proportional to the partition function by a distribution named for this man, and with Maxwell he names a distribution of molecular velocities in a gas.  He discovered that a system's entropy can be given by the natural logarithm of the number of microstates times his namesake constant, equal to the gas constant over Avogadro's number.  For 10 points, identify this physicist who names a law governing blackbody radiation with Stefan.;;(Ludwig) Boltzmann;;
Religion/Mythology;;In Ephesus, this man enraged a mob of silversmiths by preaching against their idols of Artemis. Along with Barnabus, this man healed a disabled man in Lystra and was mistaken for a Greek deity, while his divinity was proven when he survived a snake bite while shipwrecked on the island of Malta. His assistants were Timothy and Titus, and he once sent the slave Onesimus to take a dispatch to Philemon. Along with Peter, he is the focus of the book of Acts, and he had a notable conversion experience when God revealed Jesus to him on the road to Damascus. For 10 points, identify this saint and Apostle who ministered to the Gentiles and who wrote a number of Epistles.;;(Saint) Paul (the) (Apostle)|(Saint) Paul (of) (Tarsus);;Saul
Art;;A Jean Louis Forain work with the same name depicts a chair behind the subject. To the left of this painting, a woman in a white coat can be seen with orange gloves, and the subject of this painting is a woman generally considered to be named Suzon. Two indistinct chandeliers hang from the ceiling, and a pair of green boots dangles from the ceiling in the upper corner. A man with a moustache can be seen at the top right of this work and the subject rests her hand on a counter where one can find a bowl of oranges and several bottles of alcohol as the subject stares directly at the viewer. For 10 points, identify this depiction of a Parisian nightclub, a work by Eduoard Manet.;;(A) Bar at the Folies-Bergere|(Un) Bar aux Foiles-Bergere;;
World History;;In the 1860s, this country started a campaign to assimilate the Aracunia region, and a civil war in this country saw the ship Itata load up arms in California and threaten the rule of a U. S. backed President Jose Balmaceda. It also gained the Tarapaca province by the terms of a treaty which also required a plebiscite to determine the sovereignty of the Tacna and Arica provinces. Yet another ruler of this country came to power after he joined forces with Jose de San Martin and defeated the Spanish at Chacabuco, Bernardo O'Higgins. For 10 points, identify this country whose Marxist leader Salvador Allende was toppled in a coup led by Augusto Pinochet.;;(Republic) (of) Chile;;
Religion/Mythology;;This figure allegedly heard the cries of Stheno and Euryale and imitated them on a reed, thus inventing the flute. She sent a plague to strike the Locrians and sent the storm which killed Ajax the Lesser after he raped Cassandra in her temple, while Erichthonius was born after Hephaestus attempted to rape her. This goddess gave the gift of prophecy to Tiresias, who she had earlier blinded for seeing her naked. She turned Medusa into a Gorgon and, after losing a weaving contest, turned Arachne into a spider. For 10 points, identify this goddess of wisdom and daughter of Metis, born from the head of her father Zeus, who won a contest with Poseidon for control of her namesake city.;;Pallas (Athena)|(Pallas) Athena|Athene|Asana|Cydonia;;
Biology;;Paleophragmodictya are among the oldest life forms in this phylum. Cladorhizadae are a carnivorous family in this phylum, while some of its members use the totipotent archeocytes to reproduce. Members of this phylum have excretory structures called oscula, and their silica-based skeletal structure is secreted by sclerocytes. Apopyles are pores which allow water to enter the atrium from the choanocyte chamber in the syconoid arrangement for them, and they are also found in asconoid and leuconoid types. All members of this phylum possess a gelatinous tissue called the mesohyl. For 10 points, identify this phylum of animals commonly referred to as sponges.;;porifera;;sponges
Literature;;This author chronicled the succession of owners of Rembrandt's Aristotle Contemplating the Bust of Homer in the novel Picture This.  King Solomon is nicknamed "Shlomo" and derives all of his wisdom from clay tablets in his retelling of the David story, God Knows. In one of his works, Bruce Gold becomes Secretary of State, and another sees Bob Slocum accidentally smother his injured son. In addition to Good as Gold and Something Happened, another of his novels is set on Pianosa and features the characters Colonel Cathcart and Milo Minderbinder. For 10 points, identify this author who wrote about Major Major Major Major and Yossarian in Catch-22.;;(Joseph) Heller;;
Music;;One character in this opera performs the "Csardas" to verify her disguise as a Hungarian countess before stealing her husband's watch to prove his infidelity, and earlier she convinces Alfred to pretend to be her husband and serve his eight-day sentence in jail. In the "laughing" song, "Mein Herr Marquis, ein Mann wie Sie," a maid convinces her master that she is actually an actress. While pretending to be Chevalier Chagrin, the jailer, Frank convinces Adele to come home with him where they find Rosalinde arguing with her husband. Falke leads the guests of Prince Orlofsky's ball to witness Baron Eisenstein's reconciliation, in, for 10 points, this operetta by Johann Strauss.;;(Die) Fledermaus |(The) Bat;;
Religion/Mythology;;Late in his life this figure traveled to Sardinia with either Aristaeus or Iolaus after a stay in Sicily, where he helped King Cocalus and his daughters murder a visiting king. The father of the healer Iapyx, this figure fled Athens after the Areopagus condemned him to death for the murder of his nephew Perdix. He once used honey and an ant to thread a seashell, and he gave Pasiphae the wooden cow she used to mate with a bull, after which he built a structure to house their child. While imprisoned at the top of a tower, this man escaped with his son after building a pair of wings. For 10 points, identify this Greek inventor, the builder of the Minotaur's Labyrinth and the father of Icarus.;;Daedalus|Daidalos|Taitle;;
Literature;;In this work, the Island of Ennasins is inhabited by a race with noses shaped like the Ace of Clubs, and earlier a dispute in which the bakers of Lerne refuse to sell cakes to shepherds prompts an invasion by King Picrochole. One character is confused by the contradictory advice he receives from Raminagrobis, Herr Tripa, and Friar John and leads a quest to consult the Oracle of the Holy Bottle. That character Panurge first meets one of the title characters after his father sends him to study in Paris because he requires four thousand six hundred cows to feed him and must be restrained by four massive chains. For 10 points, name this work about a pair of giants by Francois Rabelais.;;(The) (Life) (of) Gargantua and Pantagruel;;
Physics;;Experiments by Francisco-Miguel Marqués et al. suggested the possibility of a stable cluster of four of them.  Brockhouse developed a method of spectroscopy using these particles, and work leading to their discovery showed that beryllium rays could remove particles from paraffin wax and was performed by the Joliot-Curies.  An antineutrino is released when these undergo a certain type of decay, and free ones have a lifetime of approximately fifteen minutes.  They undergo beta-minus decay, and are created by electron capture.  Discovered in 1932 by James Chadwick, for 10 points, name this electrically neutral subatomic particle, found in the nucleus with protons.;;neutron(s);;
World History;;He resigned from his first term after a scandal involving the defense minister Lavon, and his policies resulted in the Haganah becoming an important pseudo-military organization. Late in his career, he founded the Rafi Party and the massive immigration of people from Yemen, which was known as "Operation Magic Carpet". He was the first head of the Mapai party, and was also the first and third person to hold his most notable office, being succeeded first by Moshe Sharett and later by Levi Eshkol. For 10 points, name this first Prime Minister of Israel.;;(David) Ben-Gurion;;
Philosophy;;He claims it is impossible for an omnipotent, loving God to be in control of the world, but possible for a weaker God to exist in his Three Essays on Religion. One of his works lays out five principles of inductive reasoning, while another argues that freedom is good for women if it is good for men. In addition to System of Logic, he wrote a work that uses dolors and hedons to calculate the "Greatest Happiness Principle" and claims that "actions are right in proportion as they tend to promote happiness". The author of The Subjection of Women, for 10 points, name this man, who outlined a philosophy practiced by Jeremy Bentham in his book Utilitarianism.;;(John) (Stuart) Mill;;
Noncomputational Math;;With the exception of the smallest of their kind, all known examples of these can be expressed as the sum of cubes of consecutive odd numbers. Euler proved that there is a one-to-one correspondence between Mersenne primes and even types of this number, and they form a subset of the triangular numbers. Numbers which do not fit this category are classified as deficient or abundant, and these numbers all yield 2n when they form the argument of the divisor function. It is unknown whether any odd ones exist. 6, 28, and 496 are the first three examples of, for 10 points, what type of number that equals the sum of its proper divisors?;;perfect (number);;
Literature;;Chapter 41 of this novel features a game where players re-arrange alphabet blocks to form words, and one character spells out the words "Blunder" and "Dixon" referring to another character's shady past. That character receives an anonymous gift of a piano, which leads to gossip in Highbury. A woman is saved from a band of vicious gypsies after the ball at the Crown Inn by Frank Churchill, who later marries Jane Fairfax. The title character tries to convince a nearby boarder to pursue Mr. Elton, but Robert Martin ends up marrying that character, Harriet Smith. For 10 points, name this novel in which Mr. Knightley marries the titular Miss Woodhouse, by Jane Austen.;;Emma;;
Music;;This person adapted the passacaglia from Bach's Nach dir, Herr, verlanget mich for a theme that appears in the notable chaconne of the last movement of his Fourth Symphony in E minor, while he created twenty-one pieces for piano-four-hands based on folk songs in his Hungarian Dances, and featured two sharp chords to begin his Tragic Overture. His first symphony is often referred to as "Beethoven's Tenth," while another of his works quotes the hymn "Gaudeamus Igitur" and was written to commemorate an honorary degree from the University of Breslau.  For 10 points, name this composer of Academic Festival Overture and a namesake lullaby.;;(Johannes) Brahms;;
Religion/Mythology;;When Jesus planned to return to Judea to visit Lazarus, this man persuaded the other apostles to go on the trip. This patron saint of architects has a feast day on July 3 which celebrates the transference of his body to Edessa in Mesopotamia.  He was assured that Christ is the Way, the Truth, and the Life during the Last Supper, and late in his life he became the first Catholicos of the East while preaching in India. However, he earned his most famous nickname when he wanted to touch Christ's wounds for confirmation of his resurrection, after which he exclaimed, "My Lord and My God". For 10 points, name this apostle, best known for doubting the resurrection of Jesus.;;Thomas (the) (Apostle)|(Doubting) Thomas|(Didymus) Thomas|(Judas) Thomas;;
World History;;This man headed the Independent Commission on International Development Issues, which released the North-South report often named for him.  He flew to Iraq to arrange the release of western hostages in 1990, and he had to resign his most famous post when his aid Gunther Guillaume was revealed to be a spy.  He recognized the Oder-Neisse Line in a nonaggression treaty with Poland.  The longtime leader of the Social Democrats, this man served as mayor of West Berlin and was known for his policy of Ostpolitik. For 10 points, name this winner of the 1971 Nobel Peace Prize, the Chancellor of West Germany from 1969 to 1974.;;(Willy) Brandt|(Herbert) (Ernst) (Karl) Frahm;;
Art;;A man dressed in green leans forward while clenching his fists and the tower of a cathedral can be seen towards the left background. A companion piece to this painting depicts a man dressed in brown attempting to stab an Arab soldier on horseback, and is subtitled The Charge of the Mamelukes. The men at right all wear black hats, unlike the most prominent figure who kneels against a foreboding pile of blood. Set against the background of Principe Pio hill, a man in a white shirt raises his arms in surrender as a firing squad points at him. For 10 points, name this painting depicting "The Execution of the Defenders of Madrid" on the namesake day, painted by Francisco Goya.;;(The) (Execution) (of) (the) (Rebels) (on) (the) Third of May(,) 1808(:) (The) (Execution) (of) (the) (Defenders) (of) (Madrid)|3rd of May(,) 1808;;
Geography;;The Presa de la Boguilla is a lake that lies along the Conchos river which lies entirely in this state. Cities in it include Santa Rosalia de Carmago and Delicias and this state is home to the Cumbres de Majalca National Park and the Copper canyon. This state's capital includes attractions like the Gameros estate and the Church of San Francisco which houses the remains of Miguel Hidalgo. It is bounded by Durango to the South, Coahuila to the East, and Sonora to the East, and it contains Ciudad Juarez. For 10 points, name this largest Mexican state which shares its name with a breed of small dogs.;;Chihuahua;;
Chemistry;;This compound reacts with sodium chloride to create an industrial reagent in the Mannheim process, and it is used to produce a nitronium ion by protonating nitric acid, which catalyzes the addition of nitro groups to aromatic compounds. Usually used to work up intermediates in the Nef reaction, a common lab demonstration relies on its ability to dehydrate sucrose into pure carbon. This compound and its generating gas is called oleum when found in solution, and it is produced in a process whose central oxidation step is catalyzed by a Vanadium oxide catalyst in the contact process. For 10 points, identify this diprotic acid with formula H2SO4.;;sulfuric acid|sulphuric acid;;oil of vitriol
Pop Culture;;A spider bite incurred on his honeymoon once prevented him from trying out for Chicago, and in his autobiography All Things Possible, he described walking through the red light district of Amsterdam on his way to church while playing in NFL Europe. He went undrafted and was released by the Packers in 1994, after which this Northern Iowa graduate led the Iowa Barnstormers to two second-place finishes. He earned his first NFL starting job after an injury to Trent Green and led the "Greatest Show on Turf". He now has such targets as Larry Fitzgerald and Anquan Boldin. For 10 points, name this QB who won the MVP with the Rams, currently for the Arizona Cardinals.;;(Kurtis) (Eugene) (Kurt) Warner;;
Philosophy;;This thinker was unflatteringly labeled "the American Heidegger" in a Steve Fuller work.  His essay "Objectivity, Value Judgment, and Theory Choice" is included in a work which divides its contents into "historiographic" and "metahistorical" sections, while his most famous work rejects Karl Popper's theory of falsifiability, presents the incommensurability thesis, and argues that the titular events are caused by paradigm shifts and include the move from a geocentric to a heliocentric model of the solar system.  For 10 points, name this author of The Essential Tension and The Structure of Scientific Revolutions.;;(Thomas) Kuhn;;
World History;;One ruler of this nation as well as Hungary had his head cut off as the result of an ill-conceived cavalry charge against the Janissary forces of Murad II at the Battle of Varna, while another ruler of it defeated Ulrich von Jungingen with the help of Vytautus the Great, stomping the Teutonic Knights at Tannenberg.  The Union of Lublin was signed at the instigation of another of its rulers, Sigismund II, as formal recognition of its union with Lithuania.  Kara Mustafa's attempts to take Vienna were thwarted by another ruler of this nation, Jan III Sobieski.  For 10 points, name this nation which was ruled by the Jagiellon dynasty and got partitioned a lot.;;Poland|Poland-Lithuania;;
Literature;;He asserts "deep waves, what dreadful tales you could recite" in his poem "Oceano Nox," found in the collection Sunlight and Shadows. The "Comprachicos" deform Gwynplaine's face, giving him a permanent smirk in The Man Who Laughs, and he wrote about the bandit who serves Ruy Gomez in Hernani. Deruchette will marry anyone who saves the Durande from a dangerous reef in a novel about the fisherman Gilliatt. In addition to The Toilers of the Sea, one of his protagonists is imprisoned for stealing a loaf of bread, takes care of Cosette, and is tracked by Inspector Javert. For 10 points, name this man who created Jean Valjean in Les Miserables.;;(Victor) Hugo;;
Biology;;Leber optic neuropathy was the first disease to be associated with this organelle, while Kearns Sayre syndrome is caused by defects in these which leads to Ophthalmoparesis and ptosis. The Tom and Tim proteins are involved with translocation of proteins across their membranes. Cytochrome C is also found within these structures, and is released into the cell to trigger apoptosis. These organelles have two membrane systems with the inner one possessing folds called cristae, and they possess their own genome which is used to analyze matrilineal ancestry. For 10 points, name this organelle, often referred to as the "power source" of the cell.;;mitochondrion|mitochondria;;
Literature;;In chapter fifteen of this novel, the waitress Mae sells a begging man and his two sons a loaf of bread and two pieces of candy for a discount price. One character sees her suitor Herb beaten to death by a shovel by her future husband Connie Rivers, and later she gives birth to a stillborn child in a flooded boxcar, while another character is a former preacher, who is killed for leading a labor strike. Both Jim Casy and Rose of Sharon join Grandma, who dies during the trek across the Mojave desert, and Ruthie, Al, and Tom in the flight from Oklahoma. 10 points, name this novel about the Joad family, written by John Steinbeck.;;(The) Grapes of Wrath;;
Geography;;Sivash, a series of bays off the coast of this region, is a producer of brines, and the Tonka of Arabat is a sandspit off this region's coast. Its namesake mountains are home to the highest point here on Mount Roman-Kosh. Cities on its coast include Eupatoria and Theodosia, and it was inhabited by Tatars with their capital at Bakhchisaray, which led to it being a part of the Tatar A.S.S.R. Its current headquarters are at Simferopol, and a city here is Kerch, which gives its name to the straight connecting the Black Sea to the Sea of Azov. For 10 points, name this peninsula in the Ukraine that was home to a war that pitted the Russians against the British and French.;;Crimean (peninsula)|Krymsky (Poluostrov)||Crimea;;
Chemistry;;A similar reaction to it sees the addition of an R group at the alpha carbon of an ester and is named for Horner and this reaction's namesake. One variation of this reaction uses a proton donor to reduce a carbon-lithium bond formed due to excess lithium to selectively yielding of the E type of product, and is called the Schlosser modification. It sees the formation of the zwitterionic betaines which undergo an oxaphosphetane intermediate, and phosphine oxide is a by-product of this reaction which usually yields Z alkenes. For 10 points, name this reaction that uses an aldehyde or ketone and a phosphorus ylide to produce alkenes and is named after a German chemist.;;Wittig (reaction);;
Literature;;He wrote about One Blossom's romance with the Russian immigrant Yozip Bloom, who inadvertently becomes chief of the titular Indian tribe in The People, and in another work Lily Hirschorn is misled by the marriage broker Pinye, who determines his matches by picking cards from the title object and is later dismayed when Leo Finkle wants to meet his daughter Stella. Along with The Magic Barrel, he wrote about Frank Alpine, who takes over Morris Bober's failing grocery shop, and in another novel Harriet Bird shoots the title character after he strikes out "The Whammer". For 10 points, name this author of The Assistant, who wrote about Roy Hobbs in The Natural.;;(Bernard) Malamud;;
Art;;In one of his works, a bow, quiver, and sword hang above the white robed title figure while five figures look on as Jesus performs the titular Raising of Lazarus. He painted his wife as the model of a woman who drank her husband Masolus of Carnia's ashes, Artemisia, and he painted a man with his right hand placed on the title figure's breast in The Jewish Bride. He also painted the author of Metaphysics with his hand on the head of a statue as well as the marching company of Franz Banning Cocq. For 10 points, name this artist of Aristotle Contemplating the Bust of Homer and The Nightwatch who also painted a dissection in The Anatomy Lesson of Dr. Tulp.;;Rembrandt (Harmenszoon) (van) (Rijn)|(Rembrandt) (Harmenszoon) van Rijn;;
World History;;This nation was at one point dominated by 12 Aymara tribes, and cities founded under colonial rule here include Cochabamba, and Chiquisaca. One president of this country established an alliance with Luis Obregoso but was defeated at the battle of Yungay, Andres de Santa Cruz. This country's important mines included one at Potosi, and they were unable to use the nitrates on the Pacific Coast that they lost in the war of the Pacific. For 10 points, name this country once ruled by Antonio Jose de Sucre, and whose namesake notably won the battles of Boyaca before establishing Gran Colombia.;;(Republic) (of) Bolivia|(Republica) (de) Bolivia;;
Pop Culture;;At one point in this film, a main character learns that his love interest is a fan of the movie Sixteen Candles, while another character's pubes are later complimented by Jamie Kennedy's character. While sneaking through air ducts at Princeton, this film's protagonists overhear a contest of "battleshits," after which they drop their marijuana in a toilet. At the end of this movie, the man who stole the protagonists' car while on Ecstasy gives them $200 to purchase sliders, and in its sequel, the main characters escape Guantanamo. For 10 points, name this movie in which the titular duo encounters Neil Patrick Harris while searching for the perfect meal, starring John Cho and Kal Penn.;;Harold and Kumar Go To White Castle;;
United States History;;Rulings in this man's court included Justice Story's finding that the court can fulfill the Constitution's supremacy clause by overriding a state court in a case involving Virginia voiding an inheritance, Martin v. Hunter's Lessee.  He ruled that Congress has the right to regulate interstate commerce, and found that New Hampshire could not interfere with George III's charter because it was a private contract.  In addition to Gibbons v. Ogden and Dartmouth v. Woodward, he ruled that a president had the right to not deliver his predecessor's court appointments, establishing judicial review.  For 10 points, name this chief justice during Marbury v. Madison.;;(John) Marshall;;
Noncomputational Math;;This man names the special case of the Archimedean spiral when n is set to two. Gauss showed that any number which can be expressed as a power of two times the product of numbers named for this man can be the number of sides in a constructible polygon. He is also the namesake of the statement that a to the p is equal to a modulo p if p is prime, and he proposed that light waves travel through the principle of least time. His most famous idea was proven by Andrew Wiles. For 10 points, name this namesake of a type of primes and a theorem that states that x^n plus y^n equals z^n has no solution for n greater than 2, his "last theorem".;;(Pierre) (de) Fermat;;
Literature;;Oscar Wilde wrote a poem that begins, "the corn has turned from gray to red / Since first my spirit wandered forth" about this city "Unvisited," and Christina Light has her bust made by the sculptor Roderick Hudson in this city. Hilda witnesses Miriam Schaefer inducing her lover Donatello to murder a monk by throwing him off the Tarpeian Rock in one novel set here, The Marble Faun, while the title character of another book is snubbed at a party hosted by Mrs. Walker in this city because she spurned Winterbourne to carry on a scandalous affair with Giovanelli. For 10 points, name this city, in which Daisy Miller contracts malaria during a tour of the Coliseum.;;Rome|Roma;;
Religion/Mythology;;This figure once fended off an attack by the centaurs Hylaeus and Rhaecus, after which she was insulted by Eurypylus and Iphicles. This woman once made love in a temple of Cybele, which led to her and her husband being turned into lions. One of this figure's sons, a friend of Telephus, was one of the Seven against Thebes; that son was Parthenopaeus. When Althea's sisters attempted to take from her a fur she won for drawing first blood at a hunt, their nephew Meleager killed them. Later, this woman  was distracted when Hippomenes threw three golden apples, causing her to lose a footrace. For 10 points, identify this only female Argonaut and hunter of the Calydonian Boar.;;Atalanta;;
Astronomy;;E.A. Valentijn and P.P. Van der Werf used their discovery of molecular hydrogen in NGC891 near Andromeda to explain this, and along with mircolensing it might be explained by the discovery of 38 white dwarfs in the Milky Way.  A large portion of it is known to be non-baryonic, and it was first postulated by Fritz Zwicky.  Some candidates for this include photinos and axions, which are Weakly Interacting Massive Particles or WIMPS, or Massive Compact Halo Objects or MACHOs.  For 10 points, name this substance that makes up the vast majority of the universe's mass despite not being directly observable.;;dark matter;;
Art;;He developed what he called the "zone system" in creating his works, which involved visualization of the final print. One of his works shows a man walking down a row of huts and another man sitting on a stoop; that image is a part of his collaboration with John Hersey that showed life in an internment camp, Manzanar. He also collaborated with Nancy Newhall on This is the American Earth, and some of his earlier work showed Mount Williamson with a storm moving over it. He's best known for his black and white works, which include such Yosemite National Park scenes as Moon and Half Dome. For 10 points, name this f/64 member, a photographer of the American West.;;(Ansel) (Easton) Adams;;
Literature;;He wrote about Mrs. Placentia and Diaph Silkworm in a play about Lady Loadstone, The Magnetic Lady. In another play Dauphine tricks his uncle Morose into marrying Epicoene, who is actually a boy, while Captain Bobadill teaches Master Matthew how to duel after Edward Knowell travels to meet Wellbred in Every Man in His Humour. In one of his plays Face allows Doll Common and Subtle into Lovewit's house where they dupe Epicure Mammon, and in another play Bonario sees the title character attempt to rape Celia, while earlier Mosca convinces everyone that the title character is dying. For 10 points, name this author of The Alchemist and Volpone.;;(Benjamin) Jonson|(Ben) Jonson;;
World History;;In this man's role as a strategoi he was given command of a fleet based in Thasos.  His work was followed up by that of Cratippus and Theopompus, and he failed to keep Brasidas from conquering Amphipolis.  Part of his work involved character studies of Brasidas, Cleon, and Themistocles, and he described the disastrous siege of Syracuse and the funeral oration of Pericles.  While exiled from Athens, he wrote his major work, which was written before Lysander's victory at Aegospotami, though it does include the Sicilian expedition and the exploits of Alcibiades.  For 10 points, name this Greek historian of The History of the Peloponnesian War.;;Thucydides;;
Music;;In the prologue to one of his operas the gods Virtue and Fortune argue about who is more powerful, only to be outdone by the god Amore. He used consecutive fifths as parody in his Canzonetta tre voci, and there is debate about the placement of the "Nigra Sum" motet in his Vespers for the Blessed Virgin. He featured a stile concitato in a setting of Jerusalem Delivered, entitled The Combat of Tancred and Clorinda. In one opera, Drusilla confesses to an attempted assassination to protect her lover Ottone, who had tried to kill Nerone's future empress. For 10 points, name this composer whose works such as Arianna, The Coronation of Poppea, and Orfeo, helped develop opera.;;(Claudio) Monteverdi;;
Religion/Mythology;;This belief's adherents trust that the third savior Saoshyant will bring about the "final renovation". Vishtaspa was the protector of their founder, who taught about the conflict between truth and lies, known as asha and druj. This religion's first man is Gayomart, and one sect of it believes in the timeless, apathetic god Zurvan. Hymns of this religion include the Gathas and the Yashts, which can be found in the Yasna. Parsi practitioners of it are placed in towers of silence when they die, and its sacred texts are found in the Zend-Avesta. For 10 points, name this faith that centers on the conflict between Ahriman and Ahura Mazda and was formed by a namesake Persian prophet.;;Zoroastrianism;;
Biology;;Organisms in which this process occurs tend to have elevated levels of ascorbate peroxidase. Members of genus Frankia perform this process, and it is characterized by the occurrence of a pinkish color in leghemoglobin. It occurs in specialized cells called heterocysts in cyanobacteria, and the protein central to this process is inactivated by oxygen, contains an iron-molybdenum complex, and is coded for by the nif gene. The microorganisms most commonly associated with it form root nodules and are called rhizobia. For 10 points, identify this process which results in ammonification of the most common atmospheric gas.;;nitrogen fixation;;
Economics;;This work discusses the growing importance of burghers in a section that explores the rise of towns after the fall of the Roman Empire.  This work discusses the advantages of founding new colonies and uses a comparison of French and Portuguese wine to argue against protectionist tariffs in its fourth book, "Of Systems of Political Economy," which argues against the mercantilist system.  Its first section supports the division of labor and discusses a pin factory, while it later argues that individuals acting due to self interest will benefit the market via the "invisible hand".  For 10 points, name this major work of Adam Smith.;;(An) (Inquiry) (into) (the) (Nature) (and) (Causes) (of) (the) Wealth of Nations;;
Literature;;In this novel, one character discovers that the legendarily pious invalid Madame Stahl stays in bed to hide her stubby legs. The title character is stunned to meet Sappho Sholtz, and earlier breaks into tears when the horse Frou-Frou trips and breaks its back while trying to race Gladiator. One character is induced to trust the psychic Landau by the insidious tutor Lydia, who tries to prevent the title character from bringing gifts to her son Seryoza. Stiva's infidelities upset Dolly, who encourages Kitty's marriage with the plain Konstantin Levin. For 10 points, name this novel, in which the title character hooks up with Count Vronsky and jumps in front of a train, by Leo Tolstoy.;;Anna Karenina;;
Philosophy;;Vaihinger discussed the relation between Swedenborg and this man's concept of two worlds, in a commentary on this man's Dreams of a Spirit Seer. He proposed the creation of a league to mediate international disputes in his essay "Perpetual Peace," and defined ratiocination as the judgment of a predicate with its subject in "The False Subtlety of the Four Syllogistic Figures". He defined his best-known concept by claiming that nothing can be called good without qualification "except a good will" in his Foundations of the Metaphysics of Morals.  For 10 points, name this author of The Critique of Judgment and Critique of Pure Reason who created the "categorical imperative".;;(Immanuel) Kant;;
World History;;This ruler allied with Spain against France via the Treaty of Westminster, and he won a victory at the Battle of the Spurs during the War of the Holy League as well as a defeat of the Scottish at Flodden Field.  One of his advisors secured peace among Europe's major powers through the Treaty of London, and he met with Francis I at the Field of the Cloth of Gold.  His advisors included Thomas Cranmer, Cardinal Wolsey, and Thomas Cromwell, who helped this leader pass the Act of Supremacy and establish the Church of England.  For 10 points, name this English king who was married to Catherine of Aragon, Anne Boleyn, and four other women.;;Henry VIII;;
Sociology;;Herbert Spencer wrote about some Reasons for Dissenting from the Philosophy of this man, who divided history into the military aim and the industrial aim in Plan of Scientific Studies Necessary for the Reorganization of Society. His collaboration with Saint-Simon influenced his belief that the progress of societies started with animism, polytheism, and monotheism. Those divisions make up the Theological stage, which was followed by the Metaphysical stage in his three-stage model of societal development, which culminated in a purely scientific stage. For 10 points, name this author of Course of Positive Philosophy, the founder of positivism and father of sociology.;;(Auguste) Comte;;
Chemistry;;An equation named for this man gives the rate of change of the equilibrium constant with respect to temperature as delta H standard over R T squared. One paper by this man cited the isomerism of maleic acid and fumaric acid as evidence for a theory independently proposed by J. A. Bel concerning the tetrahedral nature of the carbon atom. One quantity named for him is a measure of the effective number of particles in solution. That quantity is related to the degree of dissociation, is important in colligative properties such as osmotic pressure, and is known as this man's namesake "factor". For 10 points, name this Dutch scientist who won the first Nobel Prize in Chemistry.;;(Jacobus) (Henricus) van(')t Hoff;;
World History;;One accusation of treason against this man rested on him possibly owning his own railroad car, and he cast an abstaining vote when his Jewish wife Polina Zemchuzhina was accused of treason. This man joined Lazar Kaganovich and Georgy Malenkov in an attempt to bring Nikolai Bulganin to power, becoming one of the "Anti-Party Group" denounced by Khrushchev. He then served for a while as ambassador to Mongolia after being demoted from his post of Soviet Foreign Minister. For 10 points, name this man who signed a non-aggression pact with Nazi representative Joachim von Ribbentrop and was the namesake of some anti-tank "cocktails".;;(Vyacheslav) (Mikhailovich) Molotov|(Vyacheslav) (Mikhailovich) Skryabin;;
Music;;This composer's tone poems include one in which the title demon murders a child, The Water Goblin, and his first symphony is titled after the "Bells of Zlonice". He quotes the song series "The Cypresses" at the end of his Cello Concerto in B minor, which is probably the most frequently-played cello concerto today. This composer also wrote the American String Quartet, which was inspired by his time in Spillville, Iowa; that also provided inspiration of a symphony he wrote that was based on the Song of Hiawatha and African American spirituals. For 10 points, name this composer of the Carnival Overture, some Slavonic Dances, and his 9th symphony, From the New World.;;(Antonin) (Leopold) Dvorak;;
Religion/Mythology;;This figure once launched Maricha across the ocean, after which he killed Subahu with his bow Kodanda in order to allow Vishwamitra to conduct a sacrifice. A son of Vali and Tara named Angada served as one of his messengers, and this figure befriended Guha, king of the Nishaadas. He forced his wife to climb a funeral pyre to test her purity, and after Kaikeyi got this figure banished, Bharata put his sandals at the foot of his throne. He helped recover the kingdom of Sugriva and was accompanied by his brother Lakshmana and the vanara Hanuman to fight the rakshasa king of Lanka, Ravana. For 10 points, identify this husband of Sita and seventh avatar of Vishnu, the subject of an epic by Valmiki.;;Rama(chandra)|(Phrea) Ream|(Phra) Ram|(Phra) Lam|Rajah Bantugan;;
World History;;This man established the rurales to combat bandits, and Ramon Corral and Jose Limantour were among the cientificos who advised him. This man chose Manuel Gonzalez as his handpicked successor, and he reached his highest office by defeating Sebastian de Lerdo after issuing his Plan of Tuxtepec. His downfall was accompanied by a rebellion organized by Pascual Orozco and the declaration of the Plan of San Luis Potosí by Francisco Madero, who signed the Treaty of Ciudad Juarez with this man, forcing him into exile. For 10 points, name this mestizo Mexican ruler from Oaxaca wah-HAH-cah, who was president from 1884 until 1911.;;(Porfirio) Diaz;;
Art;;Veronese changed the title of his Last Supper to Feast in the House of Levi after he was told to replace one of these with Mary Magdalene. Two flowers, two pens, and some sheet music lay by another one of these at the bottom left of the portrait of Madame de Pompadour by Francois Boucher. The periodic motion of a woman's feet and one of these can be found in a painting by Giacomo Balla titled the Dynamism of one of these, and another one of this animal is curled up at the foot of the bed as a woman rummages through a chest in the background in Titian's Venus of Urbino. For 10 points, a series of sixteen paintings by C. M. Coolidge depicts what animals playing poker?;;dog(s);;
Physics;;This man lends his name to an integration method which finds optimal points described by roots of the orthogonal polynomial, his namesake quadrature. One unit named for him is equal to ten to the negative fourth Weber per meter squared. A statement named for him implies the non-existence of magnetic monopoles. Another statement developed by him yields the universal gravitational law when applied to the gravitational field and reduces to Coulomb's law for point charges. For 10 points, identify this scientist whose most famous law states that the net flux through a closed surface is proportional to the charge enclosed by the surface.;;(Carl) (Friedrich) Gauss;;
Geography;;The Leaf Hills located in this state's Otter Tail County are home to its highest point, Inspiration Peak. The River named for this state rises from the Big Stone Lake and flows by towns such as St. Peter and New Ulm. International Falls is located near this state's northern border, whose "Northwest Angle" is the only mainland region north of the 49th parallel. This state's Lake Itasca is the source of the Mississippi River, and the St. Louis River flows into Lake Superior near its third largest city, Duluth. Bordered by Iowa to the south and Wisconsin to the east, for 10 points, identify this state with capital at St. Paul and whose largest city is Minneapolis.;;Minnesota;;
Literature;;One character in this work is mocked when Kat shouts "Change at Lohne" and attacks him with a bedcover when he is coming home from his favorite pub. One of the protagonist's friends mourns that he will never become head forester, and gives away his boots. Some of the main character's other friends include the locksmith Tjaden and the peat-digger Haie. The protagonist feels obligated to lie to Kemmerich's mother, and stabs Gerard Duval when they both hide in the same shell hole. The protagonist dies on an otherwise uneventful day. For 10 points, name this work about Paul Baumer's World War I experiences, written by Erich Maria Remarque.;;All Quiet on the Western Front|Im Westen nichts Neues;;
Computer Science;;Topological ones could use anyons to avoid the problem of decoherence. These objects use Hadamard gates, and the no cloning theorem makes error correction difficult for them. One of them is used in the Deutsch-Jozsa algorithm, and one of them allows the use of Grover's algorithm to search through an unsorted database in sublinear time. They can use Shor's Algorithm to factor primes in "order log cubed of n" time, and their individual elements are represented by two-state systems. Loss and Vincenzo have proposed one constructed of a certain type of dot. For 10 points, name these devices that store information in the form of superpositions of ones and zeroes, in qubits.;;quantum computer(s);;
United States History;;The use of public funds by religious schools are banned by this man's namesake amendments. He was Speaker of the House for three terms, though a scandal involving the Little Rock & Fort Smith Railway caused him to lose the presidential nomination to Rutherford B. Hayes. This man was Secretary of State for both James Garfield and Chester Arthur, and he was hurt in his attempt to become president by Reverend Burchard, who spoke of "Rum, Romanism, and Rebellion". For 10 points, name this "Plumed Knight" and "Continental Liar from the State of Maine" who was defeated by Grover Cleveland in 1884.;;(James) (Gillespie) Blaine;;
Literature;;In one of this author's works, Margery Meanwell grows up to become a schoolteacher. In another of his works, Edwin becomes a recluse beside the Tyne and Angelina must seek him dressed as a boy. In addition to "The History of Little Goody Two-Shoes" and the "The Hermit," he also wrote about the village of Auburn, which had become depopulated because of a sudden influx of money, in "The Deserted Village". His other works include one in which Kate Hardcastle meets Charles Marlow, and a work about Mr. Burnell, who is actually Squire Thornhill. For 10 points, name this man, who wrote She Stoops to Conquer and The Vicar of Wakefield.;;(Oliver) Goldsmith;;
Noncomputational Math;;With Jacobi and Bellman, this man names an equation central to optimal control problems, and he names a theorem which implies that a square matrix A satisfies its own characteristic polynomial, along with Cayley. He names a cycle on a graph such that the path visits each vertex exactly once, and he is also the namesake of an operator which is the Legendre transform of the Lagrangian operator and gives the total energy of a system. Better known for the creation of a division ring where i squared, j squared, and k squared equal negative one, for 10 points, identify this Irish mathematician who developed the mathematics of quaternions.;;(William) (Rowan) Hamilton;;
Literature;;In one of this man's works, Thomas Hudson comes to terms with the death of his kids and hunts for a damaged German boat. He wrote a work in which Harry Morgan runs contraband, and also wrote of Robert and Maria, who clash with Paolo, in the stories "Islands in the Stream" and "True at First Light". Another short story by this author sees Al and Max discuss murdering the boxer Ole Andreson. That work is "The Killers," which includes his recurring character Nick Adams. This man's longer works include To Have and Have Not and one in which Manolin assists the fisherman Santiago. For 10 points, name this author of A Farewell to Arms and The Old Man and the Sea.;;(Ernest) Hemingway;;
Biology;;Sandhoff disease is related to this disease, and the metabolism of 4-methyl-lumbelli-ferone is used in the biochemical test which detects this disease. It is caused by a mutation in the HEXA gene, which leads to a deficiency of hexosaminidase A. Compounds made of sialic acid and glycosphingolipids called gangliosides are not metabolized in this condition, which results in the "cherry-red" spot that can be seen on the retina of patients with this condition. For 10 points, name this fatal genetic disorder that mostly affects infants and is especially common among Ashkenazi Jews.;;Tay-Sachs (disease);;
Art;;Stone cannonballs line the paths of its outer courtyard, and its South Gallery is home to the Deesis day-eh-sis Mosaic. A ring of forty windows separated by ribs is found at the base of its most famous feature, which is supported by four pendentives to which Sinan added buttresses. The Fossatis gave it its red and yellow exterior, as well as its calligraphic roundels, and it was originally designed by Anthemius of Tralles and Isidore of Miletus. A mihrab, a minbar, and some minarets were added after its conversion to a mosque in 1453. For 10 points, name this church with a giant dome, commissioned by Justinian and dedicated to the Holy Wisdom in Constantinople.;;(the) Hagia Sophia|Ayasofya;;(Church) (of) (the) Holy Wisdom
Religion/Mythology;;In one story, this man saved the town of Gubbio by making a pact with an attacking wolf. After spending time as a Perugian captive, he saw a vision of a hall full of cross-marked armor, which encouraged him to travel to Apulia. After 40 days' fasting on the mountain La Verna, he saw a six-winged seraph, after which he received the stigmata, according to his namesake Fioretti. He praised Sister Death, Brother Fire, and Brother Moon in his Canticle of the Sun, and was credited with inventing the Nativity creche scene. For 10 points, identify this Catholic patron saint of animals, the founder of a namesake group whose first two orders are the Poor Clares and the Friars Minor.;;(St.) Francis of Assisi|(San) Francesco;;Francis
Philosophy;;The beginning of this work discusses a town called The Motley Cow where one character gives a sermon "On the Despisers of the Body" claiming that the enlightened one knows that he is body and nothing more. Socrates is alluded to in the section "On the Flies of the Marketplace" and important themes include those of eternal recurrence and the will to power. Subtitled "A Book for All and None," it begins when a prophet descends from the mountains to preach about the Ubermensch, and it reintroduced its author's earlier statement from The Gay Science, "God is dead". For 10 points, name this philosophical work, named for a dualistic prophet, by Nietzsche.;;Thus Spake Zarathustra|Also sprach Zarathustra|Thus Spoke Zarathustra;;
Literature;;In a poem in this language, an exile convinces the titular entity, which is "frolicsome as an elephant," to carry a message to his wife. The same author also penned a play in this tongue in which the title woman loses a signet ring that is later discovered in the belly of a fish, after her husband Dushyanta is cursed. This language was used to write Shakuntala and "The Cloud Messenger" by Kalidasa, and it also provides the last three words of Eliot's The Waste Land, "shantih shantih shantih". For 10 points, name this language that was used to write the Upanishads and the Mahabharata.;;Sanskrit|samskrta|samskrtam;;
Geography;;The Choke Mountains are an important bird-watching area in this country, as is Lake Chew Bahir, which is located near its southern border. The Danakil desert is shared by this country and its northern neighbor and is home to the Afar people. Gonder is among its larger cities and is home to castles constructed by Iyasu II, and its city of Adama was once called Nazareth. This country's Lake Tana is the source of the Blue Nile, and it is involved in the dispute over the Ogaden region with its eastern neighbor Somalia. For 10 points, name this nation which neighbors Sudan and has capital Addis Ababa.;;(Federal) (Democratic) (Republic) (of) Ethiopia;;
Miscellaneous;;This man wrote about "How Keynes Came to America" in one work, and "The Massive Dissent of Karl Marx" in another.  In addition to Economics, Peace and Laughter and The Age of Uncertainity, he wrote about the economic development of the Ford Motor Company in "The Imperatives of Technology," which appears in a work that argues that classical demand has been subverted by advertising and other methods of corporate planning, while his most famous work discussed income disparities and coined the term "conventional wisdom".  For 10 points, name this author of The New Industrial State and The Affluent Society.;;(John) (Kenneth) Galbraith;;
Art;;This man painted a work in two panels which shows the title figures intently discussing about the texts in their hands and is called The Four Apostles. A lion rests on the floor in the foreground as the title figure stare intently at his work sitting at a desk in his St. Jerome in His Study. One work depicts an angel sitting on a wheel near a ladder and dog by the feet of a woman, and also contains an hourglass, a sphere, and a Latin square, while another work a decrepit figure holds a trident at the bottom left as the titular quartet tramples over some people. For 10 points, identify this German artist of several woodcuts such as Melancolia I and Four Horseman of the Apocalypse.;;(Albrecht) Durer;;
Literature;;One of this man's protagonists sees a giant chrysanthemum that irradiates everything at the exact moment his father dies, and he wrote a short story in which a young boy named Harelip helps attend to a shot-down black airman.  In one of his novels, a man named Bird desires to flee to Africa instead of facing his handicapped newborn son.  He also wrote a novel in which Mitsusaburo and Takashi return to their great-uncle's village, in which the protagonist first thinks of the titular sound when he finds his friend hanged with a cucumber up his anus.  For 10 points, name this Japanese author of Nip the Buds, Shoot the Kids, A Personal Matter and The Silent Cry.;;(Kenzaburo) Oe|Oe (Kenzaburo);;
Music;;One of his works contains the movement "The Evil God and the Dance of Pagan Monsters" and a section depicting the sun god Ala. He evoked the 18th century with a down-bow on the strings and D-minor triad arpeggio at the start of a symphony created "as Haydn might have written it". This composer of the Scythian Suite and Classical Symphony wrote a troika in a work about the advisors of Emperor Paul, who create a fake military hero. This creator of the Lieutenant Kije Suite wrote a work in which the clarinet plays the cat and the bassoon represents the Grandfather. For 10 points, name this composer of the ballet Romeo and Juliet and Peter and the Wolf.;;(Sergei) Prokofiev;;
Religion/Mythology;;This figure's sons include Falka, Benig, and another that is met when a son of Gjulki meets Hjaalprek he-YOLL-prek. In that story, one of the boldest of this figure's sons, Grani, refuses to serve Gunnar, and another story claims that he created the canyon Asbyrgi. Said to have runes carved on his teeth, this character's birth follows from a bet for the Sun, the Moon, and the hand of Freya in which Blast claims he can fortify Asgard in a single winter. To do so, Blast enlists the aid of this character's father to carry bricks a long way in an instant, and Loki mates with that animal, resulting in this figure's birth. For 10 points, name this son of Svadilfari, the eight-legged mount of Odin.;;Sleipnir;;
World History;;This entity shares its name with one controlled by the astronomer and investigator of mesmerism, Jean Sylvain Bailly.  It saw the execution of General Lecomte, and Marshall MacMahon led a campaign against it that culminated with a mass execution at the Wall of the Federalists.  Its aftermath saw a mass deportation to New Caledonia, and it was opposed by Adolphe Thiers.  Louis-Auguste Blanqui was its nominal leader despite being imprisoned at the time, and it ended in the "Bloody Week" amidst fierce barricade fighting.  Growing out of the Franco-Prussian War, for 10 points, name this socialist government that held power for two months in 1871 in the French capital.;;(the) Paris Commune;;
Pop Culture;;This is the second word of the title of a song in which Donovan notes that he's "just mad about Saffron," and it signifies industrial zoning in a certain Maxis series. This type of "kid" was the main character of Richard Outcault's Hogan's Alley, while this kind of fog "rubs its back against the windowpanes" in T.S. Eliot's "The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock," and tartrazine is known as this "No. 5". A song of this title notes that "your skin and bones/turn into something beautiful" and asks the listener to "Look how" the stars "shine for you". For 10 points, identify the hue that titles that 2000 Coldplay song, the color of Pikachu, tennis balls, Big Bird, and the sun.;;yellow;;
Literature;;In this novel, Lankes takes a coin from his left pocket and puts it in his right whenever he borrows a cigarette, and an attendant at the Maritime Museum commits suicide by impaling himself on the mast of the "Niobe" after falling in love with its wooden figurehead.  Vittlar's testimony inadvertently implicates the protagonist in a murder after he finds the severed ring finger of Sister Dorothea. The protagonist of this novel plays in "The Onion Cellar" with Klepp and Scholle in a troupe of dwarves, can shatter glass with his scream, and refuses to grow after age three. For 10 points, name this novel in which Oskar Matzerath refuses to give up the title instrument, by Gunter Grass.;;(The) Tin Drum|(Die) Blechtrommel;;
Chemistry;;The Cadiot- Chodkiewicz coupling links two of these in the presence of copper I chloride catalyst and a base, while in a namesake homologation. The Cory-Fuchs reaction generates these from aldehydes, while reacting them with mercury salt in water yields enols. They can be synthesized by the dehydrohalogenation of vicinal dihalides, and hydrogenating one of these in the presence of palladium on calcium carbonate "poisoned" with quinilone, also known as Lindlar's catalyst. For 10 points, identify this class of compounds, the simplest example of which is acetylene, characterized by a carbon-carbon triple bond.;;alkyne(s);;acetylene(s)
Philosophy;;One of his works claims that twelve categories of human understanding posited in the Critique of Judgment are reducible to causality.  His last work, a set of "stray yet systematically arranged thoughts on a variety of subjects," includes sections "On Din and Noise" and "Additional Remarks on the Doctrine of the Suffering of the World".  This author of Parerga and Paralipomena wrote On the Fourfold Root of the Principle of Sufficient Reason, and another work argues that art tries to represent the Platonic ideal of an object and that works expands Kant's "Ding an Sich" to the whole universe. For 10 points, supposed pessimist, the author of The World as Will and Idea.;;(Arthur) Schopenhauer;;
United States History;;Its creation was presaged by plans written by Malcolm Rorty and James Warburg.  A review board chaired by Clarence Darrow suggested investigation of it by the FTC for monopolistic practices.  It promoted a "blanket code" under its first director, retired army general Hugh S. Johnson.  It was decided that the president was given too much power by its "codes of fair competition" in the Supreme Court case that declared it unconstitutional, Schechter v. U.S., called the "sick chicken" case.  Publicity supporting it featured the slogan "we do our part" and images of a blue eagle.  For 10 points, name this New Deal agency which set maximum working hours and minimum wage.;;(the) NRA|National Recovery Administration;;
Biology;;LepA can reverse this process, and in some organisms, this process sees protein EF-3 utilize ATP to reduce affinity for the substrate at L1. The characteristic ratcheting mechanism of this process involves GTP hydrolysis by EF-G, while EF-Tu, which works as a proofreader, also employs GTP to bind the substrate. Beginning with binding to the Shine-Dalgarno sequence in prokaryotes, it sees movement of the substrates through aminoacyl, peptidyl, and exit sites. This process ends when the nascent peptide is complete and the two subunits dissociate. For 10 points, name this second step of protein synthesis in which a ribosome reads messenger RNA following transcription.;;translation;;translocation
Literature;;In this poem's eighth stanza, a "funeral with plumes and lights" travels "through the silent nights," and the poem earlier discusses a place of "Four grey walls and four grey towers" that "overlook a space of flowers / And the silent isle".  The title character proclaims that she is "half sick of shadows", and only the "reapersamong the bearded barley" are able to hear her, though she longs to meet a man who sings "Tirra lira". The title character cries "The curse is upon me" after her "mirror cracked from side to side" after she stops weaving when she sees "bold Sir Lancelot". For 10 points, name this poem about a woman who is trapped in a castle near Camelot, by Tennyson.;;(The) Lady of Shalott;;
World History;;This ruler's reign saw a migration led by Nekrasov during the Bulavin Rebellion as well as the rise to power of both Count Golovkin and Peter Tolstoi. Vasily Galitzine controlled power for part of this ruler's early reign after one of two revolts led by this ruler's half-sister Sophia and the Streltsy, whom this ruler would later disband.  This ruler shared power with his retarded half-brother Ivan until that man's death, and he had his son Alexei executed.  He led several expeditions against Azov in order to gain a port on the Black Sea, and likewise fought to gain Baltic Sea possessions from Charles XII.  For 10 points, name this victor in the Great Northern War and westernizer of Russia.;;Peter the Great|Peter I;;
Religion/Mythology;;Its name may be compared to the Arabic word "rawiyyah," and it repeatedly uses the term "hevel". In matters of friendship, this book claims that "a new friend is as a new wine: when it is old, thou shalt drink it with pleasure". Its closing section, "Advice for the Young," advises the reader to "Rejoicein thy youth". Its author states that "the heart of the foolish is in the house of mirth," and notes that there is no new thing "under the sun". After the author introduces himself as Qoheleth and declares he is a son of David, he realizes that "Vanity of vanities...all is vanity". For 10 points, name this Old Testament book following Proverbs that claims "to everything there is a season".;;(Book) (of) Ecclesiastes;;(the) Preacher|Qoheleth
Biology;;One group of species in this phylum became hermatypic during the Middle Triassic, and palytoxin was first isolated from a species in this phylum. The order Rhyzostomea includes organisms with mouths found along their arms, such as the Cassiopeia. Members of one class possess a tissue called the velarium which aids in locomotion, and the largest class in this phylum includes sea pansies and sea fans and is called Anthozoa. Members of this phylum possess a structure called the operculum, within which nematocysts are found, and members go through both polyp and medusa stages. For 10 points, name this phylum which includes anemones, hydras, and jellyfish.;;Cnidaria(ns);;
Art;;One of his works depicts a woman with a cage of doves exiting the title place as Jesus smacks a money-changer. In another of his works, a red-tunic'd Jesus looks towards the sky as several people mock him. In addition to The Purification of the Temple and Disrobing of Christ, one of his paintings shows John the Baptist extending his arms as cherubs bring white clothes to several naked figures, and inspired Picasso's Demoiselles d'Avignon.  In addition to Opening of the Fifth Seal, he painted a dark sky a green hillside on whose top sits the Alcazar, in his painting View of Toledo. For 10 points, identify this Spanish artist of The Burial of Count Orgaz, originally from Crete.;;(El) Greco|(Domenikos) Theotokopolous;;
World History;;One polity involved in this conflict was led for a brief period by the Duke of Caxias, who helped the eventual winners gain control of Humaita, and it also saw battles fought at Tuyuti while its final battle took place at Cerro Cora. The turning point of this conflict occurred at the Battle of Riachuelo, a victory for Admiral Barosso in which the navy of the landlocked aggressor nation, led by the dictator Francisco Solano Lopez, was decimated. For 10 points, name this South American conflict in which a large portion of the Paraguayan male population was killed in defeat against the namesake group of Argentina, Brazil, and Uruguay.;;(War) (of) (the) Triple Alliance;;Paraguayan War
Literature;;He wrote about a rock star whose tempted by Azarian and Dr. Pepper, and is later chased by the evil organization, "The Happy Valley Farm Commune". That character, Bucky Wunderlick appears in Great Jones Street, while Keith Neudecker barely escapes the destruction of the Twin Towers in Falling Man, and the prologue "Pafko at the Wall" about the 1951 National League Pennant starts a novel focusing on Nick Shay. Along with Underworld, one of his novels centers on a colleague of Murray Jay Siskind, who is addicted to Dylar.  For 10 points, name this American author, who wrote about Professor of Hitler Studies, Jack Gladney in White Noise.;;(Don) DeLillo;;
Astronomy;;In analyzing 31 flybys of this body in 1996, scientist found gravitational anomalies in one, providing evidence for its lumpy interior, while NIMS detected such ocean salts as magnesium sulfate here in 2000, supporting the theory of an ocean deep below its surface. The Hubble Space Telescope detected a thin ozone around this body, and one feature of its surface is the Memphis Facula, which is located within a large dark region known as the Galileo Regio. This body is the only moon in the solar system with a magnetosphere. For 10 points, name this Galilean moon of Jupiter, the largest in our solar system.;;Ganymede;;
Literature;;In one of his works, a priest who had been falsely accused of rape dies after rushing into a burning house to save the accuser's baby, revealing that the priest was a woman. In addition to "The Martyr," he wrote about a robber who tries to climb out of hell using the title object in "The Spider's Thread". In one work the protagonist of one work is horrified to discover his daughter had been placed in a burning carriage that he had requested to inspire the title artwork, while in another of his works a servant is angered to find a beggar woman pulling out hairs from corpses to make wigs at the title gate. For 10 points, name this Japanese author, who wrote "Hell Screen" and "Rashomon".;;(Ryunosuke) Akutagawa|Akutagawa (Ryunosuke);;
Religion/Mythology;;Zipporah placed the central object of this action on Moses's feet, and God commanded Joshua to do his en masse at Gilgal.  One notable incident of this action is celebrated on a January 1 feast day in the Eastern Orthodox Church.  Genesis 17:10 is an important scriptural source about this action, and is usually interpreted as ordaining normally forbidden action on the Sabbath.  This practice is alternatively referred to as Taharah in Arabic, and is usually called Tihan.  Known as a bris milah in Judaism, it takes place on the eighth day after birth.  For 10 points, name this action, that when performed on Jesus, resulted in the Holy Prepuce's formation.;;circumcision;;
Physics;;The Sagnac effect was discovered in an experiment which built upon this experiment and disproved the "ballistic theory". One experiment very similar to it used varying lengths of an object to show that the time difference is constant, thus falsifying the Fitzgerald-Lorentz hypothesis. The apparatus used in it was placed on a marble slab which was rotated in mercury to allow for all orientations of a certain "wind" to equally affect the outcome, and one of its namesakes developed the interferometer used in this experiment. For 10 points, identify this experiment, which showed no change in the velocity of light due to ether drift, and thus debunked the theory of the luminiferous ether.;;(the) Michelson-Morley (experiment);;
World History;;Prior to this event, one party sent an envoy to the Minor Consiglio in the hopes of avoiding the battle. One wing of the eventual victors was commanded by Agustino Barbarigo. This battle occurred two months after the fall of Famagusta and Miguel de Cervantes' left arm was amputated as a result of wounds sustained in this battle. Occurring near the Gulf of Corinth, it saw the forces from the flagship Real successfully boarded the Sultana and killed Ottoman commander Ali Pasha. For 10 points, name this naval victory for the Holy League led by Don Juan, which halted westward expansion of the Ottoman empire.;;(Battle) (of) Lepanto;;
Literature;;The title character of this novel forces Abel Whittle to come to work without his pants to punish him for tardiness, and later he is infuriated when the carnival he planned is rained out while the indoor dance organized by his rival is a success. Jopp accidentally reveals the content of secret letters, which leads to the town organizing a parade featuring effigies of the title character and his lover Lucetta Templeton, and eventually the title character's step-daughter Elizabeth-Jane marries his rival Donald Farfrae. Elizabeth is sold to a sailor for five guineas, in, for 10 points, this novel about Michael Henchard by Thomas Hardy.;;(The) Mayor of Casterbridge;;
Religion/Mythology;;This figure was a close analog of the wind god Ehecatl. Cihuacoatl aided him in grinding up the bones of older races to begin the fifth age of mankind, and this deity either disappeared on a raft of snakes or got exiled by his rival. He jumped onto a funeral pyre, causing his heart to become the morning star, after being tricked by Tezcatlipoca. Often conflated with the Mayan Kukulcan, this god's twin brother was the dog-headed skeletal psychopomp Xolotl sho-LOT-tul, and he was the son of either Coatlicue by herself or Mixcoatl and Xochiquetzal sho-chi-KET-zal. For 10 points, name this Atzec sky god, often depicted as a plumed serpent, not to be confused with Hernan Cortes.;;Quetzalcoatl|Quetzalcohuatl;;
Philosophy;;This man wrote about the pursuit of social honor in "Class, Status, Party," and he defined a state as an entity with a monopoly on the legitimate use of physical force in "Politics as Vocation".  He wrote about "The Arena of Normative and De Facto Powers" in a work often identified as a revision of Marxism, Economy and Society.  He discussed a certain people's concept of "calling" in a work which also talks about asceticism and posits a link based on the need for worldly success to justify predestination.  For 10 points, name this man who argued that Calvinism is tied to economic success, the German author of The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism.;;(Max) Weber;;
Art;;Its artist also depicted his father listening to a musician playing a violin in an After Dinner party at the titular location. A skull lies by the feet of one of the two oddly dressed figures at this painting's center, whose clothes are from the French Revolution. One figure kneels on his right knee and stares at a choirboy, and another figure staring at the viewer holds a crucifix. Two clergymen in the center are dressed in red, and a dog stands to the center right as several people walking in an S-shaped line are depicted dressed in mourning. For 10 points, identify this gigantic painting depicting a funeral, a work of Gustave Courbet.;;Burial at Ornans|(A) (Painting) (of) (Human) (Figures,) (the) (History) (of) (a) Burial at Ornans(;)|(Un) Enterrement à Ornans|(Funeral|Interment){1}? at Ornans
Music;;This work received its current name from violinist Johann Peter Salomon. A passage in its opening Allegro vivace movement echoes the composer's earlier "Voi siete un po tondo," while the opening theme of its final movement is identical to the opening in the finale of Haydn's thirteenth Symphony. Highlights of the Andante Cantabile movement include a lyric bassoon solo, and the final movement ends with a blaze of trumpets and timpani that leads a double fugue, which culminates into a famous five-theme canon. For 10 points, identify this final symphony by Mozart with an Olympian name.;;(the) Jupiter (Symphony)|(Mozart's) (Symphony) (No.) 41|K551 (Symphony);;
Biology;;One type of bodies found in these were identified by the fusion of RAR alpha with PML proteins in promyelocytic leukemia patients. Pores in its membrane are made of proteins rich in phenylalanine and glycine residues, and import into and export out of this structure requires karyopherins, and is regulated by Ran proteins. Cajal bodies are also found in this organelle, which can be visualized by Hoechst or DAPI staining. The rough endoplasmic reticulum is continuous with its double membrane, and it is the location of mRNA splicing as well as DNA transcription. For 10 points, name this organelle which contains chromatin that is only found in eukaryotes.;;nucleus;;
World History;;This man sent troops to deal with the Spanish capture of Casale, and refused to sign the treaty of Regensburg.  He followed the theory of Antoine de Montchrestein, enacting the Code Michaud for regulation of trade.  Buckingham failed to stop this man's siege of La Rochelle, and this man withstood one conspiracy led by Gaston d'Orleans and Cinq-Mars, while another, the Day of the Dupes, resulted in him winning a power struggle over Marie de' Medici.  For 10 points, name this man who formulated policy during the Thirty Years' War, a minister to Louis XIII and priest known as "The Red Eminence".;;(Cardinal) Richelieu|(Armand-Jean) (du) (Plessis) (de) Richelieu(,) (Cardinal-Duc) (de) (Richelieu);;
Philosophy;;One section of this work argues that conjugal love is appreciated for its continuity and repetition, qualities that separate it from the endless present experienced by people described in the earlier section, "Crop Rotation". It uses Nathan's parable addressed to David to illustrate the necessity of this work's central discourse, and after sections titled "Shadowgraphs" and "The Unhappiest One," this work discusses the wooing and subsequent breaking of the engagement to Cordelia by Johannes Climacus in "The Seducer's Diary". Compiled by Victor Eremita, for 10 points, name this work that distinguishes between the aesthetic and ethical stages of life, by Soren Kierkegaard.;;Either/Or|Enten-Eller;;
Pop Culture;;His first acting job was in 1968's With Six You Get Eggroll, playing Herbie Fleck. He won a Grammy for the album FM and AM, and was nominated two years later for Occupation: Foole, which closed with a bit adapted from his earlier album Class Clown. This first host of Saturday Night Live played Rufus in Bill & Ted's Excellent Adventure and more recently portrayed Cardinal Ignatius Glick in Dogma. His written works include Brain Droppings and Napalm and Silly Putty. For 10 points, name this comedian who provoked a Supreme Court Ruling on the "Seven Dirty Words" and passed away from heart failure in June 2008.;;(George) (Denis) (Patrick) Carlin;;
Literature;;In one of this author's novels Culla, abandons his sister Rinthy's incestuous child in a forest, and in another book the witch "Mother She" is consulted by the giant Abnego Jones and Cornelius has left his family to live in a houseboat in McAnally Flats. Along with Outer Dark and Suttree, he wrote one novel in which Captain Glanton leads a party of scalp hunters in which "the boy" meets the villainous Judge Holden, while in another of his novels Llewelyn Moss is tracked by the bounty hunter Anton Chigurh. For 10 points, name this author who wrote All the Pretty Horses, Blood Meridian, and No Country for Old Men.;;(Cormac) McCarthy|(Charles) McCarthy;;
World History;;The night before this battle, the victors were able to land behind and take Vergor's camp at the L'Anse-au-Foulon, bypassing forces led by Levis and Vaudreuil.  The battle itself lasted less than an hour, with two extremely effective musket volleys devastating the advancing French line.  Afterwards, the French retreated over the St. Charles River to regroup under Bougainville, leaving the victors free to besiege the city.  It resulted in the death of both commanders: for the French, the Marquis de Montcalm, and for the British, James Wolfe.  For 10 points, name this battle of the French and Indian War which occurred on a plateau near Quebec.;;(Battle) (of) (the) Plains of Abraham|(Battle) (of) (the) Heights of Abraham;;(Battle) (of) Quebec
Chemistry;;One variety of them formed from secondary imines such as pyrimidine are named for Zincke. Two equivalents of these compounds yield a carboxylic acid and a primary alcohol in a disproportion reaction named for Cannizaro. They are characterized by an NMR shift of about 9 to 10 ppm, and their oxidation in the presence of a diamine-silver complex yields a "silver mirror" in the Tollens test. For 10 points, identify this functional group which features a carbon double bonded to an oxygen atom and single bonded to a hydrogen atom, exemplified by methanal and ethanal.;;aldehyde(s);;
Geography;;One of this nation's cities celebrates the Palo de Mayo festival and another city contains the tamarind tree of the Sutiaba and the cathedral of Benito de Baltondano. In addition to Bluefields and Leon, this country includes the Islas de Maiz to the east, the Tipitapa River which joins its two large lakes, and the Cordillera Isabella to the north. The San Juan River forms a part of the southern border of this nation, whose city of Puerto Cabezas is found in a region named for an insect. For 10 points, name this Central American country, home to the Mosquito coast, that lies between Costa Rica and Honduras with capital at Managua.;;Nicaragua;;
Psychology;;With Harvey Carr this man explored the importance of "kinaestheic sensations" in rats running a maze, causing them to run into a wall in his kerplunk experiment, and he argued that thinking was a form of "sub vocal speaking".  Author of a work subtitled "An Introduction to Comparative Psychology," he worked in advertising late in life and is credited with inventing the coffee break.  With Rosalie Rayner he performed an experiment that involved making loud noises, resulting in a young boy growing afraid of furry white things, especially a rat. For 10 points, identify this performer of the Little Albert experiment, the founder of behaviorism.;;(John) (Broadus) Watson;;
Literature;;The title character of this novel is rebuked by a judge when he unsuccessfully attempts to acquit a peasant, who he knows is guilty of murder. The title character encounters a crazy man, who is gathering nosegays for his imaginary mistress after resigning from a position assisting an ambassador that Wilhelm had acquired for him. After an intimate reading of Ossian's poetry ends badly when one character locks herself in her room, the title character borrows two pistols from Albert to commit suicide over his unrequited love for Charlotte. For 10 points, name this novel, which inspired a series of copycat suicides, written by Goethe.;;(The) Sorrows of Young Werther|(Die) Leiden des Jungen Werther;;
World History;;Joseph Addison's The Late Tryal and Conviction of Count Tariff was critical of this agreement's attached Treaty of Commerce, which would have violated the Methuen Treaty but was voted down by Whig opposition.  Victor Amadeus II of Savoy gained Sicily in this treaty, though he was forced to exchange it for Sardinia after the soon-following War of the Quadruple Alliance.  Britain acquired Newfoundland and Gibraltar, as well as the lucrative right to slave trade in the Spanish colonies, while Austria gained the Spanish Netherlands.  For 10 points, name this treaty which recognized Philip of Anjou as the new Philip V of Spain, ending the War of the Spanish Succession.;;(Peace|Treaty) (of) Utrecht;;
Astronomy;;Objects in this region with roughly circular orbits whose plane is approximately that of the ecliptic are called "cubewanos," and their distribution follows an inverse quartic relationship with distance. The area at the 1:2 orbital resonance is known as its namesake "cliff" and occurs at about 50 AU, while TL66 was the first "scattered" object found in it. It is the region where Varuna, Eris, and Charon are found, and it was thought to be the area where short-period comets originate. For 10 points, name this area which lies beyond Neptune's orbit, and is named for a Dutch-American scientist.;;(Edgeworth-)Kuiper (belt);;
Literature;;Sonny and his wife fix one of these objects belonging to the title character of a Eudora Welty short story. Boon steals one of these belonging to Lucius's grandfather, which Ned McCaslin later trades away in The Reivers. Madeleine and Valentine Gersbach lock June in one later responsible for the title character's injuries in Herzog, while the husband of Fran Voelker makes his money from selling these in the novel Dodsworth. Dwayne Hoover owns a place that sells one type of them in Vonnegut's Breakfast of Champions, and one mishandled by Daisy Buchanan causes Myrtle Wilson's death. For 10 points, Willy Loman commits suicide using this vehicle.;;car(s)|automobile(s);;
United States History;;Section 4 of this law allows those injured in its violation to seek treble damages, which resulted in the case Kansas v. Utilicorp United Inc., and another section notes that "The labor of a human being is not a commodity or article of commerce".  It was amended by the Celler-Kefauver Act, and it notably does not regulate collective bargaining or picketing, and thus does not impact union activities like its predecessor, but it does prohibit mergers and acquisitions when they may be used to substantially lessen competition.  For 10 points, name this act passed during the Wilson administration, the successor to the Sherman Antitrust Act.;;Clayton (Antitrust) (Act);;
Philosophy;;One portion of it alludes to Cicero's mention of a judge, who would routinely ask accusers "cui bono" or who benefits, from an action.  In addition to considering the prevalence of ignorance in Of the Kingdom of Darkness, this work discusses a precursor of the ex post facto and states that "No law, made after a Fact done, can make it a Crime". It argues that there is no injustice in a state of war, clarifying that Bellum omnium contra omnes, or the war of all against all, is inevitable unless a strong sovereign is present, while its first section describes life in the state of nature as "solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short". For 10 points, name this best-known work of Thomas Hobbes.;;Leviathan(,)|(The) (Matter,) (Forme) (and) (Power) (of) (a) (Common) (Wealth) (Ecclesiasticall) (and) (Civil);;
Literature;;One character in this novel gets her fiancée a gift of a turtle with her initials encrusted in diamonds on its shell. The protagonist meets two prostitutes, who he nicknames "The Death's Head" and "The Sickly Child," during his trip to Ma Mayfield's "Old Hundredth," which ends badly when Boy Mulcaster gets arrested for drunk driving and Rex Mottram has to bail them out of jail. The deathbed repentance of Lord Marchmain leads the protagonist to end his affair with Julia Flyte. For 10 points, name this novel in which Sebastian first brings Charles Ryder to the titular Catholic estate, written by Evelyn Waugh.;;Brideshead Revisited;;
Pop Culture;;One song from their first release describes a man "trippin on his shoelace," "Psychopsilocybin". They created a song for Halo 2 titled "The Odyssey," and in one song by this band, the singer notes that "in this moment I am happy" before repeating the title.  In a song from their A Crow Left of the Murder, lead singer Brandon Boyd claims that "you're no Jesus, yeah you're no fuckin' Elvis". Those songs by this non-Pink Floyd band are "Wish You Were Here" and "Megalomaniac". Another song by this group asks "Would you choose water over wine" and avers "Whatever tomorrow brings I'll be there". For 10 points, name this California band of the song "Drive".;;Incubus;;
Religion/Mythology;;This tradition was reformed by King Josiah, and the Second-Temple era service focused on Psalms 113 through 118.  Traditional songs associated with this observance include Adir Hu and Had Gadya.  Upon reciting the acronym "D'tzach adash b'achav," wine is spilled.  The Magid begins with a discussion of "the bread of affliction", and also includes the tale of the Four Sons and the Four Questions.  Also including the breaking of the middle matzah and hiding of the afikoman, the story of the Exodus is told before the meal is eaten.  For 10 points, name this traditional Passover meal.;;(Passover) Seder;;
Chemistry;;The Duhem-Margules equation can be used to derive it and a similar relation, and this law can be related to the Lewis-Randall rule by the Gibbs-Duhem equation. Its proportionality constant gives a relation between the chemical potential of solute atoms and infinite dilution; that constant is determined experimentally by measurements on a liquid-vapor equilibrium and the value depends on temperature as well as the solute-solvent pair involved. It explains decompression sickness in divers and the fizzing of soda when a bottle is opened. For 10 points, name this law of chemistry that relates the dissolved concentration of a gas to its partial pressure above the solvent.;;Henry's (law);;
Literature;;In this play the gossiping neighbor Daphne is excoriated by Madame Pernelle, and later the maid Dorine is criticized by the righteous Laurent for concealing a handkerchief in between the pages of her Bible. A casket containing secrets owned by the political exile Argas is exploited for blackmail by the title character, who earlier uses his influence to disinherit Damis and break Valere's engagement to Marianne. The title character is eventually banished from house after his unsuccessful seduction of Elmire is witnessed by Orgon. For 10 points, name this play about the titular hypocrite, written by Moliere.;;Tartuffe;;
Music;;This composer created one of the very first roles of the Luthéal instrument in his Tzigane, and his piano duet written for Mimi and Jean Godebski is entitled Mother Goose. "The Valley of Bells" and "A Boat on the Ocean" are two sections of his difficult Miroirs, and he included "Ondine" and "Le Gibet" in his piano work meant to be more difficult than Balakirev's Islamey, Gaspard de la nuit. The end of one work features an eight bar shift from C major to E major right before bass drum and cymbals make their first entrance reinforcing the ostinato first played by the snare drums. For 10 points, name this composer, who created Pavane for a Dead Princess and the repetitive Bolero.;;(Joseph-Maurice) Ravel;;
World History;;A conquest of this place by Ziyadat Allah I saw a sacking of Taormina, after which this place was controlled by the Aghlabid dynasty.  The Mamertine mercenaries were brought here by Agathocles, and the Peace of Caltabellotta ended a war fought over this place that involved Charles the Lame and Roger of Lauria.  That war began with a revolt led by John of Procida which fought against Charles of Anjou in favor of Peter III of Aragon.  In addition to that revolt named for evening prayers, its namesake "Vespers," this place was grouped with Naples in the Kingdom of Two of this city.  For 10 points, name this island separated by the Strait of Messina from mainland Italy.;;Sicily;;
Psychology;;A lesser-known method for scoring this test is known as Bohm's system.  The more commonly used method, the Exner system, takes into account factors such as location, form, color, movement and frequency.  An attempt to improve it is known as the Holtzman test, which provides more objective scoring criteria and increases the number of test items from ten to forty-five.  The original ten test items consist of three multicolored figures, two black and red figure, and five black figures on white paper, all of which are open to interpretation.  For 10 points, name this psychological test that asks participants to identify objects in ambiguous pictures that resemble drops of ink.;;Rorschach (Inkblot) (Test);;Inkblot (Test)
Art;;This man painted a portrait of Cardinal Niccolo Albergati, while another of his works depicts St. George taking off a metal helmet as another man kneels by the Madonna and Child. Another work shows an angel with a crown flying over Virgin Mary, who is seated facing a Burgundian aristocrat. In addition to The Virgin of Chancellor Rolin this artist of Self Portrait with Red Turban worked with his brother on an altarpiece which depicts the Adoration of the Lamb, but is best known for depicting a man in a black dress and a woman in green holding hands in front of a mirror which reflects the artist painting the scene. For 10 points, identify this artist of The Arnolfini Marriage.;;(Jan) van Eyck;;
Religion/Mythology;;This man's father-in-law Idas kidnapped Marpessa and killed Castor. According to some accounts, this man killed the centaurs Hylaeus and Rhaecus, and his father may have been the man to introduce viniculture to Aetolia, Oeneus. It was Oeneus's omission of the sacrifice to Artemis that led to this man's greatest feat. He killed his uncles Toxeus and Plexippus after they were angry that he gave a hunting prize to his love; this led to his own death when his mother, Althaea, then cast the log which kept him alive onto the fire. For 10 points, name this Greek hero who loved Atalanta and slew the animal which Artemis sent to ravage his kingdom, the Calydonian Boar.;;Meleager;;
Literature;;He wrote about the death of the Yardmaster in "Man on Pink Corner," which was included along with "The Cruel Redeemer Lazarus Morell" and a work about Monk Eastman in his A Universal History of Iniquity. He wrote about the scarred John Vincent Moon in "The Shape of the Sword" and of the death of a man with perfect memory in "Funes the Memorious". In another of this man's works, the narrator trades a rare Bible for the infinitely-long "Book of Sand," while in another, Dr. Albert is shot in the back by the double agent Yu Tsun. For 10 points, identify this author of "The Garden of Forking Paths," an Argentine who also wrote the collections El Aleph and Ficciones.;;(Jorge) (Luis) Borges;;
Geography;;The Sangu and Feni are two rivers in a system which cuts through some namesake Hill Tracts of one of its cities, and the Mru, Chak, and Marma are indigenous peoples of this country. Seasonal lakes called "beels' form in the city of Sylhet in this nation. Bordered on the east by the states of Tripura and Meghalaya, it contains the seaport of Mongla and cities of Khulna, Rajshahi, and Chittagong. The eastern portions of the Sundarban forests can be found in this country which sees a large delta formed by the confluences of the Meghnad, Padma, and Jamuna river, also called the Ganga-Bramhaputra delta. For 10 points, name this nation with its capital at Dhaka.;;(People's) (Republic) (of) Bangladesh;;
Biology;;One part of it contains the median aperture of Magendie and the lateral aperture of Luschka. Meckels cave is found in its outer layer, a strong fibrous connective tissue, contains a sickle-shaped partition known as the falx cerebri. One part of it contains filaments known as trabeculae that transverse the space between the inner and middle layers. Its three layers are known as dura matter, arachnoid and pia mater and inflammation of it due to viral or bacterial infection can be detected by a lumbar puncture. For 10 points, name this system of membranes that protects the central nervous system.;;meninges|meninx;;arachnoid (space)
World History;;This polity won a war which saw the defeat of the Retired Emperor Go-Toba and the appointing of jito in the losing side's provinces. That war, the Jokyu War, solidified control of this dynasty by the Hojo clan, It was aided by typhoons in repelling two sea-borne invasions of the Yuan Dynasty, spearheaded by Kublai Khan. Its downfall began with suicides of discontent Samurai after which Ashikaga Takauji assumed the title of shogun. Established after its founder defeated the Taira clan in the Gempei War, for 10 points, name this shogunate established by Minamoto no Yoritomo, the first Shogunate in Japanese history.;;Kamakura (Shogunate|Bafuku);;
Physics;;The square of this quantity appears in the denominator of the Prandtl-Glauert equation, which breaks down when this quantity is around point seven or above, and it is related to pressure by the Rayleigh Pitot formula.  For ideal gases it is equal to the square root of the Cauchy number, and when it exceeds one, decreasing the cross section of a tube will reduce the flow speed.  For small values of this quantity, flow is incompressible, and it can be defined as the fluid velocity times the square root of density over the bulk modulus.  This quantity reaches a critical value when speed equals 331 meters per second.  For 10 points, name this ratio of an object's speed to the speed of sound.;;Mach (number);;
Physics;;This statement contributes to the repulsive one over r to the twelfth term in the Lennard-Jones Potential. Its rigorous statement requires that particles with half-integer spin have anti-symmetrical wave functions, and it also explains neutron degeneracy, which prevents smaller neutron stars from collapsing into black holes. The "+1" term seen in the denominator of the Fermi-Dirac distribution arises due to this statement, and bosons do not have to obey it, but fermions such as protons and electrons do. For 10 points, name this law of quantum mechanics, which states that no two identical fermions can occupy the same quantum state at the same time.;;Pauli exclusion (principle);;
Music;;The final movement of this work features a coda that us described as "the tail that wags the dog". In the second movement the cello section is divided with two cellos playing muted instruments representing dripping water, while the rest of the section joins the double basses in playing pizzicato. A trio appears twice and is interrupted by a 2/4 scherzo each time in the third movement depicting a peasants' dance, and a cadenza featuring the oboe, flute, and clarinet represents bird songs in the second movement subtitled, "By a Brook". For 10 points, name symphony in F Major inspired by country life by Beethoven.;;Pastoral (Symphony)|Beethoven('s) (Symphony) (Number) 6th (Symphony) (in) (F) (Major);;
United States History;;This man served as chair of the Special Studies Project while advising the Governor of New York, Nelson Rockefeller, and he argued for a policy of "flexible response" as opposed to "massive retaliation" in his 1957 book Nuclear Weapons and Foreign Policy.  This man supported Pakistan in its fight against Bangladesh and India, while his implementation of a South American assassination campaign, Operation Condor, led to his being accused of war crimes. However, he also won a Nobel Peace Prize he shared with Le Duc Tho for the U.S. ceasefire and withdrawal from Vietnam. For 10 points, name this Secretary of State under Richard Nixon and Gerald Ford.;;(Henry) (Alfred) Kissinger|(Heinz) (Alfred) Kissinger;;
Literature;;The speaker of this poem discusses the "gleams of half-extinguished thought" which makes "the picture of the mind revive again" and allows him to recognize the "still, sad music of humanity". The speaker hopes that another's person's memories of "wild ecstasies shall be matured / Into a sober pleasure" and form in her mind a "mansion for all lovely forms". The speaker concludes that "this green pastoral scene" has grown "More dear" to him after "Five years have past" since he first visited the title location with his sister Dorothy. For 10 points, name this poem named for an abandoned monastic building by William Wordsworth.;;(Lines) (Composed) (a) (Few) (Miles) (Above) Tintern Abbey;;
Physics;;One of these particles exchanges a virtual photon with an electron in Bhabha scattering, and along with a neutrino, one of these is a side product of the creation of deuterium in the proton-proton chain.  A pion and one of these particles should result from proton decay, and their appearance under normal circumstances will immediately result in the creation of a photon with 511 keV of energy.  They were first postulated as negative energy solutions to a namesake wave equation by Paul Dirac, and they were discovered in 1932 by Carl Anderson.  For 10 points, name this spin-½ particle with positive charge, the antiparticle of the electron.;;positron(s)|beta-plus (particle);;antielectron
Music;;He offered four variations on a "sighing" theme in the "Variazioni" section of a work featuring movements inspired by the Alborada and Fandango dances, while King Dodon is advised about the Queen of Shemakha by the title mystical object of one opera. Along with Capriccio Espagnol and The Golden Cockerel, he used terse violin cadenzas representing the light emanating from Christ's tomb to separate the sections of his Russian Easter Festival Overture and the bass motif of the sultan is contrasted with the violin motif of the title character in a work based on The Arabian Nights. For 10 points, name this Russian composer of Scheherazade and "Flight of the Bumble Bee".;;(Nicolay) (Andreyevich) Rimsky-Korsakov;;
World History;;A morning fog at this battle concealed the initial advance of St. Hilaire and Vandamme.  The attackers' disastrous plan to attack the defenders' purposely weakened right flank was designed by Weyrother, and it allowed Soult to lead a charge straight up the opponents' center, taking the Pratzen Heights from Kutuzov.  Its aftermath saw the creation of the Confederation of the Rhine after the Treaty of Pressburg dissolved the Holy Roman Empire.  For 10 points, name this battle in which a joint force under Francis II and Alexander I was defeated by Napoleon, also called the Battle of the Three Emperors.;;(Battle) (of) Austerlitz;;(Battle) (of) (the) Three Emperors
Philosophy;;Robert Kapsis argued that it was low in certain communities in his article on Black Ghetto Diversity and it.  In an article by Gary Lee entitled Marriage and this, Lee references a version of this concept which attempts to explain the criminal tendency to act upon any opportunity for income, even when illegal.  That version was developed by Robert Merton, who wrote Social Structure and this.  It was identified as a result of religion's decreasing importance in society and of the modern division of labor.  For 10 points, name this breakdown of social norms resulting in a feeling of lack of purpose, one of the four major causes of suicide identified by Emile Durkheim.;;anomie;;
Geography;;In this modern-day country's north, the Tatra Mountains include its highest point, Gerlachovsky Stit, and include numerous hiking and skiing attractions. The Vah river originates in its Tatras Mountains, and flows West and then South past cities such as Trencin and Zilina. The Spis castle is located in the Kosice region, while Presov is the third largest city in this country, and is home to a salt mine. This country's western border is formed by the Morava River, which also forms part of its southwestern border with Austria. For 10 points, name this country also bordered by Hungary, Ukraine, and Poland with its capital at Bratislava, and was once paired with the Czech Republic.;;Slovakia|Slovak Republic|Slovenska Republica;;
Philosophy;;This man inspired Giles Deleuze's formulation of the concept of "the plane of immanence". His early work, On the Improvement of Understanding, influenced a later work that introduced his concepts of mode, attribute, and substance. He asserted that Ezra was the primary author of the Old Testament and miracles could be explained naturally in a work arguing that freedom of ideas encourages a secure state, Theological-Political Treatise. One of his works features the section "Of Human Bondage," uses the phrase "God or Nature" to explain Pantheism, and is written in "geometrical order". For 10 points, name this Rationalist philosopher, who wrote Ethics.;;(Baruch) (e)Spinoza|(Benedict) (e)Spinoza;;
Biology;;A cleft-like structure sometimes remains in Rathke's pouch which forms its pars tubullaris and pars distillaris, and infarction of this organ occurring during pregnancies is known as Sheehan's syndrome. It is situated in a depression in the sphenoid bone called sella turcica. Its adenohypophysis is divided into acidophil, basophile, and chromophobe regions, and herring bodies are found on the axons of the neurons that connect it to the hypothalamus. Divided into an anterior and posterior lobe, for 10 points, name this organ often called "master gland" which secretes prolactin and growth hormone, and is located at the base of the brain.;;pituitary (gland);;
Pop Culture;;A piece of fan fiction about this game is subtitled "Repercussions of Evil" and revolves around John Stalvern. Spider Masterminds and Revenants were missing from its N64 version, though that game did contain the Laser of the Unmaker. Its first sequel added the Megasphere and ended when the player killed the Icon of Sin by shooting rockets into its brain; that sequel was subtitled Hell on Earth. Its shareware version consisted of the episode Knee Deep in the Dead, which began with the vanishing of Deimos and the arrival of demons on Phobos. For 10 points, identify this id Software FPS, in which the BFG 9000 is among the weapons used by the player, a Space Marine.;;DOOM;;Doom 64|Doom II
Literature;;In one of his works Orual describes her sister Psyche's romance with Cupid, and another novel centers on Elwin Ransom's mission to Mars to stop Professor Weston from corrupting the new Adam and Eve. In addition to Till We Have Faces and Perelandra, which forms a trilogy with That Hideous Strength and Out of the Silent Planet, one of his characters is annoyed that his nephew never learned the "Law of Undulation," from Slubgob at Training College before berating Wormwood for failing as a tempter. For 10 points, name author of The Screwtape Letters, who wrote about the Pevensie children in his Narnia series.;;(Clive) (Staples) Lewis;;
United States History;;Prior to this battle, the Hornet and Enterprise were sent on a surprise bombing mission, leaving them out of the US fleet.  The other side in this battle wished to secure the island of Tulagi and its harbor.  On May 7, the first major day of battle, the Kikuzuki and the Shoho were both destroyed, and the next day the Shokaku was forced to retreat.  The Yorktown escaped major damage from the Japanese attack, but the Lexington was destroyed.  For 10 points, name this battle fought over control of Port Moresby, a 1942 naval battle that notably featured no ship-to-ship combat, fought in a namesake body of water that is home to the Great Barrier Reef.;;(Battle) (of) (the) Coral Sea;;
Art;;Triangular patterns can be seen on the hat of one figure in this painting who wears a set of beads with a cross, and diagonal lines connect the eyes of the two most prominent figures of this painting, one of whom feeds the other a flower. A face peeks out of an orthodox church in the background of this work whose top right contains five houses, two of which are upside down. A woman can be seen milking a goat, and in another portion, a man with a scythe walks to the right as an upside down woman points the way. Depicting the artist's hometown in Vitebsk, Belarus, for 10 points, name this painting by Marc Chagall.;;I and the Village;;
World History;;Early in this man's reign he faced revolts from Theobald IV of Champaign and Pierre Mauclerc, and his biographer was Jean de Joinville.  He defeated Hugh of Lusignan and the English at the Battle of Taillebourg, and with James I of Aragon he signed the Treaty of Corbeil.  With a Treaty of Paris he ensured Languedoc would become a royal possession, ending the Albigensian Crusade,  and he constructed the Sainte-Chapelle.  This son of Blanche of Castille captured Damietta before failing to take Cairo, ending the Seventh Crusade.  For 10 points, name this only French king to be canonized.;;Louis IX|Louis II of Artois;;(Saint) Louis
Chemistry;;The propensity of nitroso compounds to participate in a variant of this reaction has been used to synthesize oxazine derivatives.  Another variant of this reaction yields 2,3-dihydro-4-pyridones and uses a compound named for Danishefsky. In addition to that 'aza' variation, this reaction is usually thermodynamically favorable since it sees the formation two sigma bonds from pi bonds. Under kinetic control, it preferentially yields an endo product, and one component must be in the s-cis conformation for the reaction to occur. For 10 points, name this cycloaddition reaction in which a diene reacts with a dienophile to produce a ring and is named after two German chemists.;;Diels(-)Alder (Reaction);;
World History;;Early in his life, this man built the Miramar Castle near Trieste, and was appointed Governor-General to the Kingdom of Lombardy-Venetia by his brother. Upon reaching his more famous position of power, he quickly nullified all large debts owed by peasants and banned corporal punishment. In attempt to solidify his position this brother of Francis Joseph I and husband of Carlota adopted the grandson of Augustin de Iturbide, but he was still defeated and killed at Queretaro by the forces of Benito Juarez. For 10 points, name this Habsburg who Napoleon III placed on the throne of Mexico.;;(Emperor|Archduke) Maximilian (I) (of) (Mexico);;
Art;;He developed the "chicken-claw" floor plan for his theorized "Cartesian skyscraper". His buildings include the Curuchet House in Argentina, and he and Nicolai Kolli designed Moscow's Tsentrosoyuz Building. His three furniture types include "type-needs" and "human-limb," and he helped reconstruct the port of Marseilles, which included his first Unite d'Habitation. He enumerated his "five points" in his Towards a New Architecture, and other works of his include a concrete church in Ronchamp and a house mounted on piloti, typical of his International Style. For 10 points, name this Swiss-French architect of the Notre Dame du Haut and the Villa Savoye.;;(Le) Corbusier|(Charles-Edouard) Jeanneret(-Gris);;
Literature;;One work set in this country ends when the dog Aesop is shot by his owner Thomas Glahn, while the title character of a trilogy about this country assists in the murder of Eline to marry a knight in the first part entitled The Wreath. In another work from this country The People's Herald withdraws its support for Dr. Stockmann's claim that the bathes are contaminating the local water, and in another work Nils Krogstad's blackmail leads to Nora leaving her husband Torvald Helmer. For 10 points, An Enemy of the People and A Doll's House are set in this country, the home of Knut Hamsun, Sigrid Undset, and Henrik Ibsen.;;Norway;;
Music;;This composer wrote the aria "Quand nos bourgeons se rouvriront" about the Belgian defense on the Ypres in his A Voice in the Desert, while a famous "nobilmente" features in his first symphony in A-flat dedicated to Hans Richter. Jacqueline du Pre popularized his cello concerto in E minor, and a Cardinal Newman poem is the basis for his oratorio The Dreams of Gerontius. An argument about Sonata Pathetique with Augustus Jaeger was depicted in the "Nimrod" section of a work thought to be inspired by "Auld Lang Syne". For 10 points, name this English composer of the Enigma Variations and Pomp and Circumstance.;;(Edward) Elgar;;
Astronomy;;A type of these objects located at the "tip" of their namesake "branch" are used as standard candles. The occurrence of a degenerate core causes them to increase temperature very rapidly while maintaining their volumes, which results in the "helium flash," after which convert three helium nuclei to a carbon-12 nucleus via a Beryllium intermediate in the triple alpha process. Eventually, their outer regions expand to form a planetary nebula, after which they become white dwarves. For 10 points, identify these stars exemplified by Arcturus, whose cool temperatures are the cause of their namesake color.;;red giant(s);;
Art;;One of his paintings features a woman in black on the left with her two daughters and a man sitting in a chair facing the trio. In addition to a Portrait of Bellili Family, he also painted Semiramis Building Babylon and Place de la Concorde. This man also depicted some Jewish bankers in his At the Stock Exchange, and some members of his family can be seen trading the titular commodity in his New Orleans Cotton Exchange, but he is better known for depicting a woman sitting beside a man smoking a pipe with the titular beverage on her table. For 10 points, identify this impressionist painter of L' Absinthe and several sculptures and paintings of ballet dancers.;;(Hillaire) (Germaine) (Edgar) Degas;;
Literature;;In one of his short stories, Paul Kovel tries to help his crazy neighbor Timothy Stokes, who believes he is a werewolf. Along with Werewolves in their Youth and A Model World, he wrote about the son of the gangster "Joe the Egg," who is torn between his attraction to Arthur Lecompte and Phlox Lombardi in The Mysteries of Pittsburgh. James Leer steals the jacket worn by Marilyn Monroe at her wedding from Richard Gaskell in a novel centering on Grady Tripp, and the title characters of another of his novels create the comic book hero The Escapist. For 10 points, name this American author of Wonder Boys and The Amazing Adventures of Kavalier and Clay.;;(Michael) Chabon;;
