Literature;;At the end of this work, one of the characters is sentenced to be set "breast-deep in earth" and famished.  The title character's last line is "witness my knife's sharp point," which he uses to stab a woman before himself being stabbed by a son of an emperor who is himself immediately stabbed by Lucius.  Popular in the 18th century in a version produced by Edward Ravenscroft, it features the brothers Bassianus and Saturninus, as well as the unsavory Chiron and Demetrius, who actually murdered Bassianus and raped Lavinia.  Featuring characters who are baked in a pie and another who carries a severed hand in her teeth, it centers on the schemes of Tamora, queen of the Goths, and Aaron the Moor.  FTP, name this early Shakespeare tragedy whose title character is a Roman general.;;Titus Andronicus
World History;;Its first significant action was the assasination of Wash Tel, and several months later it took responsibility for the bombing of a Dutch gas plant. One year after its most famous action, its members took hostages at the Saudi embassy in Sudan and killed George Moore, the American ambassador there. Its name was inspired by the PFLP's hijacking of three airliners in Jordan, after which King Hussein moved against the fedayeen, resulting in a civil war. It was founded by Salah Khalaf, also known as Abu Iyad, and its most famous action, supposedly masteminded by Abu Daoud, resulted in the ordering of Operation Wrath of God by Golda Meir. FTP, name this terrorist group best known for this killings of 11 Israeli athletes during the 1972 Munich Olympics, which took its name from a month in autumn.;;Black September|Aylul Aswad
Economics;;This work's opening chapter ponders "the great enigma of our times," which the author identifies as the association of the titular phenomena. This work's sixth chapter is dedicated in part to the refutation of Malthusian theory, which the author claims "exonerates the rich," and cites the famines in India in opposition to it. Beginning with some definitions of capital, this work remarks that "all capital is wealth, but not all wealth is capital," while chapter 14, using the example of "the island of free opportunity," investigates the persistence of the second titular concept "amidst advancing wealth". Another chapter links the causes of industrial depressions to the denial of equal access to land, while chapter 18 approvingly cites the Physiocrats. Best known for its claim of the primacy of land to economic activity, FTP, name this 1879 book, the most famous work of Henry George.;;Progress and Poverty
Art;;It has twelve Doric columns and its pedestal depicts allegories of the arts and sciences. Its interior sections feature narrative reliefs and it is topped by a depiction of Eirene, the goddess of peace, whose olive wreath was later replaced with a cross. Its various sculptures were created by Johann Schadow, whose son Frederick was a leading figure among the Nazarenes. Divided into five passageways, it is modeled on the Propylea and is located at the terminal of the linden tree lined boulevard on Pariser Platz. Featuring the famous quadriga of vitory, this structure would become the kernel of the "Athens on the Spree" envisioned by Karl Friedrich Schinkel, and was built under the direction of Karl Langhans from 1788 to 1791. FTP, identify this arch, located just south of the Reichstag building in Berlin.;;Brandenburg Gate|Brandenburger Tor
Literature;;His first book of poetry opened with a description of "jaunty crop-haired graying / Women in grocery stores," and in addition to "Poem About People" featured such poems as "Discretions of Alcibiades" and the long "Essay on Psychiatrists".  His second book of poetry featured sections on the "many fragments," "great emptiness," and "everlasting possibility" of this country, and purported to offer an "explanation of America".  In addition to writing a book on the poetry of Walter Savage Landor, his volumes include History of My Heart and The Want Bone, as well as a notable translation of Dante's Inferno.  FTP, name this author who in 1997 became Poet Laureate of the United States and who founded the "Favorite Poem Project," which asks average Americans like Paul Litvak to recite poems they love.;;(Robert) Pinsky
Physics;;The phase variety of this phenomenon typically occurs in oscillators and is caused by fluctuations in the phase of a wave. The Brownian variety of this phenomenon has a spectral density proportional to the inverse square of the frequency, while the pink variety, which is sometimes also known as the one-over-f type, is proportional to the inverse of the frequency. Proportionality to the square root of the product of temperature and frequency is a characteristic of the thermal, or Johnson type, which occurs naturally in all resistors, while the shot variety is a Poisson process that occurs when the carriers of energy are discrete particles. Best known when it is a random process with flat power density, known as the "white" type, FTP, name this physical phenomenon, the ratio of signal to which is typically to be maximized.;;noise
United States History;;In response to this, Noah Webster composed a letter to the man who delivered it which advocated an "aristocratic branch independent of popular suffrage". It encourages those present to bear in mind the "sacred principle" that the will of the majority, "to be rightful, must be reasonable," and cautions against replacing religious intolerance with political intolerance. Positing that "every difference of opinion is not a difference of principle," this speech claims that "we are all Republicans; we are all Federalists". Noting that "sometimes it is said that man can not be trusted with the government of himself," it asks whether he can "be trusted with the government of others," or whether "we have found angels in the forms of kings to govern him," and proposes that history answer this question. It was delivered only days after a 30-hour special session of the House, on March 4, 1801.  FTP, name this speech given by the third president of the United States.;;(Thomas) Jefferson('s) (First) Inaugural (Address)
Miscellaneous;;One of this group's albums includes a track asking "What do I think I think"? while another begins, "May day, every day, my day". The title of the fifth song on an album by this group references the institutionalized star of Come and Get It and the second song took its inspiration and lyrics from Patrick Suskind's Perfume: The Story of a Murderer.  An album of B-sides and rarities put out by this group includes the song "Mexican Seafood" and covers of songs like "Molly's Lips" by the Vaselines, while their first album included the songs "Negative Creep" and "Floyd the Barber" and was put out in 1989 by Sub Pop.  In addition to Bleach, their albums include Incesticide and an album which features the songs "Rape Me" and "Heart-Shaped Box," In Utero.  FTP, name this group which put out Nevermind and which was fronted by Kurt Cobain.;;Nirvana
Literature;;In one of them, a 70-year-old man marries a 15-year-old girl and then dies of jealousy after suspecting her of committing adultery with a man named Loaysa.  In another Theodosia dresses up as a man to find the person who promised to marry her, while a third features Preciosa, who turns out to be the daughter of a noblewoman rather than the title "gypsy girl".  Others include "Lady Cornelia" and a work about two rapscallions who are known as Rinconete and Cortadillo.  FTP, name this group of twelve short works of fiction first published in 1613 and written by Miguel de Cervantes.;;Exemplary Novels|Novelas ejemplares
Earth Science;;It is home to the TAG and Snake Pit hydrothermal fields, which are a source of ferromanganese nodules. It is interrupted by the Romanche Gap, which offsets it by about 400 miles. This feature was formed during the Triassic from the collision of three-armed grabens, and its aulacogens eventually became the river valleys of waterways such as the Mississippi. Just east of it at 30 degrees north latitude is the Lost City hydrothermal field, the chief feature of the Atlantis Massif. It is responsible for the existence of such islands as Ascension, St. Helena, Tristan da Cunha, and Iceland. Running for approximately 10,000 miles from the Arctic Ocean to the tip of Africa, FTP, name this divergent boundary, an undersea mountain range which sits in the center of a basin between two abyssal plains in its namesake ocean.;;(the) Mid(-)Atlantic (Ridge)
Philosophy;;This man's interpretation of a 20th-century philosopher is criticized in the second lecture of Stanley Cavell's Conditions Handsome and Unhandsome.  The book by this man which Cavell criticized considers a "paradox" about how courses of action are determined by rules. The prettiness of London was the subject of this man's 1979 article "A Puzzle about Belief," though he is better known for two books, the second of which presents an "elementary exposition" of the views on "rules and private language" held by Wittgenstein. At the age of 19 this man published "A Completeness Theorem in Modal Logic," and his most famous work is a collection of lectures in which he invented the idea of the rigid designator, which picks out the same referent in all possible worlds. FTP, name this American philosopher, best known for Naming and Necessity.;;(Saul) (Aaron) Kripke
Biology;;A recent Science article attempted to identify the "kernels" of the networks made up of these objects, defining these kernels as "evolutionarily inflexible subcircuits". The duplication of a set of these objects about 520 million years ago is thought to be responsible for the Cambrian explosion. In vertebrates, they are organized into 13 paralogues and 4 clusters, and each cluster is the same size as the Ubx gene in Drosophila, the animal in which these types of genes were discovered. About 180 base-pairs long, these genes encode transcription factors and act on the embryo in the sequential order that they occur on the chromosome. FTP, identify this family of genes active during development which directly control an organism's body plan.;;Hox (genes)|Homeobox (genes)
World History;;This man's grandson, who was known as "Gonatas" or "knock-kneed," established himself as the head of the Thessalian League and defeated Sparta during the Chremonidean War. During this man's service under Antipater he beseiged Eumenes, an ally of Perdiccas, at Nora, and following his occupation of Syria this man formed the League of the Islanders. He sent his son Demetrius against the governor of Athens, who had been appointed by Cassander, but suffered his last and only defeat when he was abandoned by Docimus following the invasion of Lysimachus from Asia Minor, Seleucus from Babylonia, and Ptolemy from Egypt. Defeated and killed at Ipsus, FTP, name this Macedonian general, a member of the Diadochi sometimes known as Monopthalmos or Cyclops.;;Antigonus (I)
Literature;;During a doctor's visit, the title character remarks that he allows his wife to do him an injustice because "it is like paying off a huge, immeasurable debt". About 12 years before the action in this work takes place, the title character's twin sons died after his wife's milk went bad when she was frightened by a fire.  Dr. Herdal ineffectually tries to prevent the title character from undertaking his final, fatal action, which he attempts after learning that Knut has had a stroke.  It features a character who had appeared in an earlier play by the same author, Hilda Wangel. Following a falling-out with Ragnar Brovik, the title character tries to place the wreath on the newly-finished church spire himself, only to fall into the quarry below and die. FTP, name this Henrik Ibsen play whose title character is architect Halvard Solness.;;(The) Master Builder|Bygmester Solness
Religion/Mythology;;After the murder of one of his brothers, this man fled with his mother and twin brother to the citadel of Midea. Two events in this man's life are associated with celestial bodies moving backwards: one involved his being chosen king, while the other took place at the moment of a notable crime. That crime was the result of this man's attempt to reverse the consecration of his brother, who was given a golden fleece by this man's wife Aerope ay-ROE-pee. This man had two sons with Aerope, one of whom became the king of Mycenae while the other succeded Tyndareos as king of Sparta. Eventually killed by Aegisthus, FTP, name this father of Agamemnon and Menelaus who killed the children of his brother Thyestes and fed them to him, thereby bringing a curse on his namesake house.;;Atreus
Noncomputational Math;;One of his theorems in differential topology states that a subbundle of a manifold's tangent bundle is integrable if and only if its space of sections is closed under the Lie bracket. His namesake algebras are equipped with associative, nondegenerate bilinear forms. More famously, he gives his name to a field automorphism which for a field of prime characteristic p maps every element a to its pth power. He is perhaps most famous for a result which categorized all real associative finite-dimensional division algebras. FTP, name this German, whose namesake theorem shows that the only algebras of the above type are the reals, the complex numbers, and the quaternions.;;(Ferdinand) (Georg) Frobenius
Music;;The production of a will in the first act of this work favors Albert Gregor over the cousin of a deceased baron, and is preceded by the aria "Ach te, ach boze!" sung by a clerk. At the start of its second act, a cleaning woman sings, "Videly ty kytice"? vee-deh-lee tee kee-tee-che before the title character's arrival, and after meeting Hauk-Sendorf, the title character calls him "Maxi" and tells him in Spanish that Eugenia is not dead. In the third act, after learning of Janek's suicide, the title character sings "Buenas Dias, Maxi!" but the handwriting analysis of the lawyer Kolenaty leads to the discovery that Elena Marty is the same person as Ellian MacGregor. The title character sings "Pater hemon," and dies after rejecting a magic immortality potion first used on her by her father Hieronymus 300 years ago in, FTP, what 1928 opera based on a Karel Capek play and composed by Leos Janacek?;;(The) Makropulos Affair|(The) Makropulos Case|(The) Makropulos Secret|Vec Makropulos
United States History;;Eleven years before this act was passed, the Supreme Court in Katz vs. United States explicitly declined to extend its ruling to cases covered by it. The constitutionality of this law was addressed in the case U.S. vs. Nicholson and U.S. vs. Duggan, the latter of which involved members of the IRA. Chapter 36 of title 50, its third subchapter addresses "pen registers and trap-and-trace devices" and includes provisions for authorization in times of emergency and of war. Section 206 of the PATRIOT Act updated this legislation to provide for a "roaming" version of its most famous application, while Section 218 loosened the requirements for a warrant, which is granted by a secret court. Passed as the result of the Church Committee's investigation into Operations Minaret and Shamrock, FTP, name this 1978 law, which may have been violated recently by the NSA.;;F(oreign) I(ntelligence) S(urveillance) A(ct)
Chemistry;;The alkyl form of these molecules can be treated with triphenylphosphine and ozone to produce nitro compounds, and these compounds can also be reduced to primary amines via the Staudinger ligation.  Isocyanates can be produced by treating carbon monoxide with these compounds, and their reactions with alkyl or aryllithium compounds produce primary amines. The Curtius rearrangement pyrolises the acyl variety of these compounds to give isocyanates, and they can be produced by reacting alcohols or olefins with hydrazoic acid. Typically sensitive to shock, the lead forms of these compounds are used in detonators and blasting caps, while the sodium salt is commonly found as an explosive in automobile airbags. FTP, name this functional group which contains three double-bonded nitrogens.;;azide|azido
Literature;;The author of this novel never finished a chapter for it which described a lawyer named Hasterer  who likes to embarrass young men by asking them difficult questions.  One chapter features a tradesman named Block who is only wearing a short-sleeved shirt, and is therefore accused of being Leni's lover. The usher's wife informs the protagonist that his speech did not go over well, and on the advice of his uncle Albert he hires an advocate. The painter Titorelli, who does portraits of magistrates, explains to the protagonist his possible fate, and when he opens a storeroom in the bank where he works he discovers a masked man whipping Willem and Franz. In a cathedral, a priest tells the parable of a man standing before the door to the law, and on the day before his 31st birthday the protagonist is taken out to a quarry by two men who argue over which one is going to kill him. FTP name this novel about Joseph K, a work by Franz Kafka.;;(The) Trial|(Der) Prozess
Miscellaneous;;Harry Partch's composition The Wayward is based on his time as a member of this group, and one of The Wayward's parts claims to be a "Message From" this kind of friend. Todd De Pastino has written a book about the "Citizen" kinds of these and hypothesizes that the name for this group came from a slang term for "farmhand". John Hodgman's The Areas of My Expertise includes matters pertaining to this group right after cryptozoology in its subtitle and provides a list of 700 names of people bearing this designation. In the pictorial language of this group, three hash marks represent an unsafe area, and their supposed vision of the good life is reflected in the Harry McClintock song Big Rock Candy Mountain. Often imagined as carrying bindlestiffs, FTP, name this group of homeless migratory workers best known for the fact that they get around by hopping freight trains.;;hobo(s)
Literature;;The plot of this work is set in motion by the death of Klavdia Ivanovna, who reveals the secret of the title things to her son-in-law. This work's main character is first seen attempting to sell an astrolabe, and for assistance in recovering the title things demands 50 percent of their worth. This novel features such characters as Elochka the Cannibal, who has a vocabulary of only 30 words, as well as Lapis, who writes about the exploits of Gavrila. One event in this novel involves an interplanetary chess tournament in the town of Vasyuki, and in the end, upon stabbing the main character, Ippolit Matveyevich tears up the titular objects, only to find out that the diamonds he thought were inside have been used to build a new public building. Sharing its title with a 1970 Mel Brooks movie based on it, FTP, name this 1928 novel by Ilya Ilf and Yevgeny Petrov, in which Ostap Bender helps Kisa Vorabyaninov search for the titular dozen pieces of furniture.;;(The) (Twelve) Chairs|Dvenadtsat Stulyev
Miscellaneous;;One example is that the power law behaviors of the Ising ferromagnetic transition and the liquid-gas phase transition are identical, because in each case there is a scalar order parameter. Another example is that in one-dimensional maps that approach a chaos in a period-doubling cascade, the ratio of successive doublings has a fixed value called the Feigenbaum constant. In general it is a consequence of the renormalization group: roughly speaking, details of microscopic behavior are invisible at long distances. FTP, what is this term, which in computing is synonymous with Turing completeness?;;universality
Literature;;His first play took as its title character a man who won the battle of Maclodio for Francesco Foscari after being insulted by Fillippo Maria Visconti, and his second play depicted Charlemagne's invasion of Lombardy.  Before turning to drama, he wrote poetic works like "The Triumph of Liberty," which he published at age 16, and the classically inspired "Urania".  In addition to The Count of Carmagnola and Adelchi, he wrote a novel about a barber named Mora and a health commissioner named Piazza who were tortured to death on suspicion of spreading a plague in 1630.  That novel is a sequel to this man's best known work, which features an unnamed outlaw, a nobleman named Don Rodrigo, and the peasant he wants to seduce, Lucia.  FTP, name this author of 1827's The Betrothed who is considered the greatest Italian novelist.;;(Alessandro) Manzoni
Biology;;Its "A" portion is explained by the "Pac-Man" or poleward-flux models. In S. cerevisiae, the Mad and Bub genes regulate a checkpoint that controls the onset of this stage that is released by the action of a protein complex containing Cdc27. The breakdown of securin indirectly activates the FEAR pathway during its early steps, and the ensuing release of separase also promotes the breakdown of cohesin and the separation of paired sister chromatids after they line up on the metaphase plate. FTP, identify this stage of mitosis which precedes telophase.;;anaphase
Miscellaneous;;An Annibale Carracci painting shows Christ appearing to Saint Peter here.  According to Martianus Capella, its namesake removed the letter "Z" from the alphabet because it looked like a corpse's teeth; that namesake ended his career by opposing peace with Pyrrhus, and won the support of the Senate despite his blindness.  Its restoration was decreed by Pope Pius VI in 1784, and under the empire its care was entrusted to a curator of praetorian rank, even before Trajan decided to add his name to it.  In the 2nd century BC, Marcus Cornelius Cathegus had an alternative built to part of it which was made unsavory by the Pontine March.  The Samnite Wars necessitated an alliance between Rome and Capua, forcing the Romans to cut through the Alban Hills and to import gravel for the construction of this "queen of roads".  FTP, name this Roman highway which, according to an immortal NAQT lead-in, had nothing to do with bees.;;(the) Appian Way|Via Appia
Psychology;;His good luck in deciding to take his first psychology class because it fit his schedule influenced his article on "The Psychology of Chance Encounters and Life Paths".  He developed a theory of motivation based on the concept of self-efficacy, which in turn feeds into his notion that environment and behavior affect each other, a notion he termed "reciprocal determinism".  He studied acquisition of self-reinforcement behaviors through observations of models with Walter Mischel, his colleague at Stanford.  In another study by this man one type of person worked quietly with a tinker toy set, while another type of person proceeded to pick up a mallet and make comments like "He sure is a tough fella" and "Punch him in the nose" while striking a particular toy.  FTP name this founder of social cognitive theory who conducted the notorious "bobo doll" study.;;(Albert) Bandura
Art;;Donatello's version of this scene was originally placed between his Bearded Prophet and Prophet with Scroll on the campanile of the Duomo. Raphael's fresco of this event on the ceiling of the Stanza d'Eliodoro shows two angels and a fire in the background.  Another treatment quoted the Spinario and depicted the figure of a draped servant boy pulling a thorn from his foot, which was shown below a man grasping a loved one's neck.  That version, a bronze relief, was the last sculpted work of Brunelleschi, who was upstaged by a cheaper design with hollow bronze figures by Ghiberti.  The subject matter for the competition panels for the east doors of the Florentine Baptistry was, FTP, what Biblical scene in which Abraham prepared to kill his son?;;(The) Sacrifice of Isaac|(Abraham's) Sacrifice of Isaac|Isaac's Sacrifice|Abraham and Isaac
Literature;;In one of these, a group of eight people which includes Doctor Cacophodel and Ichabod Pigsnort talk by a fire in the Crystal Hills while looking for the title object. In another of them, a painter has the ability to paint portraits that look into the "inmost souls" of Elinor and Walter Ludlow.  In addition to "The Great Carbuncle" and "The Prophetic Pictures," this collection also contains the author's personal reflections on "The Toll-Gatherer's Day" and "The Vision of the Fountain".  First published nine years after another collection containing "Mrs. Bullfrog" and "The Artist of the Beautiful," it also contains a story in which the title character is saved from hanging by Dominicus Pike and another whose title object is possessed by Mr. Hooper.  Containing stories such as "Mr. Higginbotham's Catastrophe" and "The Minister's Black Veil," FTP identify this collection of short stories so named because they had all been previously published in periodicals, written by Nathaniel Hawthorne.;;Twice-Told Tales
Physics;;This technique can be used to determine the motion of a line vortex inside a fluid-filled cylinder, or the flow pattern induced by a line vortex near a rigid barrier.  For a point near a circular boundary, the distance of the appropriate point from the circle's center is given by the circle's radius squared over the source or sink distance from the circle's center.  This technique relies on a uniqueness theorem to generate solutions to boundary value problems involving Poisson's equation in situations with nice geometric arrangements.  Commonly used in electrostatics to determine the potential due to a charge near a conducting surface, FTP, name this technique which involves placing a reflected charge in a situation with a mirror symmetry.;;(the) (technique) (of) image(s)|(the) (method) (of) image(s)
World History;;A revolt against them led by Babak, the leader of the Khorram-dinan sect, was put down by their eighth ruler, who succeeded his brother al-Mamun to the throne.  Their first ruler was a member of the Banu Hashim who called himself the "blood-shedder" because of his fondness for killing members of the previous dynasty.  That ruler was succeeded by his brother, al-Mansur, after a brief five-year reign, having come to power at the Battle of the Great Zab with the death of Marwan II.  The last member to rule from their original capital is sometimes said to have been rolled up in a carpet and trampled to death following the 1258 sack of that capital.  Reaching their peak under the leadership of Haroun al-Rashid, FTP name this dynasty which ruled from Baghdad after supplanting the Umayyads.;;Abbasid(s)
Philosophy;;He argued that revolutions are unjustifiable in Passive Obedience.  He promoted the use of sumptuary laws in his Essay toward Preventing the Ruin of Great Britain, which condemned "direct gaming" of the sort which led to the collapse of the South Sea Bubble.  He used the phrase "ghosts of departed quantities" to describe fluxions in a work subtitled "A Discourse Addressed to an Infidel Mathematician," and tied kinesthetic sensations to the perception of distance in his Essay towards a New Theory of Vision.  In reference to one of his ideas, Jonathan Swift supposedly once refused to open his door for this man, and Samuel Johnson exclaimed, "Thus I refute him!" after kicking a rock.  FTP, name this Bishop of Cloyne who wrote Three Dialogues Between Hylas and Philonous supporting his view that "to be is to be perceived".;;(Bishop) (George) Berkeley
Geography;;It took its name from a nearby monastery on the Isar river and was formally established in 1155, after a dispute between the Freising family and the eventual ruling dynasty of the region.  The city's center is the Odeonsplatz, and it is home to an art museum called the Glyptothek.  Other famous sites in this city include an attraction which depicts the marriage of Duke Wilhelm V and Renata of Lothringen, and which is authoritatively described by Wikipedia as "the most famous glockenspiel in the world".  It is also home to three museums known by the name Pinakothek; the Nymphenburg Palace, which was home to the Wittelsbach dynasty; and a drinking establishment where Erich von Ludendorff and Adolf Hitler tried to overthrow the Weimar Republic.  FTP, name this site of an Olympic park set up in 1972, the capital of Bavaria.;;Munich
World History;;His two main rivals were warlords named Kobyak and Konchak, according to the Hypatian and Laurentian Chronicles.  Edward Keenan of Harvard argues that the most famous literary work describing this man was a forgery by the 18th-century Czech writer Josef Dobrovsky, but Roman Jakobson argued for the work's authenticity by comparing it to the Zadonshchina.  Eventually named ruler of Chernigov, he and his brothers set out in 1185 on a failed expedition against the Kumans, who were immortalized in an operatic dance 700 years later under the name of Polovetsians.   FTP, name this Kievan prince whose life became the subject of an early Russian epic poem and an opera by Aleksandr Borodin.;;(Prince) Igor
Chemistry;;Suzuki coupling requires a palladium metal catalyst and this element to carry an alkyl group for formation of a carbon-carbon bond.  In the highly reactive compounds it forms with hydrogen, it adopts structures according to Wade's rules; these bonds were described by Longuet-Higgins.  Addition across a carbon-carbon double bond and reaction with basic hydrogen peroxide results in the formation of an anti-Markovnikov product when an alkene is reacted with one of its hydrides.  Its nitrides are isoelectronic with carbon; the cubic-bonded form has nearly the hardness of diamond.  FTP, name this element whose hydrides are often described as having three-center two-electron bonds, notable for forming Lewis acidic compounds since it has only three valence electrons, which has atomic number 5 and symbol B.;;boron
Literature;;Wallace Stevens, in his late poem "The Planet on the Table," wrote that a figure of this name "was glad he had written his poems".  In another literary work, a character of this name accuses another character of lying before playing the tune "Flout ‘em and scout ‘em".  Later that character enters "like a harpy," removes a banquet, and describes three other characters as "men of sin" who had been belched up by the "never-surfeited sea".  The first stanza of a poem of this name mentions the "substanceless blue / Pour of tor and distances," and features a title creature who is described as "God's lioness".  One poem in the collection of this name ends "Out of the ash / I rise with my red hair / And I eat men like air," while another poem begins, "You do not do, you do not do / Any more, black shoe".  The poems "Lady Lazarus" and "Daddy" appear in, FTP, what final collection by Sylvia Plath, which shares its name with the spirit who helps Prospero in The Tempest?;;Ariel
World History;;Frederick Hodgson tried to seize it soon after Prempeh was exiled to the Seychelles, sparking a revolt led by the Queen Mother that was only crushed in 1901.  Following the defeat of an Akan people known as the Denkyera, a meeting was called in the city then known as Kwaman by Okomfo Anokye, who predicted the appearance of this. Also known as the Sika Dwa Kofi, it was displayed only at events like the Adae and Odwira festivals, and was said to represent the soul of the nation which could never be captured by enemies or allowed to touch the ground.  FTP, what object supposedly fell from the sky onto the lap of Osei Tutu at a meeting in Kumasi and functioned as the seat of the ruler of the Ashanti empire?;;(the) Golden Stool
Astronomy;;The alpha star of this constellation lends its name to a class of main sequence stars with infrared excess interpreted as reradiation due to debris disks.  This constellation's beta star is the prototype for a class of ellipsoidal variables that are also eclipsing binaries.  For a time, its alpha star was used to set the zero point of the apparent magnitude scale.  Another star in this constellation is the prototype for a class of Population II, short-period, pulsating variable stars that are less luminous than Cepheids.  It is also home to the planetary nebula M57, known as the Ring Nebula.  FTP, name this summer constellation that will become a circumpolar constellation in about 14,000 years, whose alpha star Vega is known as the Harp Star.;;Lyra
Music;;The sixth was written for flute and bassoon, while the ninth of these opens with a movement marked "vagaroso e mistico".  The second was adapted from pieces originally written for piano and cello and features movements such as "Woodland Memory" and "Song of the Hoodlum".  Written by the composer of three African Dances and a "Rough Poem" for Arthur Rubenstein, the most commonly performed may be the fifth, scored for soprano and eight cellos and consisting of a dance subtitled "Hammered" and an aria written seven years earlier with a text taken from a poem by Ruth Correa.  Each movement in the set is given two titles, one classical and one in the composer's native language.  FTP identify this collection of nine nationalistic pieces written by Heitor Villa-Lobos vee-yuh YO-bozh.;;Bachianas Brasileiras
Biology;;The presence of the E4 allele of apolipoprotein E increases the risk of this disease. Other disorders that may cause similar physical symptoms include Binswanger's disease and another disease that involves alpha-synuclein-containing Lewy bodies. Definitive histological diagnosis involves Bielschowsky or Congo red staining of a 40- to 43-amino-acid-long peptide derived from its precursor, A-P-P. Co-discovered by Kraepelin and its namesake, it prominently affects the hippocampus and association areas of the cortex. FTP, name this neurodegenerative disorder marked by accumulation of tau protein and beta-amyloid in neurofibrillary tangles and plaques, the most common cause of elderly dementia.;;Alzheimer('s) (disease)|Alzheimer('s) (dementia)
Religion/Mythology;;In the myth of Etana, Shamash advises one of these creatures to use a bull's corpse to trap a treacherous eagle.  In Egyptian myth, the field and granary goddess Renenutet took this form, and another of these creatures was sometimes said to have arisen from the spittle of Neith.  In Indian myth, some of these creatures guarded Vinata after she lost a bet with Kadru.  In Aztec myth, the goddess Coatlicue coh-at-lee-queue wore a skirt of these creatures.  In Egyptian myth, the demon Apep was said to take this form, and in Indian myth, Shiva's throat turned blue after one of these creatures, named Vasuki, vomited poison.  FTP, the Aztec god Quetzalcoatl assumed the plumed form of what creature?;;snake(s)|serpent(s)
World History;;Pierre de La Rue wrote the devotional "Gaude Virgo" for this monarch and her husband.  Her daughter Eleanor's unhappy marriage was arranged in the Ladies' Peace of Cambrai, and the War of the Communities was fought to reinstate her as queen of her country.  After the death of her Burgundian husband from typhoid, she refused to be parted from his body, and she was eventually immured in the castle of Tordesillas while her son, who defeated Francis I in the battle of Pavia, ruled Spain.  FTP, name this wife of Philip the Handsome and mother of Holy Roman Emperor Charles V, a Spanish queen known for being loco in the cabeza.;;Juana the Mad|Juana of Castile|Joanna the Mad|Joanna of Castile
Literature;;In their essay "Against Theory," Steven Knapp and Walter Benn Michaels imagine a scenario in which one of these writings appears on a beach in the wake of a receding wave.  In one of these, the namesake figure is compared to a "mountain roe" whose feet "disperse the powdery snow / That rises up like smoke" and is tracked to a bridge.  In another, the speaker eyes a "descending moon" while riding a horse to the namesake's "cot," and is struck by the "fond and wayward" thought that she may be dead.  Another says that she "dwelt among th'untrodden ways / Beside the springs of Dove," while another notes that she is "rolled round in earth's diurnal course / With rocks and stones and trees".  FTP, name this group of poems which includes "A slumber did my spirit seal" and "Strange fits of passion have I known," which deal with a mysterious and deceased young woman and were written by William Wordsworth.;;(the) Lucy (poems)|(A) slumber did my spirit seal
United States History;;His novels include the political thrillers The Company and The China Card, but he is better known for his memoir, Witness to Power.  A winner of the Distinguished Flying Cross in World War II who joined a Seattle firm after graduating from Stanford law school, he named his friend Bud Krogh to head a "Special Investigation Unit" within the White House.  His ties to "the Plumbers" were one factor in his April 1973 resignation, and he was sentenced to 18 months in prison for obstruction of justice and perjury in 1975, along with John N. Mitchell and H.R. Haldeman.  FTP, name this Assistant to the President for Domestic Affairs implicated in the Watergate scandal.;;(John) (Daniel) Ehrlichman
Music;;His early compositions such as Die Liebe für den König oder Karl Stuart and Nicht mehr als sechs Schüsseln were written while at the abbey of Kremsmunster under the direction of Georg Pasterwitz.  Although he attained a degree of success after the opera Moses oder der Auszug aus Agypten, the theatre director needed convincing to stage his final opera, "List und Zufall".  Paganini's reputation as a virtuoso was established when he wrote and performed a set of variations "on the G string" based on a theme in this composer's opera Il Noce de Benevento.  Erich Duda catalogued this composer's work, including two German Requiems and the opera Der Spiegel von Arkadien, with a libretto written by Schikaneder.  FTP identify this composer who completed a horn concerto and Requiem by Mozart.;;(Franz) (Xaver) Sussmayr
Literature;;One character in this work, who quickly outpaces his master despite his goutiness, is terrified by an animal unlike his white lapdog.  Baba and Augurinus are chosen as companions for the title character of this work, which takes place in mid-October.  After injuring himself while farting, the title character provokes an argument in the Senate house and tries to have the goddess Fever beheaded.  Later in this work, the title figure is made to gamble with a bottomless dice-box to atone for his sins, which include the murder of Messalina.  FTP, name this work by Seneca that depicts the afterlife of the emperor Claudius.;;Apocolocyntosis (divi) (Claudii)|(The) Pumpkinification (of) (the) (Divine) (Claudius)
World History;;King Emeric of Hungary was one of its targets.  A meeting between Philip of Swabia and Boniface of Montferrat may have helped bring it about, as it has been argued that Philip intended to return a pretender from the Angelus family to the throne.  Its beginnings could be found in a tournament at Écry, where Fulk of Neuilly preached, and it is also suggested that the blinding of Enrico Dandolo and his subsequent vendetta may have inspired it.  It is remembered mostly from the works of Nicetas Choniates and Geoffrey of Villehardouin vee-hahrd-whan, who was one of the Franks involved in it.  It began with an invasion of the Adriatic city of Zara, and ended with the establishment of the Latin Empire under Baldwin of Flanders.  FTP name this crusade that saw the Venetians and Franks capture Constantinople.;;(Fourth|4th){1}? (Crusade)
Biology;;The Big Brother type of this protein from the Drosophila slowpoke gene is blocked by charybdotoxin, while the apamin-blocked type has greater sensitivity to calcium, and mediates the slow hyperpolarization in spike adaptation, blockage of which contributes to the poisonous effects of honeybee stings. The hyperpolarizing delayed rectifier is represented by Shal, Shab, Shaw, and Shaker in Drosophila, and its pore is selective against sodium. Regulated in part by sulfonylurea receptors, examples of these proteins are the calcium-gated BK and SK varieties, and a large number of these proteins lie in the proximal tubule of the kidney. FTP name this class of mostly voltage-gated membrane proteins that allows its eponymous ion to flow out after action potentials.;;potassium (ion) channel(s)
Literature;;He published a collection of one-act plays, The Long Christmas Dinner, while working as a teacher at the University of Chicago.  He wanted to write a cycle of 14 plays, though he only finished a group of three known as Plays for Bleecker Street.  He won a National Book Award for his novel The Eighth Day, while his other fictional works include a novel about Julius Caesar and a novel about a man who takes a number of jobs after his car breaks down in Newport, Rhode Island in the summer of 1926.  In addition to The Ides of March and Theophilus North, he won his third Pulitzer for a 1942 play about a man who invents the wheel, George Antrobus. FTP, name this author of The Skin of Our Teeth and The Bridge of San Luis Rey.;;(Thornton) Wilder
United States History;;The majority opinion in this case cites a 1774 letter of the Continental Congress to the inhabitants of Quebec, as well as the court's earlier judgment in Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire. The defendant argued that the federal statute in question violated the powers reserved by the Ninth and Tenth Amendments, but the court affirmed the relevant exercise of postal power delegated by Article One, Section 8 of the Constitution.  The majority opinion also overturned an 1868 test resulting from Hicklin v. Regina in this decision, which was combined with Alberts v. California.  Hugo Black and William Douglas dissented, while Justice Brennan wrote the majority opinion which upheld the conviction of the proprietor of American Aphrodite, A Quarterly for the Fancy Free.  FTP, name this 1957 case which ruled that obscene material was not protected by the First Amendment.;;Roth (v) (U(.)S(.))
Economics;;The first appearance of it can be traced back to work on agricultural experiments on the Mecklenburg estate of J. H. von Thunen, though von Thunen's The Isolated State offers a different form of it. One version of it can be applied to modeling utilities with several components, a technique used in supply-side analysis. When its model coefficients sum to one, then it is first-order homogenous, which implies constant returns to scale. Those two coefficients, alpha and beta, are constants determined by technology, and they are exponents of the parameters L and K. Due to its multiplicative form, a consequence of it is that if K is set to zero, then its output is also zero, which implies that there can be no productivity when capital input is zero.  Mapping outputs from capital and labor inputs, FTP, identify this production function popularized by the two men for whom it is named.;;Cobb-Douglas (production) (function)
Philosophy;;He expounded three notions of logic in his Institutio Logica, while many of his views were transmitted through the Abrege of Francois Bernier. His friends convinced him to publish his translation of Diogenes Laertius with commentary in his Animadversiones, though wasn't until after his death that his friend Montmor compiled his best known work. Through his membership in a group known as the "libertines erudits," he became the informal tutor of Molière.  Mersenne helped him codify his refutation of Robert Fludd's views on Galileo in Epistolica Exercitatio, and he opposed Scholasticism in 1624's Exercitationes Paradoxicae. It was in his Syntagma Philosophicum that he put forth the strongest statement of his atomism, drawn from the writings of Epicurus, from whom he took his empiricism. FTP, name this French philosopher, perhaps best known for his objections to Descartes' Meditations.;;(Pierre) Gassendi
Physics;;Freeman Dyson pointed out that when it is negative, QED is unstable, so a perturbative expansion in it must be asymptotic rather than convergent. It can be measured from the Josephson effect and was independently confirmed by the quantum Hall effect. Attempts to propose formulas for its infrared value are regarded as numerology since it runs logarithmically. It was first introduced by Sommerfeld to account for small deviations from the Bohr model in hydrogen. FTP, identify this constant which is defined as e squared over h-bar c and often approximated as one over one hundred thirty-seven.;;fine-structure (constant)|alpha (constant)
Art;;An updated version of this piece was the artist's last painting and was given a name which commemorated the end of World War II. The predominance of yellow in the original canvas was inspired by cabs zooming around a certain city, and this work was preceded by depictions of Trafalgar Square and the Place de la Concorde which prefigure it.  Although the color black has been completely eliminated from this work, it did not betray the principles its artist had espoused in his manifesto, Neo-Plasticism, more than 20 years earlier. Primarily composed of tiny alternating rectangles of different colors, FTP, identify this De Stijl masterpiece, a depiction of New York street life set to a jazzy rhythm which is the most famous work of Piet Mondrian.;;Broadway Boogie(-)Woogie
Literature;;This man composed a 9000-line epic poem about Joseph and Potiphar's wife. Chapter 26 of Gibbon's Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire contains a footnote about an early translation of this man's work, which was written by Captain Macan for the king of Oude. After being swindled by the treasurer Hasan Maimandi, this man entrusted a satirical verse to Ayaz in which he compared his first benefactor to a boundless sea.  That benefactor, Mahmoud Ghazni, had originally intended to pay him a dinar for every couplet that he wrote. The epic he authored was a compilation of earlier work by Moses of Chorene and begins with the conflict between Kaiumers and Ahriman. FTP, name this poet who depicted the hero Rustem in his Shah Nameh, or Book of Kings.;;Firdousi|Ferdowsi|Firdausi
Pop Culture;;He fights such villains as Stilt-Man and Purple Man, who can control people through the power of his radiated skin. With the help of a social worker named Betsy, he helps a man named Melvin regain his sanity and open a costume shop. His romantic life is extremely troubled; in addition to his liaison with the Black Widow, he spends some time engaged to Heather Glenn, who later becomes an alcoholic and commits suicide. Perhaps most disastrous is his affair with his former secretary, Karen Page, who becomes an actress and heroin addict. For a fix, she sells his secret identity to his greatest enemy, who ruins his career in law and blows up his Hell's Kitchen home. Deciding to become a superhero after his boxer father Jack is killed by mobsters, he also runs a legal clinic with his best friend Foggy Nelson. FTP, name this Marvel superhero, an enemy of the Kingpin and lover of Elektra, who is a blind man who fights with his heightened senses.;;Daredevil|(Matt) Murdock
Geography;;The city of Amposta, now located inland, was once a Roman port located on this river.  One of the most notable features of this river is the Mequinenza meh-key-NEN-thaw Reservoir, and to the northeast of the cape at which it meets the sea is the Gulf of San Jorge.  Its source is near the town of Reinosa in the Cordillera Cantabrica, and its tributaries include the Jalon hah-LONE, Guadalope, and the Arga, which flows through a city known in Basque as Iruña.  It flows through cities such as Tudela and Logroño on its way to the sea at the Cabo de Tortosas.  The Gallego River branches off to the north at the location of the most famous city on its banks, Zaragoza.  FTP name this Spanish river, whose name may derive from the Basque word for "valley" or from the name of the inhabitants of the namesake peninsula.;;Ebro (River)|Ebre (River)|Iberus (River)
World History;;The fifth one had a name that translates as "splendid accountant," while the fourth was a famed athlete who was said to have been born with all the teeth in his mouth. The seventh was abducted at an early age, and his sadness led to his name which means "blood-crying". The ninth reorganized his state into a system of four apos, each of which controlled four provinces known as suyu.  The first wife of each of them was known as the Qolla and was his full sister, and they officially took their position after a visit to Mount Huanacauri.  The ninth conquered the Chimu people, but the adoption of succession rules similar to those of the Chimu did not prevent war between the successors of Huyna and Ninan Cuyochi. FTP, identify these men, who include Pachacuti, Manco Capac, and the unfortunate Atahualpa.;;Inca ruler(s)|Sapa Inca|Inca emperor(s)
Literature;;While writing this novel, its author plastered copies of the Isenheim Altarpiece all over his apartment. Chess plays a prominent role in this novel, particularly the competitions at a bar called "Ideal Heaven". A friend from the author's time as a graduate student in chemistry may have inspired the sardonic chess-playing dwarf Fischerele. The hero's brother Georges is a psychiatrist who is unable to help his him. The novel's action is set in motion by Benedikt Pfaff, who cares for the protagonist's apartment, and the housekeeper Therese Krummholz, who convinces the protagonist to marry her. After being thrown out of his apartment, which is home to a library of 25,000 books, the main character begins a descent into madness. FTP, name this work about sinologist Peter Kien, the only novel written by Elias Canetti.;;Auto(-)da(-)F(é|e)|(Die) Blendung
Music;;After Oscar Pettiford broke his arm playing baseball, this man stepped into a lineup that included Dizzy Gillespie, Charlie Parker, Bud Powell and Max Roach to play in a stellar live show at Massey Hall. He was the first musician to use overdubbing on a jazz album in his recording of a six-part suite originally intended to be a ballet. That album, Black Saint and Sinner Lady, was one of many to feature Dannie Richmond, a longtime collaborator who first appeared on The Clown.  He eulogized the Attica Prison Riots in Changes One, and composed a piece about school integration in Arkansas, "Fables of Faubus". That track appeared on an album along with "Self-Portrait in Three Colors" and "Better Git in Your Soul," though the best known track off that album may be "Good-bye Pork Pie Hat". The influence of his hero Duke Ellington can be seen in tracks like "My Jelly Roll Soul" which appeared on his album Blues and Roots, while his masterwork may be Epitaph. FTP, name this jazz bassist who died of ALS, best known for Ah Um and Pithecanthropus Erectus.;;(Charles) Mingus
Earth Science;;Sheeted dike sequences in ophiolites display the most complete record of this process, though an evolutionary gap exists between ancient deposits, whose mineral zonations increase through the zeolite and prehnite-pumpellyite lithofacies, and modern deposits, where it occurs exclusively in the lower greenschist facies. Skarns are formed when resurgent boiling in magma metasomatizes adjacent limestone in continental crust, though this process most commonly affects gabbro and basalt, where mineral solutions recrystallize olivine and pyroxene into serpentine on the ocean floor. FTP, name this geologic process, the chemical alteration of pre-existing rocks by hot water.;;hydrothermal metamorphism
Literature;;According to one poem about this figure, "destiny decreed / That beasts to thee a sacrifice should bleed" for the sake of her coat.  In another poem, we learn that "straight from her eyes she lightning hurl'd" and that neither "her tears nor grieved desire can quench" a "raging, pleasing fire".  She also engaged in a dialogue with Alexis in which she asked "what this parting is, that so like dying is, but is not it".  Part of the sadness in these lines is the result of her marrying another man, which she did because the poet who wrote about her was presumed dead. More famously, an author declares to her that he "could not love thee, dear so much / Lov'd I not Honour more". FTP, identify this figure based on Lucy Sacheverell, the subject of a series of poems including one subtitled "Going to the Wars" which were written by Richard Lovelace.;;Lucasta
Religion/Mythology;;According to Dictys Cretensis, this man's wife decided to take up with a man known as Cometes or Cyllabarus after being told that this man had taken a female prisoner as his new wife.  Later, this man assisted in a war against the Messapians at the behest of Daunus, who gave this man his daughter Euippe you-IPP-ee in marriage.  On his way home from Troy, this man was almost sacrificed to Ares by Lycus, but his life was saved by Lycus' daughter Callirrhoe.  Earlier, this man had thrown a huge rock on Aeneas, though Aphrodite prevented him from killing the Trojan, and stole some horses after sneaking into the camp of King Rhesus.  The son of Deipyle day-IPP-uh-lee and Tydeus, FTP, name this hero from Argos who earned the undying hatred of Aphrodite after wounding her, a member of the Epigoni who shared his name with the owner of some man-eating mares captured by Hercules.;;Diomedes
Miscellaneous;;Opposing the ideas of Vladimir Propp, this work replaces the "syntagmatic sequence" with the "paradigmatic sequence" in its analysis of the Kayapo. Part four of this work, "Well Tempered Astronomy," discusses the Pleiades and the Rainbow. This work is set up according to a musical progression, beginning with the "Overture," and contains such chapters as "The ‘Good Manners' Sonata' and "Chromatic Piece".  The starting point for inquiry is the identification of a "key myth," which in this case is that of the Bororo people. Using poison as an example of what the author calls "the point of isomorphic coincidence between nature and culture," this work proposes a thematic link between the title entities as encompassing the opposition of natural and social forces. FTP, identify this 1964 work of structuralist anthropology, the first volume of the four volume Mythologiques, which was written by Claude Lévi-Strauss and whose title refers to two ways in which food might be consumed.;;(The) Raw and the Cooked|(Le) Cru et le cuit
Chemistry;;A similar reaction to this uses a tetrafluoroborate salt to substitute fluorine onto an aryl amine; this is known as the Schiemann reaction.  Other variations of this reaction include the use of cuprous cyanide to form benzonitriles, a thiol to create thioethers, or water to generate phenols.  Often requiring heat to be driven to completion, it involves treating with nitrous acid to produce a diazonium ion, and allows the replacement of amine groups of an aromatic amine with substituents of choice.   FTP, name this reaction which is most commonly used to synthesize aryl halides from aryl amines by proceeding through a diazonium salt.;;Sandmeyer (reaction)
World History;;After fleeing the Russian Army, Jaroslaw Dabrowski became its military leader. Another of its leaders was nicknamed "locked up" because he spent over half his life in jail. A week before it was declared, Generals Jacques Thomas and Claude Lecomte were murdered.  Those deaths led to a crisis in which the Central Committee of the National Guard declared itself powerless, and a council consisting of 92 members took power under the presidency of Auguste Blanqui. It temporarily cancelled rents, had pawnbrokers return tools to their original owners, and abolished the guillotine. In the end, it was crushed by Marshall MacMahon over the course of "Bloody Week".  FTP, name this socialist government which for two months in 1871 held power in the capital of France.;;Paris Commune
Literature;;This playwright popularized the actress Leslie Carter, and it was rumored that he dragged her around by her hair to increase the emotional intensity of her performances. A mentor to Cecil B. De Mille, he cowrote several plays with De Mille's father, including Lord Chumley. The Civil War drama The Heart of Maryland was his first great success, and he later played himself in the Edwin Porter version of his A Good Little Devil.  That film starred Mary Pickford, who was a member of his troupe and appeared in his The Warrens of Virginia. He also penned the screenplay for the Buster Keaton film Seven Chances, though he is best remembered today for adaptations of his work by Giacomo Puccini and David Henry Hwang. FTP, name this playwright who wrote The Girl of the Golden West and Madame Butterfly.;;(David) Belasco
World History;;In an attempt to imitate Agamemnon, he planned to offer a sacrifice to the gods at Aulis before an expedition to Ionia.  However, he was unsuccessful due to the intervention of the Thebans, who rankled under the dominance of his polis.  Once in Asia Minor, he met with great success in battle against the Persians, but in 395 BC he was called back to Greece, to defend his city against the allied forces of Athens, Thebes, and Corinth in the battle of Coronea.  Despite being the Eurypontid king of Sparta, this son of Archidamus II later led a mercenary army to aid the Egyptians against Persia.  FTP name this king who saw the decline of Sparta after her victory in the Peloponnesian Wars, a man who is paired with Pompey in Plutarch's Lives and who succeeded his brother Agis II.;;Agesilaus (II)
Earth Science;;This structure forms in Main Sequence stars when EIT waves encounter a magnetic separatrix following a coronal mass ejection. According to Petterssen's Rule, they serve as ideal generators for mid-latitude cyclones. Long trails of altocumulus clouds commonly occur in their presence, resulting in prolonged periods of precipitation. They may develop from inverted troughs, or when southward flowing polar air slows against a ridge of high pressure, leading to parallel but opposing wind directions across their surfaces. FTP, name this boundary depicted as a series of alternating semicircles and triangles, characterized by a lack of a displacement force exerted by adjacent warm and cold air masses.;;stationary front
Literature;;In the final section of this work, Madame de Rosemonde learns that one of the central characters is moving to Malta.  Earlier, she had learned that Monsieur de Prévan was to be reinstated in his position, while another character had an unfortunate experience at the Comédie-Italienne.  One character leaves the Ursuline Convent to marry the Comte de Gercourt, who had left another character in this work to have an affair with Madame de Tourvel.  In a climactic scene, a collection of letters is given to the young Chevalier Danceny after he kills the Vicomte de Valmont in a duel.  FTP, name this 1782 novel which also features the sinister Marquise de Merteuil murr-toy, a work by Choderlos de Laclos.;;(Les) Liaisons Dangereuses|Dangerous Liaisons|Dangerous Acquaintances
Religion/Mythology;;Its project was unsuccessfully opposed by Robert of Bavaria and Carlo Malatesta.  It was presided over by the Bishop of Palestrina, and came to a climax with a stirring denunciation delivered by Simon de Cramaud, the Patriarch of Alexandria, after which Baldassare Cossa successfully intrigued on behalf of Peter Philarghi.  It asserted that Pedro de Luna and Angelo Corraro were heretics, and five years after it occurred another council met and elected Oddone Colonna as Martin V.  FTP, name this meeting which elected Alexander V pope, a council convened in 1409 to end the Great Schism.;;(Council) (of) Pisa
Sociology;;Chapter 13 of this book concludes that the "most singular feature" of the title entity is the contrast between the "care and encouragement which it lavishes on the production of private goods" and the restraint on those emerging from the public sector.  That chapter, "The Bill Collector Cometh," follows chapters devoted to "the dependence effect" and "the Marxian pall".  The introduction asks if people will long be content with the "rather mundane goal" of continually increasing the title quality, and notes that this book is the "window to a room" which the author inhabited for the next decade as he wrote The New Industrial State.  FTP, name this 1958 book which discusses a culture which had freed itself from poverty, a work by John Kenneth Galbraith.;;(The) Affluent Society
Art;;The smoke rising from the burning buildings in the left background fills much of the canvas with inky darkness, while the composition of the figures that surround the primary scene was inspired by Rubens' Medici cycle. This work, its artist's first major achievement, caused Thiers to proclaim that "No canvas better reveals the future of a great painter". One bearded man in the bottom right bites the head of another as pale bodies writhe about the title character's party trying to escape damnation and the dark waters of the river Acheron. Phlegyas can be seen from behind as he guides the titular vessel to safety in, FTP, this 1822 work that depicts a boat transporting Vergil and the author of the Inferno, a painting by Eugene Delacroix.;;(The) Barque of Dante|Dante and Virgil (in) (Hell)
Literature;;After the title character is shot on her wedding day, her new husband tracks her assailant to Barrow Down and kills him.  Earlier, that husband had been taken to a gold mine by his great-uncle Reuben, who wanted him to marry a girl named Ruth.  While he was away, the title character had been taken by the Dugals, but after being saved by Jeremy Stickles the central male character goes to London and rescues his love.  The novel is narrated by John Ridd, whose father is murdered by Carver, a member of the title family of outlaws.  FTP, name this 1869 work, a "romance of Exmoor" written by R. D. Blackmore.;;Lorna Doone
Astronomy;;The spectra of the smallest examples of these bodies indicate enrichment in iron hydride and calcium titanate, and as they decrease in size, chromium and vanadium monoxide increase in abundance, lending credence to their birth following the destruction of population III stars. Because they are typically less than one third of a solar diameter, they may not initiate helium fusion, and thus may have lifespans that reach into the trillions of years. The most likely hosts for terrestrial exoplanets, they include the K and L spectral classes.  FTP, name this stellar class which comprises nearly 70 percent of the stars in the universe, whose nearest example is Proxima Centauri.;;red dwarf(s)
World History;;One of the armies involved in this battle spread a false rumor that it was at stationed at Haleb, while the other was augmented by Sherden mercenaries.  The leader of the latter army would have been captured if a group of soldiers from Amurru, whose defection to his side had originally caused the conflict, hadn't arrived to save his bacon.  One side was commanded by the son of Mursili II, while the other was commanded by the son of Seti I.  Fought near the Orontes River, it ended in a stalemate.  FTP, name this battle of 1274 BC, one of the greatest chariot battles ever fought, which pitted Muwatalli's Hittites against the Egyptians of Ramses II.;;Kadesh
Pop Culture;;One track on this album features a lament about having to show I.D. to get inside of Sam's Club, but notes that when you see what an accident did to Left Eye you should think that angels are watching you from the other side.    Another track asks a girl to cover up her mouth as if she has SARS, and features a woman named Lassandra who is delighted about not having to "fuck wit Ray J's broke ass no mo'".  In addition to "Never Let Me Down" and "The New Workout Plan," it features Talib Kweli and Common on "Get ‘Em High" and Twista and Jamie Foxx on "Slow Jamz".  The singer asks God to show him the way because the Devil tries to break him down on its third single, "Jesus Walks".  FTP, name this 2004 album, the debut release by Kanye West.;;(The) College Dropout
Geography;;It is home to the Los Katios National Park, which became a World Heritage Site in 1994, and to a National Park which shares its name.  It measures some 100 miles long by 30 miles wide, and the Rio Atrato flows through its southeastern portion.  Home to the Choco and Cuna tribes, its town of Yaviza is a terminus of the Pan-American Highway. It shares its name with a gulf which contains the Gulf of Uraba and which it itself the southernmost portion of the Caribbean Sea.  FTP, name this impassable "gap" of Colombia and Panama, upon a "peak" of which "stout Cortez" is said to stand "silent" in Keats' "On First Looking into Chapman's Homer".;;Darien (Gap)
Religion/Mythology;;His children included Lovell and a figure who was alternately known as Libeaus Desconus.  According to one legend, he had a nephew who was in love with a woman named Fénice, though she was married to a man who usurped his nephew's claim to the throne of Constantinople.  One of his younger brothers was married to Lynet, and killed this man's mother after discovering her with Lamorak.  Another of his younger brothers was known as "Beaumains" and was accidentally killed by Lancelot, which kicked off this man's fatal feud with that knight.  FTP, name this knight of the Round Table, a son of Lot and Morgause who grew weaker in the afternoon and had an encounter with the Green Knight.;;(Sir) Gawain
Physics;;Schwinger calculated that a strong one would cause pair production from the vacuum. Surface defects concentrate it, leading to emission and breakdown. When added to the time derivative of the vector potential, it is curl-free. Relativistically it makes up half the components of the field strength tensor. Atomic spectral lines split when one is applied, a phenomenon known as the Stark effect. It exerts a force proportional to an object's charge and unrelated to its velocity. FTP, what is this concept introduced by Michael Faraday, proportional to the gradient of an electric potential?;;electric field
Literature;;In the opening scene of this work, a servant named Brigid notes that her master received a postcard with the views of Youghal.  The second act opens in a cottage at Ranelagh, where another character plays Wolfram's song from Tannhauser on the piano.  One character in this work, the newspaper editor Robert Hand, was based on the author's brother Stanislaus.  Robert was once engaged to Beatrice Justice, but gave her up on realizing she loved Richard Rowan, who returns from Italy with his wife Bertha and son Archie.  FTP, name this work published in 1918, the only play written by the author of Ulysses, James Joyce.;;Exiles
United States History;;Three years after it took place Fort Buchanan was built, though that fort was abandoned after only five years following the Bascom Affair.  It provided for two commissioners to meet at Paso del Norte and conduct a survey, which was needed because the Disturnell map turned out to be erroneous.  Its namesake served under Andrew Jackson during the War of 1812 before becoming president of the South Carolina Railroad Company.  It allowed for the construction of a canal across the Isthmus of Tehuantepec, though the possibility of building a southern transcontinental railroad was more exciting  to the men who conceived of it.  FTP, name this event of 1853 by which $10 million was paid to Mexico in return for land in present-day Arizona and New Mexico.;;(the) Gadsden (Purchase)
Biology;;Noncanonical functions for this structure are regulation of telomerase, modification of microRNAs, interaction with viral proteins, and sequestration of proteins important for tumor suppression and the cell cycle. Consisting of fibrillar centers, dense fibrillar components, and granular components, it is surrounded by a layer of condensed chromatin. Disappearing totally during mitosis, this structure is the location of 75% of the polymerase activity in the cell, primarily through the transcription of rDNA through RNA polymerase I. Also the location of synthesis of tRNAs and signal recognition particles, FTP, name this cellular organelle that is the primary site of ribosome synthesis, a subcomponent of the nucleus.;;nucleolus
Music;;Such pieces as "Tribute to Roberto Garcia Morillo" and "In the First Pentatonic Minor Mode" constitute the 12 "American" ones by Alberto Ginastera.  25 of them constitute the Opus 64 of César Cui, while 13 of them comprise the Opus 32 of Sergei Rachmaninov.  Others include "The Canopic Jar," "Dancers of Delphi," and "The Sunken Cathedral," which appear in the two books of them written by Claude Debussy.  A more famous group of them ends in D minor after beginning in C major, and includes one known as the "Raindrop".  FTP, name this type of composition that constitutes the Opus 28 of Chopin, and which is paired with fugues in The Well-Tempered Clavier.;;prelude(s)
Literature;;After the death of William Schlumberger, the most famous owner of one of these died at sea and his version of it was purchased by John Mitchell, whose son Silas later wrote a book about it.  The earliest known one of these was created by Wolfgang von Kempelen, whose work was duplicated by Joseph Racknitz later in the 18th century.  One of them known as "Ajeeb" was destroyed in a fire in the 1920s, while the most famous one was the subject of an 1836 essay which compares it to the duck of Vaucanson and the calculating machine of Charles Babbage.  FTP, name this subject of that Edgar Allan Poe essay, a device owned by Johann Maelzel which featured a mannequin wearing a turban who excelled at a certain game.;;(the) chess player|chess automaton|(the) Turk
Chemistry;;This effect is present in purines and pyrimidines, a fact which initially confused Watson and Crick; for example, adenine can base pair with cytosine if adenine is present as a lactim.  It occurs very rarely in DNA, because hydrogen bonds and the attachment to the sugar prevent access to the acid or base which catalyzes it through protonation or deprotonation.  Due to aromatic stability, it can only be induced in phenols with great difficulty.  This is in sharp contrast to ketones and aldehydes, where contact with a glass surface can catalyze interconversion between keto and enol forms.  The result of a migration of a proton and a double bond, FTP, name this type of isomerism which involves a chemical equilibrium between two forms.;;tautomer(ism)
Philosophy;;He presented a concrete and abstract theory of motion in his New Physical Hypothesis, while his other early works include a translation of the Theatetus and a dialogue, Pacidius Philalethi, which deals with the labyrinth of the continuum.  He concluded that "love of God" is our greatest good in his essay "The Principles of Nature and Grace," while another of his late works concludes that under a perfect government no good act would be unrewarded, and no bad deed unpunished.  Those works were both written in 1714, and the first was prepared for Prince Eugene of Savoy.  In response to Coste's French translation of a major English work on epistemology, this man wrote his New Essays on the Human Understanding.  FTP, name this German philosopher of the Theodicy and the Monadology.;;(Gottfried) (Wilhelm) Leibniz
World History;;This man rose to power after his chief rival was undermined by a party held at Vaux-le-Vicomte.  He founded the city of Rochefort after deciding that its harbor would be easily fortified, and Pierre-Paul Riquet designed the Canal du Midi under his direction.  In addition to establishing the Code Noir, which dealt with slave labor, he founded the Académie des Sciences.  He was succeeded by Jean de la Fontaine as a member of the Académie Française upon his death in 1683, though he is better known for giving pensions to other writers than for his own writings.  FTP, name this protegé of Cardinal Mazarin who supplanted Nicholas Fouquet and became minister of finance to Louis XIV.;;(Jean-Baptiste) Colbert
Literature;;In this novel's final pages, the protagonist's son Paul starts crying and is comforted by his new stepfather Elmer, who has just purchased some tapestries from his wife's previous husband.  Paul came to live with his mother in France after his birth father, Ralph Marvell, shot himself in the head, making it easier for his mother to marry a French aristocrat.  The protagonist moves from the Western city of Apex to New York, where her parents indulge her every whim, mainly by buying her endless dresses.  FTP, name this novel about Undine Spragg, a work by Edith Wharton.;;(The) Custom of the Country
World History;;It was renamed in honor of Sir Christopher Hatton.  It was originally accompanied by the Marigold, Swan, and Christopher.  Originally known as the Pelican, it was renamed near the Cape of Virgins following the execution of Thomas Doughty.  Its notable achievements include the capture of the Cacofuego and an arrival in Plymouth on September 26, 1580, almost three years after it departed.  FTP, name this English vessel which circumnavigated the globe under the command of Sir Francis Drake.;;(the) Golden Hind
Literature;;This author wrote about Ulick O'Shane, who serves as the title character's guardian, in an 1817 novel.  After collaborating on 1798's Practical Education, this author wrote about some unscrupulous managers named Garraghty in an 1812 novel whose title character is Lord Clonbrony.  In that novel, Lord Colambre falls in love with Grace and goes to Ireland to inspect his father's estates.  In addition to Ormond and The Absentee, this author wrote about Thady Quirk in an 1800 novel.  FTP, name this author of Castle Rackrent.;;(Maria) Edgeworth
Computer Science;;It was the first programming language to implement type classes, and some lesser-known compilers for it are Jhc and HBC.  It was based on the language Miranda, from which it inherited its best known feature.  That feature is implemented using thunks, and because of it, effects are dealt with by being encapsulated in the monad structure.  It is implemented in the Hugs and Glasgow compilers. FTP, name this purely functional programming language using lazy evaluation and named for a famous logician.;;Haskell
World History;;Two members of this family fought the War of the Two Brothers in the 19th century, which began a few years after one of them held the throne for less than three months before abdicating in favor of his daughter.  The penultimate ruler from this family was assassinated along with his heir two years before the dynasty came to an end, which happened despite their last monarch's dismissal of the Franco cabinet.  Its greatest monarch built the Palace of Mafra and was known as the Magnanimous, while its first monarch was known as the Restorer.  That first monarch was the eighth duke of this house, and took the throne in 1640 as John IV.  FTP, name this dynasty which ruled until 1910 as the royal house of Portugal.;;Braganza|Bragança
Computer Science;;One algorithm implements these by extruding polygons from the silhouette edges of each object in the scene and then uses the stencil buffer.  Another algorithm renders the scene into a texture from the perspective of the light source and then projects the resulting eponymous map into camera-space.  In raytracing, these are implemented essentially for free, because you can just cast a ray from an object to a light source and see if any object is in the way.  The Unreal 3 game engine will allow objects to cast these shapes on themselves.  FTP, name this type of region which consists of a penumbra and an umbra.;;shadow(s)
Literature;;Near the end of this novel, the final movement of Mahler's Third Symphony is played after Herb Keble delivers a self-serving eulogy at a funeral.  Before that, the narrator overhears a conversation at a restaurant named Pauline's Place which leads him to try to obtain another character's diary, but a Filipino woman prevents him from talking to that character's father.  One of the characters pretends that a man broke into her office and sent a fake email from her computer on the night he was run off the road by Lester Fawley, a deranged Vietnam veteran who is outraged when his ex-wife Faunia starts sleeping with Coleman Silk, a retired classics professor.  FTP, name this novel in which Nathan Zuckerman befriends Coleman, a book by Philip Roth which was made into a dreadful movie starring Anthony Hopkins.;;(The) Human Stain
United States History;;A year after it was created Senator Lyman Trumbull introduced a bill to expand its powers, which eventually passed over two presidential vetoes.  Four years later it was the subject of an investigation led by Fernando Wood, and two years after that it was put under the control of the Secretary of War.  It grew out of Edward Pierce's "Port Royal experiment," which had begun near Fortress Monroe, and it was brought to an end in 1872, only four years after it was established.  FTP, name this Federal agency run by Oliver Howard, which in practice spent most of its time getting African-Americans to vote for the Republican party.;;(the) Freedmen(')s Bureau|(the) Bureau of Refugees, Freedmen, and Abandoned Lands
Miscellaneous;;This work opens with an epigraph from Paracelsus which notes that anyone who imagines that all fruits ripen when strawberries do knows nothing about grapes.  This book's second chapter considers the "theory" of the subject by noting that it is "the answer to the problem of human existence" before considering its "disintegration in contemporary Western society" in a chapter which contrasts the views of Harry Stack Sullivan to those of Freud.  The second chapter also discusses typical "objects" of the title activity, such as God, the self, and children.  FTP, name this 1956 book which extends the views expressed in Man for Himself and Escape from Freedom, a work by Erich Fromm.;;(The) Art of Loving
Biology;;A strain of this pathogen may be responsible for Von Economo syndrome, while immunization against it can cause a false positive reaction in tests for HTLV-2. Consisting of three classes, A, B, and C, only A and B are capable of causing human disease. Primarily infecting epithelial tissue, infection by this pathogen is mediated by binding of cellular membrane sialic acid by the pathogen's heme-agglutinin complex, while release of new pathogens is mediated by the NA glycoprotein. With a genome consisting of eight discrete single stranded RNA segments, reassortment of segments is in part responsible for formation of new strains of this pathogen such as Hswine/N1, H2/N2, and the recently discovered H5/N1 strain. Commonly carried by pigs and waterfowl, FTP, name this respiratory disease caused by an orthomyxovirus, the cause of pandemics nicknamed "chicken," "Asian," and "Spanish".;;influenza|flu
Art;;The background features a castle on the left side and a shepherd tending his flock on the upper right. A pair of rabbits hides underneath the trees that frame the primary figures. Two of the figures are divided by a marble relief that references the violence perpetrated on the Bagarotto family. Created as a wedding gift for Nicolo Aurelio's future bride, its youngest subject looks down and dips his right hand into the clear water at the center of the painting, while another figure wears a flowing orange robe and holds a lamp to the sky as she leans on a sarcophagus and stares at her chastely dressed counterpart. FTP, name this 1514 work housed in the Borghese Gallery that contrasts the images of two women who personify the opposition between different types of affection, a painting by Titian.;;Sacred and Profane Love
Philosophy;;The "structure" of this is the subject of a book by W. H. Newton-Smith, which discusses Peirce's argument about a limit of this and constraints on logical possibility.  It is the second title thing in a book by Richard Swinburne, which argues that it has of logical necessity a unique topology.  The "unreality" of this was asserted in a famous article by J. M. E. McTaggart, who divided it into a so-called "A" and "B" series to prove that it doesn't exist.  In his Confessions, Augustine claimed that when no one asks him what it is, he knows, but when someone asks him he doesn't know.  FTP, identify this concept which is paired with "free will" in a book by Henri Bergson and with "Being" in the title of a book by Martin Heidegger.;;time
Literature;;He claimed to have "studied Glanville and James the wise" and "wizard black-letter tomes which treat / Of demons of every name and size" in a poem about "The Demon of the Study".  Someone named Andrew goes to fish for perch in his poem "The Witch of Wenham," while Goodwife Cole is released from Ipswich jail at the end of his poem "The Changeling".  The title character of one of his poems was "tarred and feathered and carried in a cart / By the women of Marblehead," while another "raked the meadow sweet with hay" when she was seen by a Judge riding by.  At the end of another poem, the titular insects are informed that "Mistress Mary is dead and gone".  FTP, name this American poet of "Skipper Ireson's Ride," "Telling the Bees," and "Maud Muller".;;(John) (Greenleaf) Whittier
Pop Culture;;It features the musical group The New Bentwood Rockers, which is composed of retirees, and the group 4Evah, which is composed of such teenagers as the vain and perhaps sexually active Becky.  One character was assaulted by the creepy Howard, though she was saved by Anthony before a rape could occur.  Another character has an unbearable mother-in-law named Mira, and was tricked by his skanky pharmacist wife Deanna into having children.  It also features a dentist and a bookstore owner, who are the parents of Elizabeth, Michael, and April.  FTP, name this comic strip about the Pattersons, which is set in Canada and drawn by Lynn Johnston.;;For Better or For Worse
Earth Science;;The "en" model of Trifunac models this process via Fourier amplitude spectra of velocity applied to extra-accelerographic frequencies to obtain a critical overburden pressure, while the Liang and Kusky equations predict the energy of its onset's dependence on a random loading rate. Ancient deposits exhibiting it are characterized by the presence of load structures such as pseudonodules or by sand volcanoes. It occurs at the equivalence point of confining pressure with pore pressure, and it is induced by the motion of S-waves in confining rock layers, such as during the destruction of Turnagain Arm, Alaska during the Good Friday earthquake of 1963. FTP, name this geologic process in which a loss of grain coherence causes sediment to flow, the basis of quicksand.;;liquefaction
World History;;This man made an oath of blood-brotherhood known as the anda by exchanging knuckle bones with Jamuka.  In his youth, this man allegedly murdered his brother Bekhter after the latter stole a fish that this man had caught, and soon thereafter he was imprisoned by the Tayichi'ut, a captivity which led this man to seek out the patronage of the Kerait leader Toghrul.  This man's first son may have been illegitimate,  as his wife Borte was kidnapped by the Merkits shortly after their marriage.  As a consequence, this man's other children refused to accept Jochi as their ruler, and this man was succeeded by his third son, who himself was succeeded by Guyuk when he died in 1241.  FTP, name this father of Chagatai and Ogodei who died in 1227, the founder of the Mongol Empire.;;Genghis (Khan)|Chingis (Khan)|Temujin|Temuchin
Literature;;When we first see the central character a steward named Order is offering him a pipe of rich Canary from Hull, while a cook named Furnace suggests a stag baked in puff-paste.  In the final scene of the play, that central character goes mad and is carried off to Bedlam, and Lord Lovell gives a military company to Frank.  The central character almost kills his daughter Margaret after he is tricked into approving of her marriage to Tom Allworth, and after he loses the paper which would have given him control of Wellborn's lands.  FTP, name this work first performed around 1625, a play about a miser named Sir Giles Overreach written by Philip Massinger.;;(A) New Way to Pay Old Debts
Music;;A number of the sonatas in Philipp Buchner's Plectrum Musicum feature one of these instruments rather than a cello, as do several of the trio sonatas of Giovanni Legrenzi.  Johann Christian Bach and Johann Nepomuk Hummel both wrote concerti for this instrument, which also features in 37 concerti by Antonio Vivaldi.  The Andante and Rondo Ungarese in C minor by Carl Maria von Weber is for this instrument and orchestra, and Weber also wrote an F major concerto for this instrument.  It developed from an instrument known as the dulcian, and modern ones employ either the Buffet or Heckel system.  Also featured in a B flat concerto by Mozart, FTP, name this woodwind instrument which uses a double reed, like the oboe.;;(the) bassoon
Literature;;While working in Dearborn, the protagonist of this work falls in love with a prostitute named Molly and rides streetcars all night until she finishes with her work.  Later, he refuses to accept a bribe and claim that an old woman is insane; his friend sets a bomb to kill the old woman, but screws up and blinds himself instead.  The protagonist's other adventures include a trip to Africa, where he spends a few weeks at a dubious trading post, and a stint catching fleas in New York.  In the end, the protagonist's shifty friend Léon is shot by his lover Madelon.  FTP, name this novel published in 1932, the story of a feckless young man named Ferdinand Bardamu which was written by Louis-Ferdinand Céline.;;Journey to the End of the Night|Voyage au bout de la nuit
Religion/Mythology;;In theory it should take place ten years after a hair-cutting ceremony known as the upsherin.  In early modern times it involved the delivery of a drasha and the reading of the maftir, which is still often done today.  A modern variant of it was introduced by Mordecai Kaplan, who was inspired by an Italian custom.  In Morocco it tends to occur a year earlier than usual, and it is sometimes performed a second time by 83-year-olds, such as Kirk Douglas.  In its aftermath, one can wear tefillin and make up part of a minyan.  FTP, name this religious ritual which commemorates the coming-of-age of a young Jew.;;Bar Mitzvah|Bar Mitzvot|Bat Mitzvah
World History;;Prior to it, one of the armies seized the city of Elateia.  Most of the other side's generals had been killed, leaving Chares, who was allegedly incompetent, to command the army.  In its aftermath, the victorious king held a council at Corinth and invited his erstwhile opponents to join him in a war on the Persians, though he was assassinated by Pausanius before he could carry that out.  Fought in Boeotia, it was a defeat for the Sacred Band of Thebes and their Athenian allies.  FTP, name this battle of 338 BC by which Philip II's Macedonians secured control of Greece.;;Chaeronea
Chemistry;;Gravitational redshift was measured by Pound, Rebka, and Snider in Harvard's Jefferson Tower using this technique to detect a frequency shift of order one part in ten to the 14th. It can be used for precise studies of the Zeeman effect in nuclei. Iron 57 and tin 119 are two of the isotopes used in this type of spectroscopy due to narrow linewidths in their transitions. Before this technique, the large size of Doppler shifts relative to transition widths made nuclear spectroscopy problematic. It was discovered by its namesake when he was a graduate student at the Munich University of Technology. FTP, what is this effect in which a crystal lattice reduces recoil energy?;;Mössbauer (effect)|Mossbauer (effect)
World History;;Two years after it was signed, the duke of Anjou escaped and one of the monarchs who signed it was compelled to surrender himself as a prisoner.  In this agreement, one side promised to surrender Guines and Ponthieu.  The king of the other side promised to renounce his claim to the French throne, as soon as the French king renounced his claim to Aquitaine.  Nine years after it was signed, the war it had temporarily settled broke out once more.  It also featured a ransom payment of 3 million écus for King John II, who had been captured at the battle of Poitiers.  FTP, name this treaty signed in 1360 which failed to end the Hundred Years' War.;;(the) (Treaty) (of) Brétigny|(the) (Treaty) (of) Bretigny
Earth Science;;Most of the basin-governed examples of these structures exhibit localized Riedel shearing. Their motion creates zones occupied by median ridges which separate pull-apart basins, and these become oblique to their motion with increasing speed. First revealed by offsets in the magnetic pattern in seafloor sediments, their most common forms occur along mid-ocean ridges or connect convergent and divergent plate boundaries, and they enable integral motion along spreading centers, a fact pointed out by J. Tuzo Wilson using origami. FTP, name this type of fault whose motion is opposite to its apparent displacement, which is characterized by a variable displacement along the fault plane, and whose name refers to the fact that it changes the motion of plates across boundaries.;;transform (faults)
Music;;He wrote three symphonies, the third of which is scored for 15 solo trumpets, orchestra, and organ.  His Violin Concerto was transcribed for flute by Jean-Pierre Rampal, while his other orchestral works include the Solemn Overture and the Concerto-Rhapsody for violin and orchestra.  His 1966 Jazz Composition was written for Benny Goodman, but he is better known for stage works like the ballets Happiness and Spartacus.  FTP, name this composer of the ballet Gayane, which features his famous "Sabre Dance".;;(Aram) Khachaturian
Literature;;At one point, the author of this work sees a woman named Joan who is known as "Spring" because of her beauty, and reflects that her name is appropriate because it derives from John, who preceded Jesus.  Another section discusses poets who have caused inanimate things to speak, and cites Juno's exchange with Aeolus in the Aeneid as an example.  Jeremiah's line "How doth the city sit solitary" inspires another section, in which the author notes that according to the Arabian calendar a certain person died on the ninth day of the ninth month.  Its closing lines were paraphrased in a letter the author wrote to Can Grande della Scala, and feature a sonnet in which a "pilgrim spirit" looks on as splendors move in homage around a lady.  FTP, name this work in verse and prose, written in response to the death of the daughter of Folco Portinari by Dante Alighieri.;;(La) Vita Nuova|(The) New Life
World History;;It notes that letters of pardon issued by one of its signatories have been given to such men as Father Pandulf and Henry, archbishop of Dublin.  One section promises to return his sisters to Alexander, king of the Scots, while another promises to remove from their bailiwicks such men as Gerard of Athee and Engelard of Cigogne.  Its 14th and 61st clauses led to the creation of the Great Council, and it was signed a year after the battle of Bouvines, at which Norman lands belonging to a number of the signatories were lost.  FTP, name this agreement whose renunciation led to the First Barons' War, which was signed in 1215 at Runnymede by King John.;;Magna Carta|Great Charter
Economics;;He realized that he had to solve a problem of maximizing a linear function on a convex polytope in order to increase equipment productivity for a plywood trust.  That led him to create a general theory he called the "method of resolving multipliers," which he discussed in The Mathematical Method of Production Planning and Organization.  In a later work, 1959's The Best Use of Economic Resources, he showed that any economy has to use prices to efficiently allocate resources.  His research was paralleled by similar work carried out by the Dutch-born author of Three Essays on the State of Economic Science, with whom he shared a major award.  FTP, name this pioneer of linear programming, a Soviet economist who in 1975 shared the Nobel Prize with Tjalling Koopmans.;;(Leonid) Kantorovich
Art;;It was the forerunner to a similar painting that inspired its artist to compose the poem "Before the Mirror".  That work, unlike this one, depicted a younger version of its subject with her hair pulled back. In this work, on the other hand, the curly hair falls about her ruffled shoulders and a heavy curtain provides the background. The artist instructed the model, his Irish mistress Joanna Hiffernan, to hang her arms listlessly by her side; she also holds a lily in her left hand, which contrasts with the crushed, dark flowers that lie in front of her on the wolf skin rug. Thought to be a depiction of a victim of mesmerism or a bride after her wedding night, FTP, identify this portrait of a young woman dressed in the titular color which dominates this work by Whistler.;;Symphony in White Number (1|One)|(The) White Girl
Literature;;One character in this work decides to become a botanist after working for two years as a teacher at an elementary school.  That character's plans are unsettled when she gets a letter from a lieutenant who impregnates her before leaving for India, though she loses the baby after contracting pneumonia.  That character's mother, Anna, married her stepfather's nephew Will after he came to work at a lace factory in Ilkeston.  Anna is the daughter of Lydia, a widow who marries the owner of Marsh Farm.  FTP, name this novel about the Lenskys and Brangwens, a 1915 work by D. H. Lawrence whose story was continued in Women in Love.;;(The) Rainbow
Astronomy;;Centrifugal trapping of cooling gas in F to G-naught supergiants at the edge of this region has been evoked to explain the x-ray deficiency and the rotational braking zone present at one of its edges. That change is associated with the replacement of fossilized radiation belts with solar magnetic dynamos in bodies that traverse it. Its onset is marked by the expansion of the hydrogen envelope of a star on a thermal timescale and the collapse of stellar cores. Tracks of stars with 2-5 solar masses are common in this region also noted for a large number of RR Lyrae stars, and when crossing it, supergiants lose 75 percent of their mass and become intermediate stars. FTP, name this triangular space located between the Giant Branch and the high end of the main sequence, whose emptiness is caused by fast stellar evolution across it and which is named for one of the originators of the H-R diagram.;;Hertzsprung Gap|Hertzsprung's Lacuna
United States History;;Its second vice presidential candidate went on to propose a constitutional amendment providing for women's suffrage and delivered a notable speech, "The Gospel of Reform," in support of Samuel Tilden.  Its first vice presidential candidate wrote Conservatism and Reform and Struggle for Neutrality in America, and served as ambassador to Great Britain during the Civil War.  Its second presidential candidate was recalled from his post as minister to Spain in 1869 after being accused of sleeping with the Queen, having earlier served as a senator from New Hampshire.  In addition to George Julian, Charles Francis Adams, and John Hale, its notable members included Charles Sumner and Martin van Buren.  FTP, name this political party active in the late 1840s and early 1850s, an abolitionist group opposed to the extension of slavery.;;(the) Free Soil (party)
Pop Culture;;With their only pick in the 1999 draft, this team took Maryland's Laron Profit in the second round.  In the 1997 draft, they took Chattanooga product Johnny Taylor in the first round, while the 2003 draft saw them take Louisville's Reece Gaines in the first round.  In 2002, they swapped first round picks with Utah, getting Ryan Humphrey in exchange for Curtis Borchardt. In 2004, they used the first pick of the second round to take Brazilian star Anderson Varejao, having used an earlier pick on a forward from Southwest Atlanta Christian Academy, and most recently they drafted Spain's Fran Vasquez.  FTP, name this NBA team which has used the first overall pick in the draft on such players as Chris Webber, Dwight Howard, and Shaquille O'Neal.;;Orlando (Magic)|(Orlando) Magic
Geography;;The most populous city in the state of this name is home to its country's largest agricultural university and is situated on the Sutlej River.  Another city in this state is home to the Harballabh Fair, and in addition to being the one-time capital of the Trigartta people was the capital of the state until 1953.  In addition to Ludhiana and Jalandhar, the state features the capital city of Chandigarh, while the province of this name is the site of the Beas, Ravi, Sutlej, Chenab, and Jhelum rivers, the five rivers of its Persian-derived name.  FTP, what name is shared by the Indian state that contains Amritsar and the province containing Rawalpindi and Lahore in neighboring Pakistan?;;Punjab
Literature;;Susan Sontag wrote about this man in her essay "Under the Sign of Saturn".  That essay notes that this man used the pseudonym Detlev Holz to write literary reviews; it also comments on a text written by this man at Ibiza, "Agesilaus Santander".  This man wrote a book about the Origin of German Trauerspiel, but is better known for essays like his "reflections on the works of Nikolai Leskov," "The Storyteller".  His other essays include an introduction to Baudelaire's Tableaux parisiens, "The Task of the Translator," and an essay on the tenth anniversary of the death of Franz Kafka.  FTP, name this German author of "The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction".;;(Walter) Benjamin
Chemistry;;A biological version of this reaction occurs in Pseudomonas and Actinobacter bacteria; there it is catalyzed by a mono-oxygenase enzyme.  The now-accepted mechanism was proposed by Criegee, and posits that the reaction passes through a tetrahedral intermediate before rearrangement.  The discoverers of this reaction used as their reagent potassium monopersulfate; today it is generally carried out with trifluoroperacetic acid, meta-chloroperoxybenzoic acid, or a metal catalyst and hydrogen peroxide.  For asymmetric cases the more highly-substituted side preferentially migrates in order to allow for insertion of the oxygen.  Notably, it can insert an oxygen atom into a ring, turning an n-membered ring into an n+1 membered lactone.  FTP, name this reaction that oxidizes aldehydes to carboxylic acids and ketones into esters.;;Baeyer(-)Villiger (oxidation)
Literature;;One of its sections features a writer who takes shelter beneath a sagging roof with a "placid and uneducated mistress," while another section features the author of "The Dorian Mood" who is said to be "the last scion of the Senatorial families of Strasbourg".   The Lady Valentine makes the poet wait in her "stuffed-satin drawing room" in another section, while he is offered advice in the "cream gilded cabin" of a "steam yacht" by Mr. Nixon.  The "envoi" alludes to a song by Henry Lawes and imitates Waller's "Go, Lovely Rose," while the opening section notes that the author's "true Penelope was Flaubert" and commemorates an effort to "resuscitate the dead art / Of poetry".  FTP, name this work about the "life and contacts" of a young author, a work which appeared in 1920 and was written by Ezra Pound.;;Hugh Selwyn Mauberley
World History;;He was interned in Kutahya for two years, but made the best of it by learning English from the works of Shakespeare during his imprisonment.  While living in Italy he wrote the so-called "Cassandra letter" to protest a compromise negotiated by Deak's government.  His work as a journalist covering the "Long Diet" led to his being appointed editor of the journal Pesti Hirlap, but he rose to power after Batthyany appointed him minister of finance.  After Görgey's surrender to the Russians, he lost power and was forced to flee to Turkey in 1849.  FTP, name this man who in 1848 became the de facto dictator of Hungary.;;(Lajos) Kossuth
Physics;;In the scattering of weak gauge bosons in the Standard Model it is perturbatively violated unless there is a relatively light Higgs boson. As a property of the S-matrix, it implies the optical theorem. The CKM matrix has this property, allowing the namesake triangle to be constructed. "Wave-function collapse," which occurs in some interpretations of quantum mechanics, does not obey it, but normal quantum processes do as a consequence of the Hamiltonian being hermitian. FTP, what is this basic property of quantum mechanics which implies that the sum of all possible probabilities is 1?;;unitarity
Music;;The composition that gives this group its name is a D major work which ends with a finale marked "Spirituoso".  Another is a work in B flat major which ends with a presto rondo and has a name referring to a story about a chandelier which fell during a performance.  One of them is notable for its unusual percussion instruments, including a Turkish crescent, while another is a D major work notable for the distinctive rhythm of its Andante second movement.  Another features an unusual chord at the beginning of its Andante second movement before returning to the quiet of the first movement.  Including works known as the "Miracle," "Military," and "Surprise," FTP, name this group of twelve orchestral compositions written in the 1790s by Joseph Hayden in a European capital city.;;(the) London (symphonies) (of) (Joseph) (Haydn)|(the) Salomon (symphonies)
Literature;;He marries a peasant girl named Antonia, but after his wife and young daughter die he tires of his country life at Lirias.  He comes into money after saving the life of a woman named Mencia, after which he meets an old friend named Fabricio who gets him a job working for men like Doctor Sangrado.  After being fired by an archbishop whose homilies he had criticized, he finds employment with the Duke of Lerma, but he goes to prison with his servant Scipio after he is discovered bringing the prince to a brothel.  FTP, name this character who appears in a picaresque novel published between 1715 and 1735, a roguish fellow from Santillane who was created by Alain René le Sage.;;Gil Blas (of) (Santillane)
Religion/Mythology;;In Peruvian legend, it is associated with a deity named Coniraya who tricked the virgin deity Cavillaca by slipping her his semen in the form of a fruit she unknowingly ate.  The  Maori deity associated with it was named Marama, while an Aztec god associated with this, Tecciztecatl tek-is-the-cah-tul, was also associated with slugs.  The Norse personification of it was the son of Mundilfari who was constantly harassed by Hati.  An Indian god of it was named Chandra, while the Chinese goddess of it was Heng O.  A Greek goddess of it was the daughter of Hyperion and Theia who fell in love with Endymion.  FTP, name this celestial body associated with Selene.;;(the) moon
World History;;According to one legend, a king of this people was attacked by Sarus and Ammius after he had their sister Sunilda torn apart by horses.  A later ruler of this people was killed at the battle of Taginae, while many of his followers were slaughtered at Mons Lactarius.  After the capture of Widin in the 560s, this people more or less vanished.  Its greatest ruler won the battle of Isonzo and was succeeded by his daughter Amalasuntha after establishing his capital at Ravenna.  FTP, name this Germanic tribe whose notable figures include Ermanaric and Theodoric the Great.;;(the) Ostrogoth(s)
Literature;;One character in this work claims that his town is two years away from being a metropolis, and proudly notes that the town will have a line of electric street-cars next spring.  After receiving 75 cents, that character shows a picture of his dead daughter Carrie and another of his son Michael.  Later, that character's other son has a discussion about fear with Mr. Blanc, who later notes that "every sin is the result of a collaboration".  In the ninth and final section of this work, we learn that a murderer got a sentence of three years in jail and that Johnnie was cheating at High Five.  The titular thing is located in Fort Romper, Nebraska, and is owned by Pat Scully.  FTP, name this story about the death of a crazy Swede which was written by Stephen Crane.;;(The) Blue Hotel
Earth Science;;This mineral's high relief, low birefringence, and uniaxial negative character distinguish it from beryl or peridot in thin section, though it was named because its hexagonal habit and color were confused with those minerals. It is also distinguished by the presence of pleochroic haloes, which form from radiation damage from substituent uranium and thorium. Its structure consists of tetrahedra laterally bonded by calcium, with fluorine, chlorine or hydroxyl ions located in its interstices. In sedimentary rocks, it occurs as an amorphous paste known as collophane, and when massive, it forms the bulk of phosphorite deposits.  FTP, name this common phosphate mineral assigned a Mohs hardness of 5, the major component of tooth enamel.;;apatite
World History;;After the death of his patron, the comte de Vergennes, he was given a job as secretary to the comte de Ségur, who was minister to Russia.  After Catherine the Great's government expelled him from that country, he returned to France, where the Girondists sent him on a diplomatic mission to Geneva.  His most important trip was held up on the chance that Louis XVI might be sent with him rather than executed, but he ended up travelling without royal company on the Embuscade.  His plotting with people like Alexander Moultrie and Stephen Drayton enraged George Hammond, the British minister who was friends with Alexander Hamilton.  FTP, name this son-in-law of George Clinton, who in 1792 was appointed minister of the French revolutionary government to the United States.;;(Citizen) (Edmond) Genet
Religion/Mythology;;A poem about this man by Margaret Walker notes his blue gums and practice of catching barracuda, and claims that his hand was as "big as a hog's fat ham".  This man curses in "giraffe-tall words" and demands a "gallon of barleycorn" just after becoming alive in a poem about his "birth" by Melvin Tolson.  This man was the subject of a popular novel by Roark Bradford which was made into a Broadway musical, and the title of a Colson Whitehead novel refers to his "days".  He also appears in the John Kieens novel A Man Ain't Nothin' but a Man, but is best known for appearing in a song which refers to events which took place in the early 1870s in West Virginia.  FTP, name this folk hero, an African American workman who wins a competition with a steam drill.;;John Henry;;Henry
World History;;Twenty-two years after it was signed, one of its signatories was compelled to accept Adolf Frederick of Holstein-Gottorp-Eutin as heir apparent in the Treaty of Abo.  It was reached a year after one of the signatories gave up its right to free passage of Oresund through the Treaty of Frederiksborg.  It was negotiated by Frederick of Hesse-Kassel, the husband of Ulrika Eleonora and brother-in-law of the monarch who had fought most of the war it concluded.  It was signed in the modern town of Uusikaupunki, and gave one nation Ingria, Livonia, and Estonia.  FTP, name this treaty signed on September 10, 1721, which made peace between Russia and Sweden and ended the Great Northern War.;;(Treaty) (of) Nystad
Earth Science;;During early stages of their formation, their development may be traced by a radial series of deep depressions which become partially flooded downstream from their source in the final stage, forming paternoster lakes. The encroachment of three of them upon one point creates a nunatak, and when two of them grow together, they erode away their restraining ridges, or arêtes uh-rehts, and ultimately merge, forming a col. They typically form when erosion of slopes beneath a bergschrund results in mass wasting, and the freeze-thaw cycle commonly causes their headwalls to retreat, resulting in avalanches. In warmer months, they often fill with water, creating lakes called tarns. FTP, name these steep, concave downward basins found at the heads of glacial valleys.;;cirque (basins)|corrie(s)
Literature;;One of his works begins by imagining an admiral who watches from an adjacent hill as a battle transpires between "two rival fleets".  Another of his works notes that the "flying hours are gone" like "transitory dreams given o'er / Whose images are kept in store / By memory alone".  He derided works like Simon Patrick's The Parable of the Pilgrim and Nathaniel Ingello's Bentivolio and Urania in another work, which concludes that "man differs more from man, than man from beast".  In that poem, this author wished to be a "dog, a monkey, or a bear" rather than being a "vain animal / Who is so proud of being rational".  FTP, name this 18th-century English poet of "A Satire Against Reason and Mankind" and the play Sodom, or the Quintessence of Debauchery, who is played by Johnny Depp in the film The Libertine.;;(John) (Wilmot,) (Earl) (of) Rochester
World History;;Its second ruler was given a posthumous name referring to a census he instituted which listed the names of 300,000 men who could fight in his army.  That ruler, Oun Hueun, succeeded his father Fa Ngum in 1373 as ruler of a state which was known as the "Kingdom of a Million Elephants".  Its notable rulers included Setthathirath and Souligna Vongsa, though after the latter's death it was split into the three kingdoms of Champassak, Luang Prabang, and Vien Chan.  In the 20th century, it was ruled by a People's Revolutionary Party after 1975, and has been led by men like Kaysone Phomvihan and Khamtai Siphandon.  FTP, name this Asian nation which was home to a communist group with the word "Pathet" in its name, and which is ruled from Vientiane.;;Laos
Religion/Mythology;;One of these begins with a discussion of the book The Image of the First Century and goes on to discuss some charges relating to the idols Cachinchoam and Keum-fucum.  In the fourth of these, the author discusses the similarities between a book by Father Bauny and the views of Aristotle.  The last of these is a fragmentary work addressed to Father Annat, which follows a discussion of some fruitless condemnations in the 18th of them.  They appeared under the pseudonym Louis de Montalte, and were banned in 1660, four years after the first of them was printed.  They were written in defense of Antoine Arnauld, who was accused of heresy by the Sorbonne because of his Jansenist views.  FTP, name this attack on the casuistry of the Jesuits, a polemical epistolary work by Blaise Pascal.;;Provincial Letters|Lettres provinciales
Art;;His public shows and "transparencies" were widely popular, though he suffered severe burns after his thousand-candle representation, Peace in the Clouds, set off 700 rockets. He studied in London where his first work of note, the allegorical Portrait of William Pitt, was produced. Notorious for secretly sketching Benjamin Franklin necking with a woman, his life-size depiction of two boys, The Staircase Group, began the trend of illusionist painting in America. An entrepreneur as well as a painter, he opened a namesake museum in Philadelphia and documented the unearthing of its greatest exhibit in Exhuming the Mastodon. FTP, name this painter of the Early Republic, perhaps best remembered for siring numerous sons, naming them for great artists, and painting the portrait Washington at the Battle of Princeton.;;(Charles) (Wilson) Peale
Physics;;Its trace is the divergence of the dilatation current, and thus zero in a conformal theory. In Yang-Mills theory it corresponds to an interpolating operator for spin 2 glueballs. For an ideal fluid, knowing it is equivalent to knowing the pressure and density, and it is diagonal in a comoving frame. The Noether procedure finds it as a set of conserved currents associated to translation invariance, but this may not produce a symmetric answer. The usual symmetric definition is a variation of the nongravitational part of the action with respect to the metric. FTP, what is this quantity that the Einstein equations relate to the curvature of space?;;stress(-)energy tensor|energy(-)momentum tensor|stress(-)energy-momentum tensor
Psychology;;In the fourth chapter, "Tragedy and the mind of the infant," Stanley Hall's claim that jealousy does not arise before puberty is rejected.  The seventh chapter deals with the first title character's "place in mythology" and notes resemblances to the Iranian Kaihorsrav, the Indian Cirakarin, and the Finnish Kullero.  The first chapter explores the link between psychology and aesthetics, while the preface notes that the book was written to explain a footnote which appears in a 1900 work by an Austrian thinker.  Also considering the "theme of matricide" and claiming that the vacillations of a tragic hero are due to his unconscious conflicts, FTP, name this book by Ernest Jones which uses a Freudian concept to explain a Shakespearean character.;;Hamlet and Oedipus
Pop Culture;;In one episode he helped a child who had to appear as asparagus in a school play, while the only two-part episode in the first season, "Try to Remember," featured his struggles with amnesia.  In the second season he dreamed that he visited Gilligan's Island and joined a monastery upon learning that his parents were married before he was born.  Born on October 28, 1756, he had a girlfriend named Rhonda, though he met his better-known associates after replying to a ham radio signal, after which he fell in with a social worker and his family.  He ended up living next door to the Ochmoneks after nuclear war destroyed his home planet, Melmac.  FTP, name this title character of a 1980s sitcom, whose real name was Gordon Shumway and who enjoyed eating cats.;;ALF
Literature;;An adaptation of this play which changed the setting to Ballybog was the first stage work by John Banville.  A character in this work is alarmed to learn that an official holding a position similar to his in the village of Holla recently tried to hang himself.  That character is even more distressed when he remembers that a cat had kittens in an article of his clothing, though Brigitte later shows up with that article.  At the beginning of this work, a clerk named Licht is surprised to discover that his employer, a judge in Huisum, has been injured, and was later learn that the injuries were caused when Ruprecht beat Adam, who was trying to seduce Eve, a series of events which led to the title object being rendered unusable.  FTP, name this 1808 drama, a classic of German comedy written by Heinrich von Kleist.;;(The) Broken Jug|(Der) zerbrochne Krug
Philosophy;;This man's most important work on ethics consists of parts dealing with the place of habit, impulse, and intelligence in the titular activity, and concludes with a discussion of the community as religious symbol.  This man's most important work on religion, his Terry Lectures, considers such topics as "The Human Abode of the Religious Function".  This man's most important work on epistemology opens with a chapter on "Escape from Peril" and considers the "naturalization of intelligence" and "philosophy's search for the immutable".  In addition to Human Nature and Conduct, A Common Faith, and The Quest for Certainty, he wrote about aesthetics in Art as Experience.   FTP, name this American philosopher, a 20th-century pragmatist who wrote Democracy and Education.;;(John) Dewey
World History;;A little more than a month after it took place, Sir John Clifford was killed at the battle of Ferrybridge.  About three weeks before it took place the young Earl of March won a victory at Mortimer's Cross, where Owen Tudor was killed.  The winning army at this battle surprised the loser when it came from the direction of Dunstable, allowing Margaret of Anjou's forces to defeat the Earl of Warwick and capture Henry VI.  In addition to that battle fought on February 22, 1461, this site saw the death of the Duke of Somerset on May 22, 1455.  FTP, name this town in Hertfordshire that was the location of two battles during the Wars of the Roses, one of which was that war's first battle.;;St. Albans
Literature;;One character with this surname loses his job with the government after being falsely accused by Beatrice, the married woman he has been dating.  Another character with this surname is forced to marry a girl who was impregnated by his boss, but after her baby was taken from her Clarissa drowned herself.  Yet another character with this surname almost has a homosexual affair with Pancras after his wife Betsey leaves him, and later impresses his boss Cameron after entering the poems of Keats into a military computer.  In addition to Moses, Leander, and Coverley, this family includes Honora, who returns to St. Botolphs after fleeing the country to escape tax evasion charges.  FTP, name this clan from two novels written in the 1950s whose titles include the words "scandal" and "chronicle," which were written by John Cheever.;;Wapshot|(The) Wapshot Chronicle|(The) Wapshot Scandal
Biology;;The completion of this process requires Ephrins B2 and B4 in targeting of disparate pseudopodia. Mediated by Prox-1 in lymphatic tissue and the orphan receptor COUP-TF2 in veins, patients with Von Hippel-Lindau disease are unable to repress this process due to a mutation in a gene that degrades the hypoxia induced protein HIF1. This process is inhibited by the release of plasminogen, thrombospondin-1, endostatin, and the drug Avastin, and inhibition is also responsible in part for birth defects seen after use of thalidomide. Upregulated by FGF and VEGF veg-eff in response to low cellular oxygen levels, FTP, name this biological process of wound healing and tumor development, the growing of new blood vessels from pre-existing vessels.;;angiogenesis
Religion/Mythology;;After losing a sledding competition, this deity became enemies with a snow goddess. Another of her enemies is a pig-god who was her former lover and who has the power to make solid rock into arable ground. This deity's father possessed a tiny shell which grew into an enormous ship if placed on the ocean.  That father responded to this deity's seduction of her brother-in-law by exiling her from their homeland, after which she sailed with her brother, a shark god, to Hana.  Once there, she was torn apart and transformed into a god who often appears as an old woman accompanied by a white dog.  FTP, name this daughter of Kane Hoalani, a fire goddess who was said to live in Mount Kilauea.;;Pele
Literature;;In the opening scene of this work, the title character tells of how a king married a sea-nymph named Psamante after Aeacus finished with her, and notes that a princess named Eido had her name changed upon reaching puberty.  In response to a threat, another female character in this work claims to have learned that her husband died at sea, and asks to be allowed to give him a proper burial before marrying the king, Theoclymenus.  When the king realizes that he has been deceived he tries to kill his sister, Theonoe, but she is saved when the Dioscuri descend to earth and explain that the two Greeks were destined to return home together.  The story hinges on the idea that a phantom was sent to Troy, while the title character went to Egypt.  FTP, name this play which first appeared in 412 BC, a work by Euripides about the wife of Menelaus.;;Helen
Geography;;This nation is home to the Retba Lake, which famously changes color from pink to purple depending on the intensity of sunlight.  It is also home to the Sine Saloum delta, which is south of the Small Coast.  The Wolof comprise some 43 percent of this nation's population; other major ethnic groups include the Fula and Serer.  This country is divided into eleven administrative regions, which include Ziguinchor and Louga.  The Casamance River flows through its south, and its second- and third-largest cities are Thies and Kaolack.  A namesake river flowing from Mali serves as its northern border.  FTP, Mali, Guinea-Bissau, Guinea, and Mauritania surround what nation that itself surrounds Gambia?;;Senegal
Biology;;On an industrial scale, it is produced by the Monsanto or Cativa processes, which use rhodium and iridium catalysts respectively and which proceed through an iodomethane intermediate.   It can also be produced from the oxidation of ethylene, either directly or through oxidation to acetaldehyde via the Wacker process.  Nearly half of annual industrial production is further processed to prepare vinyl acetate monomer for use in polymers.  At high concentrations, it behaves more like an polar organic solvent than an acid; in pure form, it forms cyclic dimers connected by hydrogen bonds.  Below 16.7 degrees Celsius,  it freezes to form large crystals resembling ice, giving the concentrated acid its name of "glacial". FTP, name this common organic acid with formula CH3COOH.;;acetic (acid)|ethanoic (acid)
United States History;;His best-known book ends with a chapter on the "Bullitt Affair" after discussing the Cecil Plan.  This man's father-in-law served as secretary of state, which led him to take an interest in international law.  In fact, he was so interested in it that he served as counsel for the U.S. in the Alaskan boundary dispute and helped to found the American Journal of International Law.  During his time in another position, he reached an agreement with Ishii that recognized special Japanese interests in China, but he was asked to resign three years later after he convened cabinet meetings while the president was incapacitated.  He had assumed that position after his predecessor resigned over a disagreement about the protest notes issued in response to the Lusitania incident.  FTP, name this man who in 1915 succeeded William Jennings Bryan as secretary of state for Woodrow Wilson.;;(Robert) Lansing
Music;;When Charles Griffes died, he was working on a festival drama based on writings by this author.  William Henry Bell titled his C minor symphony with this man's name, which also names an unfinished choral symphony by Granville Bantock.  Charles Stanford's Elegiac Ode is based on this man's work, as is George Crumb's song-cycle Apparition  and a 1983 cantata by Ned Rorem.  An 1899 overture by Gustav Holst is named for this man, and Holst also based his "Ode to Death" and "The Mystic Trumpeter" on this man's poetry.  Such works as Dona Nobis Pacem and the Sea Symphony by Ralph Vaughan Williams are also based on his writing.  FTP, name this American poet whose elegy for a president was set to music by Paul Hindemith.;;(Walt) Whitman
Philosophy;;Its second part ends with a section on the titular thing "as a mastered moment," and considers the work of Solger and Tieck as instances of that thing "after Fichte".  That second part includes a section on the "world historical validity" of the titular thing, which is defined as "infinite absolute negativity".  The first part discusses the work of Xenophon and Aristophanes before considering the "daimon" of a figure to whom the work makes "constant reference," Socrates.  It was submitted as the author's dissertation in 1841, a few months before the author broke off his engagement with Regine Olsen.  FTP, name this book by Soren Kierkegaard whose title refers to a figure of speech in which the intended meaning is different from the literal meaning.;;(The) Concept of Irony
Astronomy;;The Loktin-Matkin catalogue determines distance and red shift data for 330 of them from UBV, and the Markarian and Collinder catalogues list some of their aberrant members, such as Ap and Am-type stars, which have compositions that vary from their other members, which have constant lithium-beryllium ratios. The Shapley Classification assigns them values of c through g according to their concentration, while the Trumpler schema adds range and brightness to their description. Another technique uses main sequence fitting for distance measuring between them, which applies parallax data from the satellite Hipparcos to an example near Aldebaran. Containing between 50 and 1000 young stars which lie within the galactic plane, the classical illustration contains such members as Taygeta, Celaeno, and Alcyone. FTP, name this type of loosely-bound astronomical body originating in diffuse nebulae including the Pleiades, the opposite of a globular cluster.;;open (cluster)
Literature;;In one of this man's works, Fiormanda's jealousy leads her to set a trap for the man she loves and Bianca, who is killed by the Duke of Pavia.  That play features the evil secretary D'Avalos and ends with Fernando killing himself in Bianca's tomb.  The title character of another of this man's plays marries Katherine Gordon and is deserted by James IV, after which this putative duke of York is executed.   In his best-known work, Soranzo is killed by a man who is himself killed by Vasques, though the play is better known for a scene in which Annabella's heart is displayed on a dagger by her fraternal lover Giovanni. FTP, name this author of Love's Sacrifice, the historical play Perkin Warbeck, and 'Tis Pity She's a Whore.;;(John) Ford
Literature;;A young man named Sanjay goes to work at Film City in a novel about a "silver" one of these written by Clive James.  An Italian scholar is kidnapped by Turks and forced to serve a scholar known as Hoja in a novel about a "white" one of these by Orhan Pamuk.  One of these named "Blandings" is described in the works of P. G. Wodehouse.  The seven "mansions" of the soul are described in a book about the "interior" one of these written by Teresa of Avila.  We learn that Theodore is Alfonso's grandson at the end of a novel about one of these which also includes Manfred and Conrad, who is killed by a giant helmet.  FTP, name this type of edifice which appears in the title of a 1764 Horace Walpole novel set in Otranto.;;castle(s)
World History;;At this site, a governor of Syria who tried to usurp the throne following the death of Pertinax was routed.  In addition to that defeat of Pescennius Niger, this was the site of a 1266 battle at which King Hethum I of Armenia was defeated by Baibars.  Another battle fought here saw the defeat of Chosroes at the hands of Heraclius, though it is more famous for an earlier engagement fought near the river Pinarus, at which the winning army advanced through the Pillar of Jonah and a force led by Parmenion held out long enough to allow the Companion Cavalry to rout their foe.  FTP, name this town in modern-day Turkey, the site of a 333 BC battle at which the Persians of Darius III were defeated by Alexander the Great.;;Issus
Sociology;;This man's most important book was criticized in Kenneth Burke's essay "The Constants of Social Relativity".  Edward Shils translated this author's Man and Society in an Age of Reconstruction into English, and this thinker swallowed his hatred of totalitarianism and  embraced social planning in the posthumously published Freedom, Power, and Democratic Planning.  His early books include Structures of Thinking and Conservatism, but he is best known for a 1929 work which includes sections on "The Prospects of Scientific Politics" and "The Sociology of Knowledge".  FTP, name this German-born sociologist who wrote Ideology and Utopia.;;(Karl) Mannheim
Physics;;Alternative methods that reject its omission of electron correlation include Moller-Plesset perturbation and density functional theory; it also treats relativistic effects as negligible and  assumes the Born-Oppenheimer approximation.  The unrestricted or restricted open shell variations are used for molecules where the number of electrons of each spin are not equal.  The procedure involves using a series of approximate one-electron orbitals to construct an operator named for one of its namesakes, which is then fed into the time-independent Schrödinger equation.  Solving this equation generates a new set of approximate orbitals and allows for the construction of a new operator; the process is iterated until the orbitals are self-consistent with the potential field that they generate. FTP, name this procedure used to approximate wavefunctions and energy levels in atoms with multiple electrons.;;Hartree-Fock (procedure)
Art;;Often compared to a related mezzotint which shows a brooding figure seated on a low horizon, a copse of trees can be seen in the left side of the canvas, while the lower portion, depicting a ridge, is dominated by shades of black. Only a donkey in the foreground remains undisturbed, as if trying to understand the hysteria that surrounds him. The use of heavy impasto for the scattering caravan contrasts with the misty, cloudy look that dominates three-fourths of this work, which was probably based on Juan Arriaza's poem about a certain figure "caught by the fiery light of the setting sun" rising above the Pyrenees. Presumably an allegory depicting the impact of the Napoleonic war on the painter's homeland, FTP, identify this 1812 work featuring an enormous bearded man, a painting by Francisco Goya.;;(The) Colossus|(El) Coloso
Literature;;He wrote a sequel to one of his major works, the Cronica Tripertita, which describes the twelve years prior to the accession of a monarch he celebrated in his poem "In Praise of Peace".  The latter monarch was the dedicatee of a group of 54 poems by this man which are misleadingly known as the Cinkante Ballades.  One of his major works features the story of Apollonius of Tyre, which is told by a character named Genius to the protagonist.  Another of his major works laments the death of Simon Sudbury and presents a popular uprising as inspired by the anti-Christ.  FTP, name this author of Confessio Amantis, a 14th-century English poet who wrote about the Peasant's Rebellion in his Vox Clamantis.;;(John) Gower
United States History;;It provided for the Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions to be paid according to appraisals made by George Vashon, Abraham Redfield, and A. P. Chouteau.  It followed an earlier council at Red Clay, after which William Carroll and John Schmerhorn were appointed commissioners.  It was steadfastly opposed by John Ross, and the group that was involved in it, known as the "Ridge Party," was in violation of the law.  Along with two of the Ridges, Elias Boudinot was assassinated for his part in it, and this agreement to pay a sum of $5 million was only ratified by one vote in the Senate.  FTP, name this treaty signed in Georgia on December 29, 1835, which provided for the removal of the Cherokees to Oklahoma and led to the Trail of Tears.;;(the) (Treaty) (of) New Echota
Pop Culture;;The character of Dot was played by The West Wing's Allison Janney, while Francis Davenport was played by a young David Krumholtz.  One of the families in this film includes such youngsters as Sandy and Jim, who were played by Adam Hann-Byrd and Jamey Sheridan.  Another member of that family, Mikey Carver, was played by an actor who more recently played a cannibal hitman named Kevin in Sin City.  Wendy and Paul, the children of Ben and Elena Hood, were played by Christian Ricci and Tobey Maguire.  FTP, name this 1997 film which also starred Joan Allen and Kevin Kline, a work set in Connecticut during Thanksgiving in 1973 which was directed by Ang Lee.;;(The) Ice Storm
Physics;;In holographic models it is a Kaluza-Klein mode of the vector SU2 symmetry, which refines the older idea of hidden local symmetry. A precise measurement of the spectral function on this resonance could improve one of the largest uncertainties in the theoretical calculation of muon g minus 2, namely the hadronic vacuum polarization. It is a triplet under isospin; the neutral component of the triplet mixes with the photon, and thus has rare decays to electron pairs. The corresponding isospin zero particle is the omega meson. The tau lepton frequently decays to one of these plus a neutrino. FTP, what is this lightest spin-1 particle in QCD, which decays to two pions?;;rho meson
Philosophy;;This man's political views are discussed in a book by Lewis Feuer which considers him "and the rise of liberalism," while his best-known work has been the subject of books by Alan Donagan, Jonathan Bennett, and Edwin Curley.  In his lifetime, this man clarified many of his views through correspondence with George Hermann Schuller and Ehrenfried Walther von Tschirnhaus.  This man warmed up for his best-known work by writing a short text which was lost until the 19th century, the Short Treatise on God, Man and his Well-Being.  He offered an account of four kinds of knowledge in his Treatise on the Emendation of the Intellect, but is better known for a book in five parts which considers the "origin and nature of the affects" and the "power of the intellect, or human freedom".  FTP, name this rationalist philosopher who used his "geometric method" to demonstrate the propositions of his Ethics.;;(Benedict) (de) Spinoza|(Baruch) Spinoza
Geography;;Known in Roman times as the Viadrus, this river was part of the Amber Road.  Its distributaries are the Dziwna, Swina, and Peene, which connect the Szczecin shuh-chech-cheen Lagoon with the sea.  Just over 500 miles long, in its lower course it serves as the boundary between the voivodship of West Pomerania and the state of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania.  FTP, identify this river that flows from the Czech Republic to the Baltic Sea and whose name is included in that of a national boundary line with the Neisse River.;;Oder (River)|Odra (River)
Literature;;He was only 22 years old when his novel The Last Act of Norma appeared, and his later works include The Lucky Kid and The Scandal.  After the abject failure of his first play, he decided to enlist in the army, and his experience fighting in Morocco led to his book Diary of a Witness of the African War.  The long-time editor of the journal El Latigo, he is best known for a short comic novel about a miller whose beautiful wife plays a trick on a local official.  Though he also wrote The Prodigal Son and Captain Poison, his reputation relies on that 1874 work, which has inspired several musical adaptations.  FTP, name this Spanish author of The Three-Cornered Hat.;;(Pedro) (Antonio) (de) Alarcon (y) (Ariza)
World History;;He appointed Kengo Wa Dondo to serve as prime minister late in his time in power, after Kengo served under him as first state commissioner.  Earlier, he had conducted a notorious show trial which ended with the executions of Jérome Anany and André Mahamba, as well as former prime minister Evariste Kimba.  Kimba had been an associate of this man's chief rival, whom this man deposed from the presidency in 1965.  After ousting Joseph Kasavubu, this man ruled until being ousted in 1997 by Tutsi rebels, after which Laurent Kabila became president of his country.  FTP, name this African strongman who was a long-time president of Zaire.;;Mobutu (Sese) (Seko)|Mobutu (Sese) (Seko) (Koko) (Ngbendu) (wa) (za) (Banga)
Biology;;One of the causes of systemic sclerosis involves production of anti-Scl 70 antibody which attacks class I of this enzyme. The mechanism of quinolone antibiotic action depends on inhibition of the bacterial class IV version of this enzyme, while in humans, the chemotherapeutic agent teniposide and doxorubicin have their effects in part to inducing double stranded DNA breaks by inhibiting class II of this enzyme. Necessary because of tangling, class II enzymes break both strands where two chromosomes cross, while class I enzymes break single phosphodiester bonds transiently in order to decrease torsionals force due to the movement of the replication fork. FTP, name these enzymes of the DNA replication complex which change the supercoiling, and therefore the topology, of DNA.;;(DNA) topoisomerase(s)
Music;;One work with this name is actually an oratorio which features such songs as "Shine Out," "Out On the Lawn I Lie in Bed," and "London, to Thee I Do Present".  Another work known by this name was inspired by a poem by Adolph Böttger, and each movement originally had a descriptive title, such as the "merry playmates" of the Scherzo.  After the composer put aside a G minor work in the same genre, he wrote this piece in less than two months at the beginning of 1841.  This B flat major work was the first of four in this genre written by its composer.  FTP, identify the shared name of a work by Benjamin Britten and the first symphony by Robert Schumann.;;Spring Symphony|Spring Symphonies
Geography;;It was renamed Azimabad in 1704 in honor of a grandson of Aurangzeb.  Earlier, it had been made a capital city by Udaya, the son of the possibly psychotic king named Ajatashatru who founded it.  The most important empire to rule from this city was weakened by the White Huns before they were finally destroyed by Harsha, who drove them out of Magadha.  It was the capital of a kingdom founded by Pushyamitra, the Sunga Empire, but is better known as a capital which was remade in stone around 270 BC by Asoka.  FTP, name this capital of the modern-day state of Bihar, which was also the capital of the Gupta Empire.;;Pataliputra|Patna
Astronomy;;The Triquetrum was invented to study precession of the equinoxes with respect to this astronomical body. Venus eclipses it every 414 years, and its occultation by the moon exposes three fainter companions, whose colliding parallel winds are the chief source of its X-rays. An eclipsing binary with an orbital period of 4 days, its large B1 member is a Beta Cephei-type star whose core hydrogen is approaching exhaustion, while its minor B4 member is gaining mass via Roche lobe overflow. Found by following the handle of the Big Dipper through Arcturus, and then down, it is located between Heze and Syrma in its constellation. FTP, name this dwarf system with median magnitude 0.95, the 15th brightest by magnitude, which is the alpha star of Virgo.;;Spica|Azimech|Alaraf|Jiao Xu
Religion/Mythology;;According to one tradition, she was the sister of the river-god Achelous and gave him her best-known possession to replace the one he lost fighting with Hercules.  According to another tradition, she had a sister named Melissa and was a daughter of King Minos.  While she was performing her best-known task, she got a group of dancers known as the Curetes to raise a mighty ruckus.  According to another tradition, her skin was turned into the aegis, and almost every tradition places her on Mount Aigaion where she became the most important babysitter in Greek myth.  FTP, name this mythical figure, who was either a nymph or a goat and who tended the infant Zeus.;;Amalthea
World History;;This man assisted his nephew-in-law to victory at the battle of Val-ès-Dunes, but would later turn against him and lose a battle to him at Varaville.  This man's father was nicknamed "the Pious," even though he was excommunicated by Pope Gregory V, and spent much of his reign getting the church to recognize him as duke of Burgundy.  This man had two wives named Matilda who died, but his third wife, Anne of Kiev, bore him such illustrious offspring as the crusader Hugh of Vermandois and his successor, Philip I.  FTP, name this French monarch, a Capetian who ruled from 1031 until 1060, quarrelled with William the Conqueror, and preceded by five centuries the next three French kings to share his name.;;Henr(i|y){1}? (I|the First){1}?;;Henr(y|i){1}?
Literature;;This work features a prologue spoken by a "personage with a hawk's head" who tells a story about a soldier who decided that in a country where dog eats dog, it is wise to kill the smaller dog and present its body to the larger one.  In the opening scene, a veteran soldier named Belzanor suffers some gambling losses to a Persian, after which Bel Affris warns the men about one of the title characters.  Other characters include the evil nurse Ftatateeta; Britannus, the first title character's secretary; and Rufio, who is left to govern a province when that title character decides to return to Italy.  The two title characters meet when one of them is perched on a paw of the Sphinx.  FTP, name this work by George Bernard Shaw about an Egyptian queen and a Roman conqueror.;;Caesar and Cleopatra
Art;;A bearded man in a blue robe puts his hand on the chest of a reclining young woman in this man's Raising of Jairus' Daughter.  Some distant mountains are lit by the sun while the title character sits in the shade to the left of three other men in his Job and his Friends.  He showed a man with outstretched arms and a woman clutching her hat in 1903's What a Freedom!, and his other works include St. Nicholas Saves Three Innocents from Death and depictions of an author "in his study" and "as a ploughman in the field".  His other portraits include ones of Dmitri Mendeleev and Pavel Tretyakov.  FTP, name this painter of Ivan the Terrible Killing His Son and The Volga Boatmen.;;(Ilya) Repin
Computer Science;;Official rounding modes for these include unbiased, towards zero, towards infinity and towards negative infinity.  Some examples of these are known as normalized and denormalized numbers. Using these, multiplying infinity by zero results in NaN, or not a number.  The IEEE 754 standard for these specifies them in single- and double-precision forms among others.  They are specified by a sign bit, some exponent bits and some fraction bits.  FTP, name these approximate representations of real numbers used in many computers, so named because the decimal place is not fixed.;;floating(-)point (numbers)|float(s)
Literature;;A 1927 book by this man contains the stories of five people who never have sex, and this man wrote a 1916 novel about Jesus, Saint Paul, and Joseph of Arimathea.  In addition to a work which isn't actually about average quizbowlers, Celibate Lives, and the novel The Brook Kerith, his novel Sister Teresa is the sequel to a book about Evelyn Innes.  In such autobiographies as Memoirs of My Dead Life and Hail and Farewell, he wrote about his work on creating the Irish National Theatre, though he is better known for a controversial 1894 novel.  The title character of that novel has to leave her job as a servant with the Barfields after being seduced, though she ends up returning to Woodview after her bookmaker husband dies.  FTP, name this author of Esther Waters who shares his name with the 20th-century British philosopher who wrote Principia Ethica.;;(George) Moore
World History;;The war named for this place was ended when Clazomenae and Cyprus were transferred to Persia through the Peace of Antalcidas, which was put forth by Artaxerxes II.  A league named for this place was brought back into existence by Demetrius Poliorcetes, but it didn't have anything to do following the battle of Ipsus.  This city joined the Achaean Confederation after being captured by Aratus in 243 BC, and was destroyed by Lucius Mummius in 146 to teach the Greeks a lesson.  Its early rulers include Cypselus and Periander, though it is better known for the action it took against Megara which set off the Peloponnesian War.  FTP, name this city on the isthmus joining the Peloponnesus and central Greece, whose citizens were the lucky recipients of a couple of epistles from Saint Paul.;;Corinth
Biology;;The gene encoding this protein is located on chromosome 3q28. Four of the five receptors for this protein do not differentiate its "14" variety from its "28" variety, the latter of which is secreted mostly in the intestine. Synthetic substitutes for it include octreotide and it acts with both endocrine and paracrine mechanisms. First identified in hypothalamic extracts, it prolongs gastric emptying and gall bladder contraction and it is used to treat acromegaly because of its most important function. FTP, name this hormone that is produced by the delta cells of the islets of Langerhans in the pancreas and that serves to suppress many hormones, including secretin and growth hormone.;;somatostatin
Literature;;This man's youngest son produced a prose translation of Paradise Lost and wrote religious poetry such as the Sacred Odes.  The title character of one of this man's works commits suicide after being betrayed by his son Pharnace, while the title character of another of his works is the younger brother of Amurat whose death is ordered by a woman who loves him and who himself loves Atalide, an Ottoman princess.  In his final tragedy, he wrote about the crowning of Joas after the titular usurper is overthrown.  In addition to Mithridates, Bajazet, and Athalie ah-thah-lee, he wrote plays about Britannicus and Esther.  FTP, name this 17th-century French author best known for his tragedies Andromaque and Phèdre fedd.;;(Jean) Racine
World History;;The pretext for this conflict was a so-called Farmer's Rebellion which was inspired by a religious movement known as the Eastern Learning.  That rebellion took off following a meeting at Boeun, where the Donghaks gathered to protest oppression.  Six months after it ended, the last empress of a nation neighboring one of the powers involved in this war was assassinated at the behest of Miura Goro.  The end of this conflict also signaled the end of the Self-Strengthening Movement in the defeated country, and the peace concluding it required the defeated party to open four additional ports to international commerce. The indemnity required by the victors consumed almost 80% of the loser's annual tax collection of 250 million Taels, while territorial losses included the Pescadores Islands. FTP, name this Asian war concluded by the Treaty of Shimoneseki in 1895.;;Sino(-)Japanese (War)
Philosophy;;A 1970 essay on this work by Wendell Carr is frequently appended to it, and discusses its influence on Viola Klein and Millicent Fawcett.  This book's middle sections discuss the difference between leading by "personal feeling" and by "personal interest" to debunk one pretext for the titular phenomenon. Its fourth and final chapter notes the influence of members of the title group in converting the Anglo-Saxons and Franks to Christianity.  Its opening section claims that the phenomenon under discussion is "wrong in itself," and notes that the author's views about it date from "the very earliest periods when he had formed any opinions on social or political matters". The author of this work defends that contention in his  Autobiography, which perhaps understates the role of his fiancée, Harriet, in this work's creation.  FTP, name this work by John Stuart Mill, an 1869 book about the equality of the sexes.;;(The) Subjection of Women
Religion/Mythology;;Generally depicted in either the kayotsarga or dhyanamudra dya-nah-MOO-druh stances, some of these figures were symbolized by srivatsa and makara, while the first is represented by a golden bull. It is universally agreed that their teachings will be lost before the end of the current kalpa, but disagreement exists regarding how much of the agama is truly due to them. They were the authors of the now-lost Purvas, which Bhadrabahu was the last person to know the contents of; this allowed him to found the sect known as the Digambaras. Also known as Jinas, their name is Sanskrit for "ford-maker".  FTP, name this group of 24 sages from Jainism, one of whom was Mahavira.;;Tirtankara(s)
Art;;One version of it was published as an accompaniment to Erasmus Darwin's The Botanic Garden, while another inspired Charles Nodier to write the story Smarra. Created 20 years before its artist began his Lectures on Painting at the Royal Academy, one of its subjects likely depicts his former lover, Anna Landolt. The original version now housed in the Detroit Institute of Arts features a side table and the edge of a vanity mirror on the right side of the canvas, while a curtain provides the background. One of the figures depicted in this work was used to model the title character's appearance in Nosferatu. That squat, impish creature looks out at the viewer and sits hunched on the chest of a woman who appears to be in a state of sensual pleasure. FTP, name this 1782 painting featuring a creepy horse and a bad night's sleep by Henry Fuseli.;;(The) Nightmare
Physics;;A relation due to this person gives the polarizability in terms of the refractivity and permittivity and is sometimes also credited to Mossetti. The proposer of a form of the ergodic hypothesis relating to electrolysis, this physicist derived the aforementioned relation by applying that form to electrolytic dissociation. His 1857 paper on the kinetic theory introduced the concept of mean free path. An equation sometimes called his theorem states that the integral of the inexact heat differential divided by the temperature vanishes over a reversible cycle; a better-known statement due to him notes that the same integral is non-negative over a general thermodynamic cycle. FTP, name this German physicist best known for positing both the second law of thermodynamics and the concept of entropy, whose name figures in an important relation along with the name of Émile Clapeyron.;;(Rudolph) (Julius) (Emanuel) Clausius
Literature;;The "Dedication" to this work features a line about "the gloom of imminent war" which is a reference to the Trent affair.  Its concluding section notes that the author's countrymen were "left mightiest of all peoples under heaven" by the "roar of Hougoumont," and ends with an image of "the darkness of that battle in the West / Where all of high and holy dies away".  The previous section of this work ends with the line "And the new sun rose bringing the new year," which is viewed by a man who had earlier seen an arm "Clothed in white samite, mystic, wonderful" which caught a weapon thrown toward it.  Other sections include "The Marriage of Geraint," "Pelleas and Ettarre," and "The Last Tournament".  FTP, name this poetic work in twelve books which features sections devoted to Guinevere and "The Coming of Arthur," an epic by Alfred Tennyson.;;Idylls of the King
United States History;;The first man to hold this position had earlier served as a representative from the 4th district of Illinois before becoming a delegate to the UN in the early 1970s.  The first man to hold this position under George W. Bush had been president of QTC Medical Services prior to holding it, and after resigning went to work for Pfizer.  When that man resigned, he was succeeded in this position by a man who had served as ambassador to the Vatican and as chairman of the Republican National Committee.  In 2006, the holder of this position was chosen to skip out on the State of the Union address.  Held by such men as Jesse Brown, Togo West, and Ed Derwinski, FTP, name this position currently occupied by Jim Nicholson, a member of the cabinet who oversees a department which deals with former soldiers.;;(Secretary) (of) Veterans Affairs
Chemistry;;The loss of the beta-hydrogen in its mechanism occurs from the least-hindered substituent; thus it follows the rule of its namesake, which also holds for ester pyrolysis. It initially involves the use of methyl iodide and silver oxide to convert the starting material into a quaternary ammonium salt; an E2 elimination then occurs in the prescence of heat and water to give the final products. FTP, this is what chemical reaction resulting in an alkene and a tertiary amine, a process also known as exhaustive methylation and named for a German chemist?;;Hofmann (elimination)
World History;;Hans von Seeckt was a proponent of this agreement and hoped that it would be expanded. Heinrich Brandler faced a significant political task in justifying this treaty to his party because it gave legitimacy to a government they wanted to replace.  A supplement to it signed seven months later extended its provisions to such states as the Republic of the Far East, Azerbaijan, and Armenia, and was signed by Freiherr von Maltzan and Nikolaus Krestinski.  The original agreement was signed by Georgy Chicherin and Walter Rathenau, while a secret addendum signed later that year allowed one nation to train its army in the other's territory, violating the Treaty of Versailles.  FTP, name this 1922 treaty which forged a military alliance between Germany and the Soviet Union and which was signed in an Italian resort town.;;(Treaty) (of) Rapallo
Literature;;One character in this novel lies about her father having been a soldier who died in Cuba; in fact, he abandoned her mother for a mistress.  That character arranges for this novel's title character to receive the grave in Arlington Cemetery that was reserved for her father, having earlier lost a job as tutor to the Miranda children.  In addition to Harriet Wilson, characters in this novel include a general named Tomas Arroyo who shoots the title character in the back.  That title character is an author whose grief at the deaths of his two sons leads him to leave the United States in 1913.  FTP, name this 1985 novel which imagines the circumstances surrounding the mysterious death of Ambrose Bierce, a work by Carlos Fuentes.;;(The) Old Gringo|Gringo viejo
Music;;The first act features a canon sung by four characters, "How wondrous the emotion," after which the tone becomes more earthy with the aria which opines that life is nothing without money.  The second act features the duet "Joy inexpressible," after which a minister of state recognizes a man whom he thought was dead.  It is based on a play by Jean Bouilly, and earlier musical versions of it had been written by Pierre Gaveaux and Donizetti's teacher, Simone Mayr.  It opens with a duet between Jacquino and Marcellina, and also features Rocco, Don Fernando, and Pizarro, who is the governor of the prison where it takes place.  FTP, name this work which premiered in 1806, an opera about a Spanish noble named Florestan and his wife Leonora which was written by Ludwig van Beethoven.;;Fidelio
Physics;;Derived in full conservation form by Axford, this PDE can be obtained by ensemble-averaging moments of the Klimontovich equation, which represents as delta functions the objects that this equation represents as a continuum. Its homogeneous version is the Vlasov equation, which has no collision-operator term. The continuum equation is its zeroth velocity moment; higher moments yield momentum relations like the Navier-Stokes equation. It is usually stated by equating to zero the total time derivative, plus the force dotted with the velocity gradient, minus the collision operator, all operating on the distribution function of a fluid. FTP, identify this equation for the distribution function of a fluid, named for an Austrian physicist.;;Boltzmann (equation)
Literature;;One of this author's novels centers on a farmer who murders his wife's lover, Ryder Channing, before shooting himself.  Another of this author's novels centers on an actress who drives to Nevada in a stolen car before being visited by her friend B Z, who overdoses on sleeping pills.  In addition to those novels about Everett McClellan and Maria Wyeth, Run River and Play It as It Lays, this author wrote about a woman named Inez who marries Senator Harry Victor in the 1984 novel Democracy.  In her most recent book, this author wrote about the illness of her daughter Quintana and the sudden death of her husband, John Gregory Dunne.  FTP, name this writer of A Book of Common Prayer  who recently won a National Book Award for her memoir The Year of Magical Thinking.;;(Joan) Didion
Religion/Mythology;;In Chilean mythology, throwing the Trauco's staff in a fire will cause it to produce this substance which can be used to heal people who were hurt by the Trauco's curses.  Some of it prevents Osawa's duck messenger from reaching the Earth, while a namesake man of Thai mythology covers himself in this substance before going out to rape women and boys.  Sesmu is the deity of wine and this substance in Egyptian myth, while Christian figures associated with it include Zagam, who can change blood into it, and Ukoback, a demon of it charged with keeping hell's cauldrons full. A drop of it awakened Eros when spilled by Psyche from the lamp she was using to view his face. FTP, name this substance, which helps to name the grove on the Mount of Olives where Jesus hung out before his crucifixion, Gethsemane.;;oil
Geography;;This territory is largely uninhabited except for a small meteorological staff on the Willis Islets. Supervised remotely by the Department of the Environment, Sport, and Territories, this group's other large islands include the Coringa Islets and the Diamond Islands. A namesake 1969 act incorporating these islands into the Commonwealth was amended in 1997 to add Elizabeth and Middleton Reefs to the territory; these reefs are located 150 kilometers north of Lord Howe Island in the Tasman Sea. New Caledonia is due east of the islands and helps create the sea with which they share their name. FTP, identify these territorial islands of Australia located between the Great Barrier Reef and Papua New Guinea.;;Coral Sea (Islands) (Territory)
United States History;;He was a founder of the so-called Whipping Post Club, and wrote for its newspaper, the Independent Advertiser.  One of his best-known acts was carried out after a series of so-called Body Meetings, and was planned with William Molineux.  Another of his major projects was extended by Dabney Carr, and was planned with Joseph Warren.  The Non-Importation Organization which this man helped to create was a major cause of the Boston Massacre, the name of which he coined, and his other efforts included supporting the Suffolk Resolves and coming up with the idea for Committees of Correspondence.  FTP, name this leader of the Sons of Liberty who organized the Boston Tea Party when he wasn't running his family's brewery.;;(Sam(uel)) Adams
Literature;;One of his works is set in "some lonely mountainous district one or more centuries ago" and features a young woman named Molly Byrne and a blind beggar named Martin Doul.  Another of his works is set on a "village roadside after nightfall" and features a young woman named Sarah Casey and the title character, Michael Byrne.  The first of his plays to be produced is set in a cottage in County Wicklow, where a tramp sits with a man who is pretending to be dead, Dan Burke.  In addition to The Well of the Saints, The Tinker's Wedding, and In the Shadow of the Glen, he wrote a famous play about Christy Mahon.  FTP, name this author of The Playboy of the Western World.;;(John) (Millington) Synge
Physics;;It was studied for certain high-Tc superconductors by Mesot et. al., who used angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy to conclude there is a single large one in the materials studied. Another probe sometimes used to study it is the de Haas-van Alphen effect. For free electrons, it is just a sphere, but in crystal lattices it acquires directional dependence. At absolute zero it separates filled from unfilled orbitals.  It is a surface in momentum space with constant energy. FTP, what is this concept in solid-state physics named for an Italian-American physicist?;;Fermi surface
United States History;;After the departure of General Franz Sigel, morale became a regular problem for this military unit. It had been formed from three divisions remaining after the dissolution of General John Pope's Army of Virginia following the defeat at the second Battle of Bull Run. In 1863, it was transferred to General Rosecrans's Army of the Tennessee alongside a corps commanded by General Slocum. This transfer came after General Howard led the corps through an uninspiring retreat through the streets of Gettysburg on the first day of that battle. FTP, identify this Union army corps whose largely German membership earned it the nickname "The Flying Dutchmen" after retreating under Jackson's attack at Chancellorsville.;;XI (Corps)|German (Corps);;(The) Flying Dutchmen
Literature;;One of the characters in this novel does not "have lips to talk with". A major digression occurs when the author describes the entire pamphlet entitled "The League of the Divine Wind," which represents the right-wing ideals of the main character.  Based in part on the author's earlier short story "Patriotism," it centers on the relationship between the lawyer Honda and Isao Iinuma, the embodiment of purity and samurai dedication to Japan. Isao is clearly a reincarnation of Matsugae Kiyoaki, the protagonist of a novel which appeared one year earlier. FTP, name this novel taking place chronologically after Spring Snow, the second in Mishima's Sea of Fertility tetralogy.;;Runaway Horses|Honba
World History;;This man served in the Army of the North with Edouard Mortier, who would later be killed when Giuseppe Fieschi attempted to assassinate this man.  He used the pseudonym "Chabos" while working as a tutor at a school in Reichenau, and he later taught French in Boston.  His daughter became the first queen of Belgium two years after he supplanted the so-called "Henry V" to become king of his nation.  He himself abdicated in favor of his grandson and went to England 18 years after he was named monarch in the wake of Charles X's overthrow during the July Revolution.  FTP, name this man known as the "citizen king" who ruled France from 1830 until 1848.;;Louis Philippe|Louis Philippe(,) (duke) (of) (Orldans)
Physics;;Those containing an odd number of electrons provide a controlled environment for studying the Kondo effect. They could perhaps be used as artificial fluorophores for intraoperative detection of tumors, because their theoretically high quantum yield gives them useful optical properties. Fabrication processes include epitaxy, in which they form spontaneously, and lithography. They are quasi-zero dimensional and have a sharp density of states making them potentially useful for manufacturing blue lasers or qubits. They are semiconductor devices containing small numbers of electrons or holes confined in all three dimensions. FTP, what are these objects sometimes referred to as "artificial atoms"?;;quantum dot(s)|semiconductor nanocrystal(s)
Literature;;One figure in this work is known as "Indignation" and is especially indignant about the way his daughter Minerva was treated.  Another figure in it, Zenas, had his life changed after he read Dr. Weese's advertisement, which led him to realize that he would die young.  It ends with an epilogue in which Yogarindra, Loki, and Beezlebub create men from earth after Beezlebub plays a game of checkers with God. It also contains a mock epic that tells of the fight between liberals like Carl Hamblin and conservatives like Christian Dallman. Sexsmith the Dentist believes that "a moral truth is a hollow tooth / Which must be propped with gold," while other parts describe Mayor A. D. Blood and Thomas Rhodes. Opening with a verse about "Elmer, Herman, Bert, Tom, and Charley," who are sleeping on "the hill," FTP, name this collection of dramatic monologues by Edgar Lee Masters.;;Spoon River Anthology
World History;;The last king of this nation's longest-ruling house, Erekle II, died in 1798 following the disastrous battle of Krtsanisi ter-sah-NEE-see.  In the 11th century, this nation was united under the Bagratid dynasty, which produced the rulers David the Builder and Queen Tamar.  It was ruled from Telavi in the 18th century, when its eastern kingdom was joined with Kartl-Kakheti kahr-till kah-KEH-tee.  A short-lived democratic republic here was governed by Noe Zhordania before being absorbed by the Soviet Union in 1921.  More recently, Mikhail Saakashvili became its president in 2004 after helping to topple Eduard Shevardnadze in the Rose Revolution.  FTP, name this Eastern European country, the birthplace of Stalin, whose capital is Tblisi.;;Georgia
Miscellaneous;;He trained his friend Saxton Pope in archery, leading to the latter's publication of a seminal work on  Bowhunting with a Bow and Arrow.  He was jailed by Sherriff J. B. Webber, and gained fame after Sam Batwi had an unsatisfactory conversation with him.  A number of his relatives died in the Three Knolls Massacre, and he himself died while visiting Thomas Waterman.  His "brain" is the subject of a recent book by Orin Starn, while two men named Clifford and Karl and a woman named Theodora also wrote books about him, which describe him "in three centuries" and "in two worlds".  FTP, name this member of the Yahi Indians, who after appearing in California in 1911 was studied by Alfred Kroeber.;;Ishi
Philosophy;;Its third section discusses various kinds of its namesake "literature," and compares certain German writers to monks who wrote "silly lives of Catholic saints" over ancient manuscripts.  That section mentions Karl Grün as the classical type of a kind of "foul and enervating literature," and derides as "duodecimo editions of the New Jerusalem" such concepts as the "Home Colonies" and "Little Icaria".  Its second section claims that upper class marriage is merely a "system of wives in common" in which men amuse themselves by seducing each others' wives, and offers ten applications of its philosophy, including confiscation of the land of emigrants and rebels.  In its fourth and last section, it describes temporary alliances with Polish agrarians and French Social Democrats, though it notes that its immediate interests are in a projected German revolution.  FTP, name this 1848 pamphlet which claims that a specter is haunting Europe, a work written by Marx and Engels.;;(The) Communist Manifesto
Art;;One work with this name is set in what appears to be a hallway near a stone staircase and features the meeting of figures in medieval costume.  In that work the man wears a cape and a feathered cap, while the woman is in a blue dress. Another work of this name is notable for the light, nondescript faces and clothes that blend into the blue-brown background. These works by Francesco Hayez and Edvard Munch are not as well-known as a 1908 work which features a background inspired by the Ravenna mosaics. In that painting a flowering field is spread out at the feet of a dark-haired male, whose neck is nearly perpendicular to his body, while the female kneels against him. Both wear gold robes, though the male's has rectangular, solid-color decorations while the female's has circular ones. FTP, Gustav Klimt painted the most famous version of what works named for an affectionate activity?;;(The) Kiss
Physics;;This effect is associated with an impedance that grows at high frequencies. One way to deal with this is to use bundles of conductors woven together with insulation between them, which is known as a Litz bundle. It arises from exponentially decaying solutions to Maxwell's equations. The associated length scale goes like the square root of the resistivity and the inverse square root of the signal frequency. It can be thought of as an explanation for why a person is safe inside a metal car if lightning strikes. FTP, what is this effect, in which an alternating electric current tends to flow near the surface of a conductor?;;skin (effect)
Literature;;This work begins and ends with characters dancing to a minuet from Don Giovanni. Early on, Augusta bites through an iris because of her jealousy of Stephanie, who later recites a "Litany of the Livid". After that performance, another character puts on gloves, a mask, and a blonde wig, and is symbolically raped and killed by Deodatus Village after lying down on a catafalque. Throughout the play, a court consisting of a Governor, a Judge, a Missionary, a Queen, and her Valet watch the action while wearing masks that leave some of the actors' skin uncovered. Featuring a commentary by Archibald Absalom Wellington, FTP, name this Jean Genet play which specifies that a white person should always be invited to be in the audience.;;(The) Blacks(:) (A) (Clown) (Show)|(Les) Negres
Pop Culture;;Midway through the first season of this show, one of the three central characters sacrificed his life to save a group of refugees, but not before he kissed another character, giving her his special power.  Toward the end of the first season one character was tempted to become good after learning that a blind assassin was going to kill some special children, but then he decided to be evil after all and lost his hand just after bringing someone back to life.  In addition to Christian Kane, who played Lindsey McDonald, it featured several actors who also appeared on the show from which it was spun off, such as Julie Benz, Alexis Denisof, and Charisma Carpenter, who played Darla, Wesley, and Cordelia.  Featuring the evil law firm Wolfram and Hart, FTP, name this show in which David Boreanaz played the titular vampire with a soul.;;Angel
Literature;;In one of this man's works, the title character's maid Franziska and a sergeant named Paul Werner fall in love.  In that play by this man, a servant named Just gives a ring to a landlord to settle a debt, which allows the title character to realize that she has discovered her long-lost love.  In another of his plays, the title character's beloved, Count Appiani, is shot on the orders of the prince of Guastalla, who is in love with her.  His best-known play features such characters as Daja, who is the companion of the title character's daughter, and Conrad von Stauffen, who falls in love with Recha.  FTP, name this author of Emilia Galotti and Minna von Barnhelm, an 18th-century German author best known for Nathan the Wise.;;(Gotthold) (Ephraim) Lessing
World History;;In the early stages of this conflict one side's army managed to occupy Nueva Ocotepeque, while the other's air force destroyed most of its enemy's stores of fuel.  It was partly caused by one country's refusal to renew a Bilateral Treaty on Immigration, a refusal which was followed by the use of an agrarian reform law by the government of Oswaldo Lopez Arellano to evict a large population of squatters.  A cease-fire took effect on July 20, only six days after military action had begun in such places as the Gulf of Fonseca.  FTP, name this war fought in 1969 between El Salvador and Honduras, which was precipitated by a dispute during a qualifying round for the World Cup.;;(The) Soccer (War)|(The) Football (War)|(La) (Guerra) (del) Fútbol
Music;;During the same summer that the composer of this work was writing it, he was inspired by the death of the painter Feuerbach to write a piece in the same genre which consists of three movements in D minor.  This work's second and fourth movements are C major maestosos, while it begins with a C minor allegro and also features an E minor animato movement.   The composer's Opus 80, it was written after Bernard Scholz informed him that he would have to write a piece of this nature, and it draws upon such works as the "Rakoczi March" and the song "Gaudemaus Igitur".  FTP, name this orchestral work which was written after the composer received a degree from the University of Breslau, a work by Johannes Brahms.;;Academic Festival Overture|Akademische Festouvertüre
Literature;;An arcade machine tells the 28-year-old protagonist of this novel that he has the strength and grip of a 40-year-old, prompting him to pick a fight with a high school gang.  This novel opens as that character, looking at a book of road maps, compares his sickly shape to the geography of Africa, to which he dreams of escaping throughout this novel.  The protagonist's wife is never named, though she is the source of a fear of wombs that he cures by having anal sex with Himiko. He later tries to kill his newborn son, who was misdiagnosed with a brain hernia.  FTP, name this novel about a new father named Bird, possibly inspired by author Kenzaburo Oe's experience with his autistic son.;;(A) Personal Matter|Kojinteki na taiken
Geography;;Shlisselburgh and Sortavala are two cities on its shores, and it contains over 600 islands.  The largest of those islands is home to a monastery that was evacuated to a nearby country just before the Continuation War, but which has recently returned to the island of Valaam.  The majority of its water comes from three sources: Lake Ilmen, via the Volkhov River; Lake Saimaa, via the Vuoksi River; and Lake Onega, via the River Svir.  FTP, name this lake of the Karelian Isthmus that is drained to the Gulf of Finland by the Neva River and is the largest lake in Europe.;;(Lake) Ladoga
Religion/Mythology;;One figure of this name was a hero of the Bretons who died after being incorrectly informed that a ship with a black sail was approaching his prison, which meant that his mother had refused to ransom him.  In another legend, a figure of this name was the father of Caractacus who went with him to Rome, where St. Paul converted him to Christianity.  A better-known figure of this name compelled his brother-in-law to designate Gwern as his heir.  After this man's half-brother Efnisien died, a struggle broke out in which this son of Penarddun and Llyr was killed.  FTP, name this enormous figure from Celtic myth, whose name means "raven" and who had a magical head.;;Bran
Chemistry;;Structurally simple examples of them include the iridoids, which are based on a ten-carbon skeleton.  Sterols and steroids are also examples, though their extensive modifications and cyclizations can obscure their parentage from a branched chain hydrocarbon.  More recognizable are long-chain plant pigments such as retinoids and carotenoids.  The key step in their biosynthesis is the HMG-CoA reductase pathway.  They characteristically have carbons in a multiple of five, a result of their biosynthesis from dimethylallyl pyrophosphate and isopentenyl pyrophosphate, activated forms of a particular saturated hydrocarbon.  FTP, name these common organic molecules composed of isoprene subunits.;;terpenoid(s)|terpene(s)
United States History;;One man with this surname served as quartermaster-general of the state troops during the Dorr Rebellion, and went on to become chief justice of the supreme court of Rhode Island in 1856.  Another man of this surname wrote the "Camillus" essays in support of a federal convention in 1787, and delivered a notable speech in support of Jay's Treaty as a member of the House of Representatives from New England.  Yet another man of this surname served three terms as governor of Massachusetts in the 1880s after having spent a fortune to settle his father's debts.  In addition to Samuel, Fisher, and Oliver, a man of this surname was investigated by Congressional committees led by Luke Poland and Jeremiah Wilson after Colonel McComb accused him of misuing stock to bribe members of Congress.  FTP, give this surname shared by a man implicated in the Crédit Mobilier scandal whose first name was Oakes.;;Ames
Literature;;The preface to one book of this work features a story about a peasant who loses his hatchet and annoys Jupiter with his loud prayers for its return.  The preface to another book discusses the siege of Corinth, at which Diogenes thrashed his tub so as not to seem idle.  In its first book, a war breaks out after some bakers from Lerné refuse to sell cakes to some shepherds, after which the Abbey of Thélème is built for a friar who contributed to the war effort.  The island of Ruach and Condemnation Island are visited in a later book, in which Friar John and one of the title characters goes in search of the Oracle of the Holy Bottle along with Panurge.  FTP, name this work in five books written in the 16th century, which chronicles the adventures of two giants and which was written by François Rabelais.;;Gargantua and Pantagruel|(The) (Lives,) (Heroic) (Deeds) (and) (Sayings) (of) Gargantua and (His) (Son) Pantagruel
Psychology;;As a youth, he watched Greek soldiers slaughter the adult men of his village, motivating him to explore the sources of aggression through social psychology. Along with his wife Carolyn, he theorized that persuasion occurs when new information unable to be assimilated or contrasted falls into an individual's latitude of acceptance, an outlook he called Social Judgment Theory. In 1936, he used the autokinetic effect to show that successive interpretations of an ambiguous piece of information converge to a single estimate, producing some of the first evidence on conformity. However, he is best known for an experiment in which direct competition between two groups of boys created tension which was reduced by having the groups work together on superordinate goals. FTP, identify this Turkish-American psychologist who performed the Robbers Cave experiment.;;(Muzafer) Sherif
Literature;;One of this man's novels parodies the detective story genre through the character of private investigator C. Card, who fantasizes about having adventures in Babylon. Besides Dreaming of Babylon, he also wrote a "Gothic Western" which describes the encounter between professional killers Cameron and Greer and the illusory titular creature in The Hawkline Monster. Both books are commonly published along with his first novel, whose title refers to both the grandfather of Lee Mellon, "A Confederate General," and the fictional twelfth member of the Confederacy, "Big Sur". He is more famous, however, for writing about iDEATH, a place where "the deeds were done and done again" in his utopian fantasy In Watermelon Sugar. FTP, name this American author who is best known for writing Trout Fishing in America.;;(Richard) Brautigan
World History;;The scale of this war escalated after Dupont lost the battle of Bailén.  After the defeat of Delaborde at the battle of Roliça and Junet at the battle of Vimeiro, Dalrymple and Kellerman signed the Convention of Cintra.  After the death of Sir John Moore, the British forces defeated Nicholas Soult at the battle of Porto under the command of Arthur Wellesley, who won the battle of Salamanca in July of 1812 and captured Madrid in August.  Wellesley then routed the French forces at the battle of Vitoria, which helped persuade Austria to declare war on Napoleon.  Caused by Napoleon placing his brother Joseph on the Spanish throne, FTP, name this war fought from 1808 to 1814 in the Iberian region.;;(the) Peninsular War|(the) Guerre d'Espagne|(the) Spanish War|(the) Guerra de la Indepencia|(the) Spanish War of Independence
Literature;;The story of a money-stealing bricklayer prompts the title character to explain one of her distinctive characteristics, and shortly thereafter the discovery of two beer bottles on a table elicits distress from another character. The main character's pet is killed in cold blood, leading her to become angry with a man with whom she recently had sex.  Christine heads off to church after refusing to accompany the main characters on their proposed trip to Lake Como, but not before the valet returns with a razor, which will later tempt his former lover to commit suicide.  FTP, name this work about a woman who makes men jump over horsewhips and begins an affair with Jean on Midsummer Eve, an 1888 play by August Strindberg.;;Miss Julie
World History;;This ruler forced his opponents to sign the Treaty of Vasvar after victory at St. Gotthard under his imperial commander Montecuccoli. On another front, he was forced to sign the less-than-favorable Treaty of Nijmegen nih-meh-jen. He married the Archduchess Claudia Felicitas after his marriage to Margaret Theresa, daughter of Philip IV of Spain, produced no children. His third marriage to Eleanora of Neuberg did produce his two successors, long after this son of Ferdinand III emerged victorious in the Battle of Senta and forced the signing of the Treaty of Karlowitz. Aided by Charles of Lorraine and Jan III Sobieski in opposing the Turkish siege of Vienna, FTP, name this Hapsburg Holy Roman Emperor who died in 1705 and was succeeded by his son, Joseph I.;;Leopold (I) (Hapsburg)
Earth Science;;These structural features are sometimes classified into two groups dependent on the presence of a strong positive or negative gravity anomaly. The second of these includes those that form from slow, stepwise subsidence, or the Masayan type, and those in which a vacuum is created by migration to adjacent chambers, the Atitlan type. All of the largest ones fall under the Valles classification, in which intrusion along arcuate faults creates a characteristic circular structure sometimes exposed by their erosion. That pattern, known as a ring dike, is typically offset by a concentric normal fault system, as rock slides inward to accommodate a sudden loss of supporting material. FTP, name this kind of depression resulting from the collapse of a volcano.;;caldera
Art;;It was completed at least partially under the financing of Louis XV of France, and sits at a junction spanned by the Via Condotti. Built to unite the Via del Babuino with the Via Felice, original designs for this structure were made by Alessandro Specchi. To the south sits the boat of Pietro Bernini's Barcaccia fountain and to the north is the Sallustian Obelisk. The obelisk sits in front of the Trinitá dei Monti cathedral, which appears in this construction's usual Italian designation, and the one-time contiguous residences of Keats and Shelley have now been replaced by museums. Ultimately completed by Francesco De Sanctis, the central Ripetta is flanked by a pair of convex paths that unite at the top. Named for an embassy to the Holy See and often lined with pink azaleas, FTP, name this picturesque structure in Rome consisting of 12 flights of stairs.;;Spanish Steps|Spanish Stairs
Literature;;One character in this work proudly shows some guests a "dummy bookshelf" which contains six volumes of "Wild Goose Chase, a Novel" and seven volumes of "Tales of Knockespotch". We learn that bathrooms were placed at the top of towers so that noble humans could perform the unpleasant task of shitting closer to heaven, according to the plan of Ferdinando Lapith. A character proposes that an ideal world would contain three groups of people known as the Directing Intelligences, the Men of Faith, and the Herd. Mr. Barbecue-Smith is a wacky author and the above-mentioned Mr. Scogan is a guest of Mr. and Mrs. Wimbush at the titular estate. FTP, name this novel about the ineffectual Denis Stone, a 1921 satire by Aldous Huxley.;;Crome Yellow
Noncomputational Math;;In order theory, this is a subset of a partially ordered set that is both lower and directed, and the dual notion is called a filter. Krull's theorem on these states that in a commutative unit ring, the height of every proper one generated by n elements is at most n. They were first proposed by Dedekind in Lectures on Number Theory to generalize the number of this type introduced by Kummer. The most general form of the Chinese Remainder Theorem concerns these when they are pairwise coprime, and they are the object in ring theory analogous to normal subgroups. In the ring of polynomials all of these are principal, which is to say generated by one element. FTP, name this mathematical object, defined in algebra as an additive subgroup of a ring that is stable under multiplication.;;ideal
United States History;;It was set in motion when Governor John Reynolds called for troops. The initial skirmish at Stillman's Run followed from discontent over the Treaty of Fort Crawford signed two years earlier, and the U.S. command was eventually given over to General Henry Atkinson. Figures on the other side who failed to provide much assistance include the so-called "Rock-prophet" White Cloud, the speckled chief Neopope, and the U.S.-friendly Keokuk, a rival to this conflict's namesake. FTP, name this war which ended with the Bad Axe Massacre, which was fought against a Sauk chieftain in 1832 and which saw a young Abraham Lincoln captain the Illinois militia.;;Black Hawk (War) (of) (1832)
Pop Culture;;Its story began in the aftermath of a shockwave known as the Pulse. The main character needs tryptophan to stave off seizures and strives to find Sandeman, who can allegedly read the prophetic Minoan runes. A climactic final scene sees Mole and the gang battle the Phalanx army of Thula and White before they hop on a hover drone and escape to Terminal City, where they raise the flag of the Freak Nation. The protagonist works at Jam Pony as a bike messenger where she argues with her boss Normal and joins up with Logan Cale, the last free voice in Seattle, after escaping Manticore with the other transhumans, but she can't get rid of the bar code on her neck. FTP, name this TV show about Max Guevara, which made a star out of Jessica Alba.;;Dark Angel
Geography;;Large portions of this country are traversed by the Adamawa Plateau, and the Maranda Mountains are located in its north. The Sanaga River flows west through Edéa into an estuary once known as the River of Prawns, and its namesake mountain is the highest in its part of Africa. Lake Lagdo in the north is the source of the Benué River which then flows to meet the Niger River, and in the far west of this country is the much-disputed Bakassi Peninsula. With its largest city of Douala on the Bight of Biafra, FTP, name this country sitting west of the Central African Republic and north of Equatorial Guinea and Gabon, whose  capital is Yaoundé.;;Cameroon
Religion/Mythology;;This god is referred to as Yang Chenmo in Tibetan traditions and is equated with the Shinto deity Benten. Girls wear besanti in celebration of this deity during the Vasant Panchami festival, and in Buddhist traditions she is the yidam consort of Manjushri. Sometimes considered the daughter of Shiva and Durga, one story about her says that her main consort grew four different faces in order to observe her dancing around him and then grew a face on top of his head when she floated over him, and she may have been replaced for a time by Gayatri. Depicted holding a veena or stringed instrument and riding Hamsa the swan or sometimes a peacock, FTP, name this Hindu goddess of music and writing who is a rival of Lakshmi and the main consort of Brahma.;;Sarasvati|Saraswati|Savitri|Vak Devi
Physics;;This quantity appears as a term many times in the FitzHugh-Nagumo equation, where it is governed by two parameters. The chord conductance equation expresses it as a weighted average, and it can be calculated by the Hodgkin-Huxley model assuming some initial state. It is more often calculated by the Goldman-Hodgkin-Katz Constant Field Equation, which applies to deviations from Nernstian conditions, under which this quantity would simply be defined as the gradient of one specific ion. The chlorine ion is a minor player in setting its value at rest, unlike sodium and potassium. Designated E-sub-m, FTP, name this quantity which may be defined as the charge difference between the cytoplasm and extracellular fluid.;;membrane potential|trans(-)membrane potential (difference)
Literature;;His tale of a murderous goldsmith entitled Cardillac inspired a 1926 Paul Hindemith work of the same name, and he also completed a two-volume autobiography of a cat. He wrote a seldom-performed opera called The Water Sprite, and one of his first works was the four-volume Fantasy Pieces in the Style of Callot. Thomas Carlyle translated his The Golden Pot, but he's better known for works like the opera Undine and the story The Serapion Brothers. FTP, name this author of The Devil's Elixir and The Life and Opinions of the Tom-Cat Murr, whose changed his third name to "Amadeus" to honor Mozart and whose namesake "tales" inspired Jacques Offenbach to compose an opera.;;(Ernst) (Theodor) (Amadeus) (Wilhelm) Hoffmann
World History;;This dynasty won a victory at the Battle of Polesella, some years after they had preserved their land holdings by the Peace of Bagnolo. One of the most powerful rulers of this line was Ercole I, who clashed with Pope Sixtus IV.  Nicolo I "the Lame" constructed their namesake castle with the help of architect Bartolino da Novara, while Ippolito II began construction of their namesake villa, though Alberto Azzo II is generally considered the founder of this line. Borso was endowed with the additional titles of Duke of Reggio and Modena by Frederick III, and Alfonso of this house is most famous for his marriage to Lucrezia Borgia.  FTP, name this line of princes who ruled over the Renaissance city of Ferrara.;;Este|(Estensi)
Biology;;Egg-laying in this organism is correlated with locomotion in a relationship apparently mediated by feedback from the HSN motorneurons to interneurons in the head. Its 302 neurons have been shown to form a small-world network, and fire no action potentials. In crowded environments it can enter the dauer larva form rather than the L3 form. The adult hermaphrodite has 959 somatic cells, all of which can be seen with a microscope. Brenner, Horvitz, and Sulston won the 2002 Nobel Prize in medicine for their studies of apoptosis in, FTP, this frequently studied nematode, the first multicellular organism to have its genome sequenced.;;C(aenorhabditis) elegans
Music;;This composer was the first winner of the Mendelssohn Prize and in 1858 moved to Leipzig to become a conductor. On his return to his native city, he wrote his "Irish" Symphony as well as an overture, In Memoriam, and an oratorio, The Prodigal Son. In 1872 he wrote what is now probably his single best-known tune, which is set to lyrics which feature a line about "marching as to war". The previous year, he had been commissioned to write a work whose score is now lost, called Thespis, or The Gods Grown Old, which was his first in a genre that he would continue with The Grand Duke and Utopia Limited. FTP, name this composer of the hymn "Onward, Christian Soldiers," as well as The Yeomen of the Guard, The Gondoliers, Iolanthe and H.M.S. Pinafore, all in collaboration with W.S. Gilbert.;;(Arthur) Sullivan
Miscellaneous;;In 1985 Vizri and Egeth created a translation mechanism model of it, ultimately determining that it has at least five distinct neural levels, among which are the symbolic, motor and executive. A variation of it is useful for testing the synaptic distance model. It has never been fully ascertained why women perform better than men, and it has been demonstrated that young people are better than older people. There are two major variations of it, which its discoverer called the RCN and NCW conditions. The discoverer first published his findings in a 1935 article called "Studies of Interference in Serial Verbal Reactions".  FTP, name this psychological effect which demonstrates interference in reaction time as people try to read words that do not correspond with the colors in which they are written.;;Stroop (Effect)|Stroop (task)
Religion/Mythology;;Prior to this event the so-called "Brigandage at Ephesus" saw Dioscorus of Alexandria force the reversal of Flavian's decision that Eutyches YOO-tuh-keez was a heretic, and Dioscorus did not allow representatives of Pope Leo to read his written opinion. That work was the basis of deliberations that began shortly after the death of Emperor Theodosius II and the accession of Marcian. It accepted as canonical both the Tome and the Two Letters of Cyril, the latter of which refuted the Nestorian heresy. The current orthodox doctrine that the Second Person of the Trinity has two natures was determined at, FTP, what council that took place in 451 near Constantinople and condemned the Monophysite heresy?;;(Council) (of) Chalcedon|Fourth Ecumenical (Council)
Astronomy;;Occlusion by this astronomical body of Saggitarius Tr-180 suggests that the rate of sublimation from its surface has doubled. That sublimation may have helped to create evaporite deposits such as the Akupara and Rem maculae, which cover a surface of beta-hexagonal ice surrounding the Plain of Abatus. Its changing albedo is believed to couple with gravitational diapirism to produce the cavi of its unique terrane of Bubeme. Perhaps the most interesting surface features occur in its equatorial region, which contains fault-block mountain ranges bounded by the Ho and Lo sulci, indicating a tectonic past, and the geyser plumes Hili and Mahilani, which contribute to its thin atmosphere. FTP, name this moon of Neptune best known for its cryovolcanic eruptions and its retrograde orbit.;;Triton
Literature;;At one point in this work a drunk soldier attempts to buy an organ-grinder's monkey, and a discussion of Ludie Freeman leads to the singing of spirituals in a dark kitchen. The protagonist becomes friends with Mary Littlejohn at the end, and she moves away with her father to live with her Aunt Pet and Uncle Eustace.  Janice Evans lives at Winter Hill and gains the affections of the protagonist's brother Jarvis, who is home from Alaska. Also including characters like T.T Williams and Honey Camden Brown, a key scene in this work involves a trip to the Blue Moon café. John Henry West is the protagonist's cousin and Berenice Sadie Brown is the black cook, but Frankie Adams is the title character of, FTP, this 1945 Carson McCullers work about a person at a nuptial proceeding.;;(The) Member of the Wedding
World History;;The father of this name was known for founding the Proculian school of thought in Roman jurisprudence, although he is more famous for starving himself to death in 33 AD, apparently out of disgust with the Emperor Tiberius. The son of this name wrote poetry which was admired by Nero, who therefore promoted him politically. When that man became emperor he faced a revolt started by Casperius Aelianus, who forced him to execute the murderers of his predecessor. This emperor then adopted the governor of Upper Germany as his son and upon this emperor's death a few months later, that governor succeeded him.  FTP, name this man who was placed on the throne in 96 after the assassination of Domitian and was very quickly followed by Trajan.;;(Marcus) (Cocceius) Nerva
Literature;;In collaboration with Ludwig Bauer, this man created the imaginary island of Orplid, and his affair with Maria Meyer inspired his cycle of Peregrina poems, both of which are included in a novella of his edited by his friend Julius Klaiber. He authored the poems "The Beautiful Beach," "The Forsaken Girl," and "On a Lamp" in addition to the above-mentioned novella Painter Nolten. His most famous poem begins "Leaning against the ivy-covered wall / of this old terrace, / You, an air-borne muse's / String-melody full of mystery," before commanding the titular instrument to play. The author of the 1856 novella Mozart on His Trip to Prague, FTP, name this man whose poems were set to music by Hugo Wolf, a rival and contemporary of Goethe who wrote the poem "To an Aeolian Harp".;;(Eduard) Mörike|(Eduard) Morike
World History;;The defending side at this battle knew the time of the initial offensive because of the capture of a sapper named Fermello. The other side's eventual attack was led by the army groups of Hoth HOTE and Modell MOH-duhl under the overall command of von Manstein, who later claimed he could have won if Hitler had allowed him to persist. The attacking forces, who referred to the battle as "Operation Citadel," had delayed the attack for two months while waiting for their new Elephant and Panther tanks to be ready, thus bringing the total tank force to nearly 3,000. Maloarkangelsk and Belgorod marked the ends of a salient that had developed after the German capture of Kharkov and which was the main operational area of, FTP, this largest tank battle of WWII, a massive German defeat in July 1943.;;(Battle) (of) Kursk
Music;;The figure of Music appears in the prologue to introduce the work. At the beginning of Act 5, the main character takes comfort from Echo in the fields of Thrace after Sylvia brings bad news. The "possente spirto" aria is an attempt to sway the will of Charon, and Apollo comes down from heaven at the end of Act 5 to take the title character away so that he can look upon his deceased forever in the stars. It has a libretto by Alessandro Striggio based on Ovid's Metamorphoses and Virgil's Georgics. FTP, name this 1607 pioneering opera about the love of the titular musician for Eurydice, a work by Monteverdi.;;Orfeo
United States History;;The two documents it quotes are an Elmo Conley-signed summary of a report done by Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher in conjunction with Price Waterhouse, and a letter from an unnamed 19-year-old wife of a marine offering a $10 check to be left uncashed.  It also calls out Stephen Mitchell, who is said to have remarked that only rich men should run for office, and accuses John Sparkman of having kept his wife on his payroll.  Composed in response to a controversy over an $18,000 campaign contribution, this September 23 address asserts the importance of fighting Communism, but most famously contains a quip about a gift an anonymous Texas supporter gave to the speaker's family.  FTP, identify this 1952 televised speech named for Senator Richard Nixon's mention of his black and white cocker spaniel.;;Checkers (Speech)
Earth Science;;Potassium rhodizonate is used to stain this substance in the Bailey-Stevens test, which distinguishes it from other optically similar minerals in metamorphic rocks. The optical boundary between this mineral and sanidine is set at a 2V-sub-x or 40 degrees, and its optical plane is perpendicular to the 010 face. The Stewart and Wright equation can be used to calculate the proportion of it by volume versus that of its sodium-containing counterpart. Intermediates between that counterpart, albite, and this mineral are known as microperthites, and frequently occur with it in syenite and granite deposits.  FTP, name this optically monoclinic potasium-containing alkali feldspar that takes its name from the Greek for "straight fracture".;;orthoclase
Literature;;One character in this work tries to use Dorcas Wykes' panic over a maid's accidental burning of a curtain as an opportunity for seduction in the infamous "fire scene," which Elizabeth Echlin used as the starting point in writing a lengthy alternative ending to this novel.  Echlin, like her sister Lady Bradshaigh, wrote distraught letters to the author about the fate of the protagonist, though Denis Diderot gushed "Who would not rather be the protagonist, despite all her misfortunes"? in an essay praising this work's author.  Through the course of the novel, the title character, engages in correspondence with Anna Howe as she is imprisoned in Mrs. Sinclair's brothel, nearly forced into an unwanted marriage with Roger Solmes, and raped by Robert Lovelace.  FTP, name this lengthy epistolary novel about the sufferings of a virtuous woman, a work by Samuel Richardson.;;Clarissa (Harlowe:) (Or) (the) (History) (of) (a) (Young) (Lady)
World History;;A grisly fate of one of this event's initial survivors is discussed in the exposé A State of Blood.  That book's author, Henry Kyemba, alleged that secret policemen abducted Dora Bloch from her hospital bed and executed her.  At a preceding stop in Benghazi, Michel Bacos and his staff turned down offers of release, though a single pregnant woman was allowed to leave.  A team of members of the Red Army Faction and the PFLP were responsible for the act that brought a mass of civilians to the eponymous location, where three out of 103 people died in a Mossad operation that saw the death of Yoni Netanyahu.  FTP, name this 1976 raid on a Palestinian-hijacked plane filled with Israeli nationals, which occurred at an airport in Uganda.;;Entebbe (Incident|Raid)|(Operation) Thunderball|(Operation) Thunderbolt
Art;;X-ray analysis reveals that this work once contained the image of a putto unrolling a scroll in front of the central figure.  Five years later the artist produced a second copy of it, which is held in the Dulwich Gallery.  A bulky necklace of pearls contrasts with a golden-brown dress and hangs over the chest of the title figure, who was also once depicted by Henry Briggs in a double portrait with Fanny Kemble.  A feminine figure with head bowed and dagger in hand on the left and a gaping-mouthed figure clutching a chalice on the right represent pity and terror; they stand behind the title character, who is perched upon a throne among dark clouds and rendered in the image of Melpomene mell-PAH-meh-nee.  FTP, name this Joshua Reynolds painting of an actress as one of the nine Greek goddesses of the arts.;;Sarah Siddons (as) (the) Tragic Muse
Religion/Mythology;;In a 1940 eschatological analysis of this, Martin Dibelius argued that its commands are impossible for man to follow because of the flawed nature of the earthly world.  Dietrich Bonhoeffer criticized the failure of church officials to adhere to it rather than merely interpret and analyze it in his discussion of it in The Cost of Discipleship.  Anabaptists based their ethical code on a literal following of it, opposing the accumulation of wealth because of its declaration that one "cannot serve God and Mammon". Nietzsche's Zarathustra parodies it by advocating the act of revenge in "On the Adder's Bite," which challenges its advice to "resist not evil" and "bless them that curse you".  Containing the full "Our Father" prayer and appearing in chapters 5 through 7 of Matthew, this is, FTP, what passage that begins with the Beatitudes, a speech Jesus delivered on a hillside?;;(the) Sermon on the Mount
Psychology;;His works like "Principles of Social Education for Deaf and Dumb Children" and "Problems of Mental Retardation" showed his concern for the education of the handicapped, whose difficulties he attributed to social barriers rather than clinical abnormalities.  The founder of a laboratory dedicated to the study of defectology, he used the controversial term "pedology" to describe his studies in childhood education.  He is often compared to Piaget because of his theory of cognitive development in children, which argues that the assistance of more experienced peers is crucial to the ability of children to learn concepts outside their limited range of understanding, a process he called "scaffolding". The author of Thought and Language, this is, FTP, what Byelorussian psychologist known for his concept of the zone of proximal development?;;(Lev) Vygotsky
Biology;;Developed from the lamina terminalis, this structure consists of the rostrum, an enlarged and posterior splenium, the body, the anterior genu, and the ventrally directed rostrum, forming a semicircle when bisected. It is absent in marsupials and monotremes, and in humans it contains about 300 million axons.  Its absence during development is responsible for Aicardi syndrome. Alien hand syndrome can result from a treatment of last resort in epilepsy which involves bisection of this structure, which also leads to inability to read words seen from the left eye. FTP, name this structure of the brain that connects the two hemispheres of the cerebrum.;;corpus callosum
Literature;;This work features a comparison between two people, one of whom is said to draw his characters "quite à la Fuseli" while the other uses a "colorless outline" like Flaxman.  Another figure discussed in this work is compared to "old what's-his-name there at the battle of Hastings" in his conduct of "metaphorical fights," and is praised for slaying the "tough old Goliath of sin" with "the smoothest of pebbles from Castaly's spring".  The author of this work describes himself as trying to climb a mountain with a "whole bale of isms," and plans to "rattle away till he's old as Methusalem".  Another section takes a shot at the New Timon, noting that Bulwer-Lytton "could ne'er reach the best point and vigor of Oliver Wendell Holmes," while other parts call Long Tom Coffin a ripoff of Natty Bumpo and allude to Barnaby Rudge when discussing "The Raven".  FTP, name this long poem in which authors such as Cooper, Longfellow, Emerson, and Poe are reviewed by James Russell Lowell.;;(A) Fable for Critics
World History;;The declaration that formally established this dynasty was made on Kulan Mountain.  The first Westerner to discover their ruins was Henri Mahout, though stories of the elegance of its capital had been told much earlier by a visiting Chinese emissary, Zhou Daguan.  Among the landmarks in its main capital were the temples Ta Prohm, the Baphuon, and Ta Keo, the first of which was made entirely from sandstone.  A complex at Roulos formed the original capital of this empire, which expanded through its conquest of the Mon Kingdom and eventually that of Champa, though it would later fall itself to the Ayutthaya ay-yut-THIGH-yuh.  Rajendravarman II, Suryavarman II, and the founder Jayavarman II were among the notable rulers of, FTP, what medieval empire of South Asia centered around Angkor in present-day Cambodia?;;Khmer (Empire)
Literature;;In this novel, the psychologically abusive union of Valerie and the lustful and controlling businessman Ferral forms the only major non-interracial couple.  One of the other unions is dissolved by the murder of the wife and child of the German shopkeeper Hemmelrich, and the other is strained when May follows through with her interest in "free love" to cheat on her half-Japanese husband.  A gruesome fate awaits the radical Katov, who is burned to death in a boiler, though Baron de Clappique is one character who manages to escape alive.  The opium addicted Old Gisors is the father of one of the main protagonists, Kyo, who, like the assassin Chen, dies at the end as result of his involvement in the central revolt.  FTP, an unsuccessful Communist uprising in China forms the backdrop of what novel by André Malraux?;;(La) Condition Humaine|Man's Fate|(The) Human Condition
United States History;;This man saw his downfall delayed when the frigate Archangel ran aground in Bermuda, thus postponing the arrival of the man who would replace him.  In the meantime, Major Richard Ingoldsby was sent to make him hand over the former Fort James and surrender his position to Henry Sloughter.  The major accomplishment of his two-year-long regime was calling for an attack on Quebec in the first independent congress of the North American colonies.  Driving Francis Nicholson out of power by riding a wave of civil unrest that came as a reaction to news of the Glorious Revolution, he was himself deposed and hanged for treason in 1691.  FTP, name this German merchant who briefly became governor of New York after leading his eponymous rebellion.;;(Jacob) Leisler
Literature;;In this work's final scene the title character, whose praises are sung by a ward whose name means "bread eater," is faced with the threat of having his testicles lopped off and used for necklace beads by the cook Cario.  A ring given to the title character by the handmaid Milphidippa sets up the plot that brings about the title character's humiliation, in which he falls for the feigned adulterous advances of the prostitute Acroteleutium, who pretends to be the wife of the elderly Periplectomenus.  That scheme, as well as one involving the construction of a fictitious twin to facilitate the romance between Philocomasium and Pleusicles, is executed by the title character's clever slave, Palaestrio.  FTP, name this play about Pyrgopolynices, through which Plautus created the stock character of a boastful military man.;;Miles Gloriosus|(The) Braggart Soldier|(The) Swaggering Solider
Music;;The composer's original score called for a five minute pause before the performance of the landler in A Flat major that constitutes its andante moderato second movement.  Its third movement consists of a scherzo with a tempo direction that asks for "quietly flowing motion," and returns this symphony to its key of three flats.  In the fourth movement, an alto singer is introduced to imitate the singing of a child for the spiritual song, "Urlicht," which along with "St. Anthony of Padua's Sermon to the Fishes" comprises the selection of Wunderhorn songs adapted for this symphony, whose completion was inspired by the funeral of Hans von Bulow.  FTP, name this Friedrich Klopstock-influenced symphony of Gustav Mahler, nicknamed for its theme of revival after death.;;Resurrection (Symphony)|(Gustav) Mahler('s) (Symphony) (No.) 2 (in) (C) (Minor)
Chemistry;;The Powder method is used to determine the magnitude of the unit vectors, and assumes a sample of smaller, randomly-oriented targets. Since the work of Perutz and Kendrew in 1958, it has become the most productive means of analyzing protein structure. This was first applied to myoglobin. The back-reflection and transmission Laue methods are two forms of this kind of analysis, relying on white light and a stationary target. It is useful because small-wavelength radiation must be used to successfully analyze molecules but such high-frequency light cannot be lensed; instead, this process analyzes a large number of similar repeating structures.  FTP, identify this technique used to study the structure of crystal lattices, which fell out of the discovery of Bragg's law.;;X(-)ray diffraction|X(-)ray crystallography
Literature;;This man's "The Crocodile and the Monkey" is one of the ten verse tales that comprises his book of fables, Beastly Tales from Here and There; two of the tales are set in his make-believe world of Gup.  The following year, he released a translation of assorted poems by Li Bai, Wang Wei, and Tu Fu.  Most recently the author of Two Lives, he once wrote a libretto based on the story of Arion and the dolphin before taking five years to complete a novel about the attempted revival of a love affair between pianist Julia McNicholl and violinist Michael Holme, entitled An Equal Music.  He also had success with his poetry collection Mappings and his verse novel set in San Francisco, The Golden Gate, but is best known for a very long novel about Lata's search for the right husband.  FTP, name this Indian-born author of A Suitable Boy.;;(Vikram) Seth
Religion/Mythology;;Pausanias claimed that after this figure's death his spirit repelled a Gallic invasion of Celaenae, a town near which his corpse was placed on display.  Also accredited with creating the "Song of the Mother," this son of Hyagnis and Oeagrus became the companion of a savage earth goddess whom he followed to Nysa, the site of the event that resulted in his death and the affixing of his remains to a pine tree.  Though a skilled user of the aulos, he was unable to have similar success on it when he turned it upside down, leading to his death as the loser of a fatal contest.  King Minos was given ass's ears for ruling in favor of, FTP, what satyr who failed to defeat Apollo in a musical competition and was flayed alive as a result?;;Marsyas
Geography;;In December 1888 an expedition on this island charting a tributary of the Mica Burn next to Leaning Peak was lost.  Afterward, the river was known as Disaster River, since Professor Brown, who set out from a tarn fed by the Spey River, was never seen again. Lake Manapouri is smaller but deeper than this island's largest lake, Te Anau, and lies in the fiordland in the southwest, a region separated from the Dunedin and the Canterbury Plains in the East by a mountain range containing Mount Aoraki, also referred to by the same name as the strait opposite Foveaux strait, which separates it from Stewart Island.  FTP, name this island that is home to Christchurch and is separated from a smaller and equally unimaginatively named island by the Cook Strait.;;South (Island)|Te Wai Pounamu
Religion/Mythology;;Conrad Martin of Paderborn was charged with revising its constitution, whose first draft was largely the work of Johann Franzelin.  Cardinal Gibbons was the youngest member of the delegation, which in the third of its four sessions produced the canons "On God the Creator of All Things," "On Revelation," "On Faith," and "On Faith and Reason," comprising the Dogmatic Constitution of the Catholic Faith.  This council had its roots in the publication of the Syllabus of Errors five years earlier and sought to address the issue of rationalism.  Called forth in the bull Aeterni Patris and discussing the "teaching authority of the Roman pontiff" in its final session, it was cut short by the outbreak of the Franco-Prussian War.  FTP, name this council held in 1869 and 1870, in which Pius IX asserted the doctrine of papal infallibility.;;First Vatican (Council)|Vatican I
Physics;;Tilden measured it for elemental metals, and the labs of Atake, Hohen, and Olsen have all made recent measurements for fullerenes.  A 1907 paper by Drude disagrees with the ion rule devised by Neumann and Kopp, and described the phenomenon in terms of three quantum oscillators.  Joseph Black noted that it was roughly proportional to mass, although the effect of phonons is more pronounced around the Debye temperature, making the theory that the atoms of all simple bodies share the same value of this quantity less applicable.  It is measured in SI units of joules per kilogram Kelvin, though its measurement in calories per gram degree Celsius is also common.  FTP, name this property of a material that quantifies the amount of heat required to raise the temperature of a substance one degree compared to water.;;specific heat (capacity)
Religion/Mythology;;He once saved the day on a doomed hunting trip to Keshcorran by killing two witches that had captured his allies and forcing the third one, Irnan, to free them.  After his death, his prized possession was buried at Slieve Baune, and his grandson Fer Li would later die in a failed attempt to avenge him.  The aforementioned possession was named Solustairtech, and was a giant chessboard fashioned out of gold and silver.  It was at the battle of Cnucha where he had his eye put out with a spear and lost his birth name, Aed, and this event also brought about the duel in which was he was killed by his ally and rival in retaliation for killing that ally's father, Cumhail.  FTP, name this giant warrior and member of the Fianna, who was eventually slain by Finn MacCool.;;Goll (mac) (Morna)
World History;;The first of the kings of a certain nation to bear this name gained the throne a year after his predecessor's parliament-empowering decree of "Nihil Novi," and rewarded a loyalty oath from Albert of Brandenburg by making him the first Duke of Prussia.  That man's son, the second holder of this name, was succeeded in death by the election of Henry of Valois and bore the nickname Augustus.  That man's grandson, the third holder of the name, was defeated at Stangebro in 1598, costing him the Swedish throne.  This is also the name of a single Holy Roman Emperor, whose forces were routed at the Battle of Nicopolis during his tenure as the King of Hungary and who helped organize the Council of Constance.  FTP, give this name held by three Polish kings, the last of whom invaded Russia during the Time of Troubles.;;Sigismund|Zygmunt
Art;;In this work, an image of a government document appearing to be surrounded by snakes as it passes over the mosaic of a Medusa head on the floor foreshadows a more dramatic mythological allusion in which images of Shiva, Buddha, and an Eskimo statue are compared with a Baroque icon of Christ to show the homogeneity of religion.  It opens with the toppling of a monarch's statue in front of the Church of Christ the Savior by a mass of soldiers and peasants to depict the events of February, and uses revolutionaries' historical allusions to Napoleon to project imperial ambitions onto General Lavr Kornilov.  Taking its distributor-given subtitle after a John Reed history of the proletariat overthrow of the Kerensky government, this is, FTP, what Leninist propaganda film by Sergei Eisenstein about a month with "Ten Days that Shook the World"?;;October(:) (Ten) (Days) (that) (Shook) (the) (World)
World History;;The Vietnamese version of it was spearheaded by the editor of Giai Pham Mua Xuan, Phan Khoi.  The better-known version featured a symposium at which an engineer complained about 600,000 plows which were unusable in damp soil.  It was inspired by a speech "On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People," though its leader later modified that speech and proclaimed that the intelligentsia had gone too far, sparking the Anti-Rightist campaign.  With a name taken from a slogan which includes a phrase about letting "schools of thought contend," FTP, name this campaign which granted non-Party members freedom of speech and the right to criticize Mao's government in 1956.;;Hundred Flowers (Campaign)|(the) Double Hundred (Campaign)
Biology;;According to a 2001 Science magazine report this molecule, which is bound to the protein apolipoprotein E, is the synapse-promoting signal released by the glial cells. In their 1985 Nobel lecture, Brown and Goldstein discussed a receptor-mediated pathway for the homeostasis of this bio-molecule. This molecule also decreases the rigidity of cellular membranes, especially at low temperatures.  It is the common precursor of steroid hormones, and also forms crystals in gout and in gallstones with bile salts and phospholipids. Importantly, apolipoprotein E, phospholipids, and free forms of this molecule have been  shown to bind low density lipoproteins, or LDL. FTP, name this lipid which is often associated with atherosclerosis.;;cholesterol
Literature;;The preface to this work notes that Augustus Caesar began a play about Ajax and that Gregory Nazianzen wrote a play called Christ Suffering, and further points out that Saint Paul inserted a verse of Euripides into one of his epistles.  One group of characters in this work consists of "friends and neighbors" of the title character who come from "Eshtaol and Zora's fruitful vale" to visit him.  That same group speaks the final lines of this work, which note that the servants of God come away from the "great event" of this work in a state of "calm of mind all passion spent".  A character named Harapha berates the weak title character, the son of Manoa, who dies after the pillars of Dagon's temple come down.  FTP, name this drama about a powerful Danite who was tricked by Delilah, the last major work by John Milton.;;Samson Agonistes
World History;;The retreating side tried concentrating its central forces in superior positions on hills around Pozzolengo and Guidizollo.  One of the early advances was stifled by mulberry trees and grapevines, and a force under d'Hilliers advanced slightly past Castiglione before noticing the opposing army.  Nine hours of fighting along a 15-mile front ensued, and after the battle the Peace of Villafranca was signed.  Fought near an Italian village in 1859, FTP, name this victory for a French and Sardinian army which was witnessed by Jean-Henri Dunant, who was inspired by it to help found the Red Cross.;;(Battle) (of) Solferino|Battle of the Three Emperors
Religion/Mythology;;The Pontianak, a female vampire in Malay legend, performs this act upon itself in order to feed upon its victims.  It happened to Jamadagni in revenge for the killing of Kaartaveerya by Jamadagni's son Parasurama.  A giant named Chrysaor was born after this happened to a monster in Greek myth.  It happened to a god who had been sent as a hostage with the speech-impaired Hoenir, and it also happened to a god of wisdom after his uncle Sani looked at him.  FTP, name this misfortune which befell Medusa and Mimir, as well as Ganesha and Maximilien Robespierre.;;beheading|decapitation
Religion/Mythology;;In the 11th chapter of this man's book, a question is posed about how a group of people can be made like Admah or treated like Zeboiim.  The next chapter of his book notes that bulls are being sacrificed in Gilgal and that there is iniquity in Gilead, and pleads for repentance before predicting destruction because people "are kissing calves".  In the 3rd chapter, we learn that God loves his people even though they eat "raisin cakes," and the title figure buys another human being for 15 silver sheleks and a "homer of barley".  The title figure's children include Lo-ruhamah, Lo-ammi, and Jezreel, whose name referred to God's desire to punish the house of Jehu.  Those children were born to this man by a daughter of Diblaim whom he was instructed by God to marry as a "wife of whoredom".  FTP, name this minor prophet who got down with a prostitute named Gomer.;;Hosea
Earth Science;;When calculating this value in situ at conditions other than standard temperature and pressure, it may be helpful to use one of several Lewis-Perkin equations, since these give corrections to the K-sub-fifteen ratio for which it is defined.  Anchialine caves may become stratified with respect to this value, which may create euxinic conditions when combined with anoxia.  At equilibrium, isopycnal diagrams may be generated by equalizing this value with temperature.  Excessive warming and confinement cause it to rise locally, resulting in dense thermohaline currents such as the North Atlantic Deep Current, and this value climaxes at the center of mid-ocean gyres.  FTP, name this oceanographic parameter measured relative to a potassium chloride standard according to electrical conductivity, the measure of the dissolved constituents in water.;;salinity
Literature;;It features a woman named Mrs. Johnson who is an expert at funerals, and who indicates that for $200 Mrs. Holsepp will bury one of the characters in this work. To raise the money, the dead man's  daughter decides to work at Mrs. Jennings' hoity-toity whorehouse. The tenants of the San Berdoo Apartments come to the funeral, as does the Gingo family, a group of Eskimos that came from Alaska to be in a film and never left.  Miguel fights with Earle at the end of the novel for sleeping with Faye Greener, the house-mate of hapless Iowan Homer Simpson.  FTP, name this novel whose ending features a riot at a movie premiere which almost claims the life of Tod Hackett, a work by Nathanael West.;;(The) Day of the Locust
Art;;One version of this work features a group of people in the upper left carrying banners with such phrases as "It is glad tiding of great joy" and "Good will to all men everywhere".  Influenced by an Edward Westall illustration that commonly appeared in American Bibles, Virginia's Natural Bridge can be seen in earlier versions, while a take on Benjamin West's Penn's Treaty with the Indians can be seen in the left background. Originally painted to provide support for the artist's Quaker preaching, common figures in the foreground include various children leading a tranquil menagerie including a lion, a lamb, and a leopard.  Chapter 11 of Isaiah served as the inspiration of, FTP, what series of paintings depicting the United States as an Edenic paradise which were created by Edward Hicks?;;(The) Peaceable Kingdom
Pop Culture;;She appeared as Cassidy on a short-running program about a Wilderness Outfitters company in Oregon, McKenna.  Earlier she appeared as Bernadette Moody in Shaky Ground and as Franny in Byrds of Paradise, which went off the air shortly before her second album, Let's Go Bang, hit the stores.  A young Jennifer Garner played Romy in a spin-off in which she starred, Time of Your Life.  Though she appeared as Nancy Sinatra in two episodes of American Dreams, she has recently played more bookish roles on screen, including the veterinarian Liz in Garfield.  Perhaps better remembered for her starring role in Can't Hardly Wait, FTP, name this star of Ghost Whisperer, who also starred as Julie James in I Know What You Did Last Summer and as Sarah Reeves on Party of Five.;;(Jennifer) (Love) Hewitt
Literature;;A pivotal scene in this work features a banquet at which two fighters named Celefon and Kalixtes have a duel, after which Venus makes a speech about love as part of an allegory to celebrate a peace treaty with the house of Montanza.  That banquet ends with a number of people being poisoned, including a man known as il Toro.  The title character admires an artist named Bernardo, but hates such people as the Princess Teodora, whom he flogs to death, and the young Angelica, who loves Giovanni.  He also hates Don Riccardo, whom he murders, and mocks the Prince whom he serves.  FTP, name this 1944 novel by the author of The Sybil, a work about a diminutive misanthrope written by Par Lagerkvist.;;(The) Dwarf|Dvärgen|Dvargen
United States History;;Georgia gave him a plantation for negotiating with the Creek and Cherokee at the end of the American Revolution.  He was elected to the House in 1789 after defeating James Jackson, but he became the first representative to be thrown out after election anomalies were discovered.  During the Revolution he led the army which captured the garrison at Stony Point and led the advance attack on Monmouth, but he was shamed after making a tactical error which resulted in the Paoli massacre.  Known for his exploits on the Maumee River, FTP, name this general who negotiated the Treaty of Greenville after winning a decisive 1794 battle against several Native American tribes at the Battle of Fallen Timbers.;;(Mad) (Anthony) Wayne
Music;;Two pianos and six percussionists are featured in one section of its third part, which opens with a chorus of boys who sing that Cupid is flying everywhere.  The following section of this work features three glockenspiels and is known as "Blanziflor and Helena".  Earlier sections include "On the Lawn," which features the German "Reie" dance, and "In Springtime".  Originally staged in 1937 by the Frankfurt Opera, it begins and ends with a section about the "Imperatrix Mundi".  FTP, name this orchestral work notable for its blaring "O Fortuna" section, which was based on a medieval manuscript and written by Carl Orff.;;Carmina Burana
Chemistry;;The Johnson-Corey Chaykovsky reaction produces them from carbonyl compounds through the action of a sulfonium ylide. They may also be synthesized by treating a halohydrin with a suitable base, which will catalyze a ring-closing SN2-style reaction similar to Williamson synthesis.  Allylic alcohols can be treated with t-butylperoxide and titanium tetraisopropylate to produce them stereoselectively, a reaction that won a 2001 Nobel Prize for its discoverer, Barry Sharpless.  Also the end result of the Prilezhaev prih-leh-ZHEY-ev reaction, they are produced by treating an alkene with a peroxyacid in a process also known as the "Butterfly Mechanism," and are highly reactive, in part due to their approximately 60-degree bond angles. FTP, name these compounds, cyclic ethers whose rings contain only three atoms.;;epoxide(s)
Literature;;One character in this work, Maria, constantly takes notes on the corners of her pamphlets. After arriving at the place where this work takes place, one character dreams that his left leg belongs to someone else, and when he wakes up it hurts him, possibly because of rheumatism. Telegin plays the guitar at the behest of the doctor during a thunderstorm, but Ephim's music later annoys a character whose wife, Yelena, asks the workman to stop. Yelena is told by her step-daughter of her love for the doctor, who manages to kiss Yelena while showing her his portfolio. Unfortunately, the title character also loves Yelena, and out of anger at her husband, Professor Serebryakov, tries to shoot him.  FTP name this play by Anton Chekhov whose title refers to Sonya's label for Ivan Voynitsky.;;Uncle Vanya|Dyadya Vanya
Geography;;An island two kilometers in circumference known as "The Island of the Gods" lies in the middle of this lake, and provides one of its "Eight Great Views".  Though it receives nearly 500 streams, many areas such as Akanoi Bay, one of its most polluted sections, suffer from poor water circulation.  Located near the Hira, Ibuki, and Suzuki mountains, its only natural outlet is the Seta River, and it is still considered clean enough for drinking water.  FTP, name this lake which is connected by canals to Kyoto and which is found in Shiga prefecture, Japan's largest freshwater lake.;;(Lake) Biwa(-ko)
Psychology;;A "conceptual analysis" of this was the subject of a 1958 book by Alasdair Macintyre, who argues that a well-known modern interpretation of it is confusingly used both as a descriptive and an evaluative idea.  The "philosophy" of this concept was the subject of an 1869 book by a thinker who posited that this thing governed the universe and consisted of three components, the "absolute," "physiological," and "relative".  Henri Ellenberger wrote a book about the "discovery" of this concept by psychologists, one of whom, Jacques Lacan, notoriously claimed that it is structured like a language.  FTP, name this subject of a work by Eduard von Hartmann, whose "collective" variety was theorized by Carl Jung.;;(the) unconscious
World History;;It featured correspondence which was translated into English and encrypted by the secretary Gilbert Curle.  Messages were transmitted through a local brewer, with the first coming from the Baron of Chateauneuf.  The initial correspondence had been described to the Baron by a double agent using the alias Coledrin, but the most damning evidence, including plans for a hundred people to rise up in Chartley, was deciphered by Thomas Phelippes, who reported it to Francis Walsingham.  Chidiock Tidbourne, John Ballard, and John Savage were all executed for their roles in, FTP, what plot to kill Queen Elizabeth I, in which Mary, Queen of Scots was also implicated and for which she was sentenced to death?;;Babington (plot)
Literature;;Poet John Greening wrote a group of these known as the "Huntingdonshire" ones, while Conrad Aiken published a group known as "Brownstone" in 1942.  Six "town" ones were written by Mary Wortley Montagu, while a group of "piscatory" ones were written by Phineas Fletcher.  The most famous group of these inspired Jan Novak's 1969 composition Mimus Magicus, and ends with a poem about a man who was in love with Cythoris, who is called "Lycoris" in the poem.  Another of those poems is known as the "Pharmaceutria," while the most notorious of them celebrates the birthday of Salonius, the son of Gaius Asinius Pollio.  FTP, name this group of ten pastoral poems written by Virgil.;;Eclogues|Bucolics
Physics;;An LBL experiment found that lanthanum iron oxide, which exhibits this property, has corresponding domains matching the size and orientation of its crystals.  Film which exhibits it is leveraged in exchange anisotropies to pin the states of readback heads of hard disks.  Manganese oxide is an example of a material that exhibits it. In general this phenomenon occurs only at low temperatures, where the materials have no response to an applied magnetic field. They normally become paramagnetic at temperatures above the Neel point.  FTP, name this phenomenon in which neighboring electron spins point in opposite directions.;;antiferromagnetism
Philosophy;;A contemporary variant serves as the basis of the theories of mereology and protothetics as proposed by Stanislaw Lesniewski.  Languages and Art: An Approach to a Theory of Symbols also takes this perspective, arguing that predicates apply out of either practice or precept.  Its early proponents included Roscelin, who argued that the trinity could not be understood as a single entity, and William of Ockham was considered its originator.  FTP, name this philosophical doctrine which holds that universals have no reality outside of their existence in the human mind.;;nominalism
Noncomputational Math;;In statistics, a restriction method which uses these objects minimizes a residual sum of squares which assesses a penalty for a function's curvature.  When using the "periodic" type, the values of a function and its first two derivatives are forced to be equal at its endpoints, while using the more common "natural" type requires that the second derivative at the endpoints be zero.  It is named in part for a strip of wood with fixed points used by draftsmen.  FTP, name this type of curve-fitting technique commonly used to render smooth 3-D graphics, in which functions are approximated using piecewise third-degree polynomials.;;cubic spline (interpolation)
Geography;;Volcanic activity approximately half a million years ago formed its Masek beds.  At FLK North, elephant bones are scattered with cut marks from surrounding stone tools while bones of giraffes, antelopes, and hippoes are arranged circularly, renewing the question of early hunting methods.  At the lowest point, the Naisiusiu bed, a complete skeleton of Homo sapiens can be found.  Sharing its name with the unflaked pebble technology of the Basal Paleolithic period which was found there, FTP, name this site at which Mary Leakey discovered the two-million-year old Zinjanthropus, a part of the Great Rift Valley in Tanzania.;;Olduvai (Gorge)
World History;;One of the bloodiest battles in this nation's history occurred at Hauganes, and ended with the execution of Brandur.  The greatest and in fact only naval battle in this nation's history took place two years earlier, and was known as "the Bay Battle". The civil war in which those battles were fought also included a battle in which Gissur the White and Kolbeinn the Young proved victorious in 1238.  That period of conflict is known as the Age of the Sturlungs, which came to a conclusion with the signing of a so-called "Old Covenant" that put an end to this country's commonwealth, which had been founded in 930.  FTP, name this island nation whose current republic was established in 1944 after it achieved independence from Denmark, which is governed by the Althing.;;Iceland
Literature;;In the third section, the title character of this work notes that he is only 42 and wishes that he had a Ruch tailcoat.  In the next section, he goes to a theater where the fool Filatka is appearing and notes that authors write very funny plays nowadays.  He has several conversations with Medji, who has been writing letters to Fidèle, and later astonishes Mavra by revealing that he is the king of Spain.  It begins on the morning of October 3, while the last entry is cryptically dated to February 34, in the year 349.  FTP, name this story about a clerk named Poprishchin which appeared with Nevsky Prospect in Arabesques, a collection by Nikolai Gogol.;;Diary of a Madman|Zapiski sumashedskogo
Psychology;;This man's work is discussed in a 1969 book by Alfred Marrow, which refers to him as a "practical theorist".  He wrote one of Dan Passner's favorite essays, 1941's "Self-Hatred Among Jews," while he collaborated with his best-known student on the essay "Level of Aspiration".  The concepts of "unfreezing" and "cognitive aids" play a major role in his theory of the "T-group".  More famously, a spiral of steps enables people to find the most effective form of social engagement in his so-called "action research".  FTP, name this student of Carl Stumpf and teacher of Leon Festinger who wrote A Dynamic Theory of Personality and Frontiers in Group Dynamics, a German who is considered the founder of modern social psychology.;;(Kurt) Lewin
Physics;;The effect of lateral confinement on this quantity on the holes in gallium arsenide semiconductors was reported in 2006. In 1925, it was while working as an assistant to its German-American namesake that Ralph Kronig hypothesized spin. For a given amount of total angular momentum, it may be quantified as the energy change divided by the product of magnetic quantum number, nuclear magneton, and nuclear magnetic field. It is equal to approximately 2, 2/3, and 4/3 for the D-lines of sodium. For the electron, it is approximately 2 and is one of the most precisely-measured quantities in physics. FTP, what is this dimensionless unit, the ratio of the magnetic dipole moment to the angular momentum, which is a quantification of the interactions that generate the Zeeman Effect?;;Lande g(-Factor)|gyromagnetic ratio
World History;;He rose in favor after refusing to join Santiago Mariño's challenge to another leader's power.  A year after he won a major victory at Tarqui, he was murdered in the Berruecos Mountains, possibly at the behest of José Maria Obando.  After being defeated at the second battle of Huachi, he won a victory over the army of Melchor Aymerich which allowed him to put down resistance in the Pasto province.  The year before that victory at Pichincha, he became chief of staff to the army, and he went on to win success at Junin who-NEEN and Ayacucho, which led to the establishment of a new nation.  FTP, name this first president of Bolivia, after whom a South American capital city is named.;;(Antonio) (Jos(é|e){1}?) (de) Sucre
Miscellaneous;;The "presuppositions" of a "critical" form of this concept were the subject of the first published work by F. H. Bradley.  Wilhelm Dilthey dill-TIE wanted to write a critique of this form of reason, but never got around to it.  Benedetto Croce CROW-chay wrote an important essay on this "subsumed under the concept of art," and later wrote a book on it "as the story of liberty".  The "influence of Christianity" on it and various "scientific" forms of it are discussed in a book on the "idea" of it by R. G. Collingwood.  More famously, the philosophy of it is discussed in a work which introduces the dubious concept of the "cunning of reason".  FTP, name this concept which was paired with "class consciousness" in a book by Gyorgy Lukacs loo-KAZH, the "philosophy" of which is the subject of a famous set of lectures by Hegel.;;history|historical
Literature;;The best known work of this author was attacked by Germaine Greer for misrepresenting the city in which she had spent four months teaching upper-class women. This author responded by satirizing Greer in a work featuring an ailing former English professor who is cared for by his daughter, Roxana. The short story "Squatter," which centers on an emigrant who is unable to evacuate his bowels on a foreign country's toilet, was included in his first collection, Tales from Firozsha Baag. This author of a novel about Gustad Noble, Such a Long Journey, is better known for a work set during the state of emergency declared by Indira Gandhi in 1975. FTP, name this author of the recent Family Matters, a Canadian who was born in India and who also wrote the novel A Fine Balance.;;(Rohinton) Mistry
Biology;;Garrett Hardin has suggested that the economic variety of this variable must be the basis for demographic accounting. The modified Dewar equation defines it for density-dependent variables, but does not give a method for calculating those variables independently. First used in describing range surveys of the Kaibab Plateau, its land-based version accesses the health of training areas. The Lotka-Volterra model extends it to generations between competing species. Biomass is the critical factor for this quantity in forests, which is why redwood groves are often given as the extreme example of natural selection by it. Appearing in the numerator and denominator of the Verhulst modified equation, it appears as K in simple logistic models for population growth. FTP, name this ecological quantity, the measure of a habitat's ability to support populations.;;carrying capacity
World History;;He was almost killed in 2004 when a rocket was launched at his helicopter when he took a trip to open a school in Gardez.  After that near-death experience, he left much of his campaign for re-election to his running mates, Karim Khalili and Ahmed Zia Massoud.  Two years earlier, he had almost been killed by a gunman while visiting Governor Gul Agha Sherzai.  This man is a member of the Popalzay clan, which is part of the Pashtun people.  In 2002, he was appointed the interim holder of the position he now holds electively, and which was previously held by Burhanuddin Rabbani before the latter was forced out of office in 1996 when the Taliban took over his country.  FTP, name this man who is now president of Afghanistan.;;(Hamid) Karzai
Literature;;The "Conclusion" to this work features a wedding held at the Rainbow, which is looked in upon by such guests as Mr. Osgood and Mr. Crackenthorp.  In the previous chapter, the title character takes a journey to Lantern Yard to look up his old minister, Mr. Paston, but he only finds Prison Street.  When we first see the title character, he's working in his cottage near the edge of a deserted stone-pit.  He moved to a small village after being framed by William Dane, but his life gets better when he starts caring for the daughter of a barmaid named Molly.  FTP, name this work which features Godfrey Cass, his daughter Eppie, and the titular weaver of Raveloe, a short novel by George Eliot.;;Silas Marner
Art;;The 1911 study for this work included a table with a vase near the window, which was not included in the finished product. That product was painted at a studio in La Ruche where the artist lived in communal squalor with Soutine, Léger, and others. The top of the work is dominated by shades of red which contrast with the planked floor of the room depicted. At the top right a simple farm house is depicted in a bubble on the wall; in the top left a window is opened to a view of the Eiffel Tower. In the center a tuxedo-clad artist is depicted as he works on a canvas features a floating woman in a white dress trying to milk a cow. FTP, name this anatomically suspect painting in which Marc Chagall depicts himself.;;Self Portrait with Seven Fingers
World History;;One ruler of this name fought a war which was settled at Margut-sur-Chiers when he made peace with Otto II.  One Holy Roman Emperor of this name rose to power after winning the battle of Welfesholz, and fought a war against Roger II of Sicily with the help of his son-in-law Henry the Proud of Bavaria. An earlier ruler of this name was decisively defeated at the battle of Fontenay, after which he agreed to a treaty which granted Aquitaine to Pepin II while giving the eastern and western portions of an empire to this man's two brothers.  FTP, give the name shared by a man who laid claim to the Holy Roman Empire on the death of his father Louis the Pious in 840, but decided to share with Louis the German and Charles the Bald at the Treaty of Verdun.;;Lothair
Literature;;At the beginning of this work, a group of men including Jetter and Soest have a shooting competition with crossbows.  In the last scene, Silva reads the title character's death sentence, after which that title character inquires about the fate of his secretary Richard and his attendant Adolphus before asking Ferdinand to leave him.  At the conclusion an apparition of Freedom, in the form of a woman named Clara who had committed suicide, shows up to bestow a wreath on the title character, who is to die even though he's a member of the Knights of the Golden Fleece.  The title character became a national hero following victories at Saint-Quentin and Gravelines grah-veh-leen, but was killed along with Count Horn by the despotic Duke of Alva.  FTP, name this play by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe to which Beethoven wrote a notable overture.;;Egmont
Geography;;The Kaministiquia, Nipigon, Pigeon, and Pic rivers flow into this body of water, on whose shores are Pukaskwa National Park and Pictured Rocks National Lakeshore.  It contains a large island which is home to Mount Desor, and which is close to a peninsula whose northern end is known as Copper Island.  The islands of Michipicoten and Madeline lie within it, the latter being the largest of the Apostle Islands.  It contains the Keewenaw and Whitefish bays, and is drained by the St. Mary's River to Lake Huron.  FTP, name this body of water which is one of the largest freshwater lakes in the world, and which is the largest of the Great Lakes.;;(Lake) Superior
Noncomputational Math;;In 1799 an Italian built upon the work of Joseph Lagrange and used permutation groups to approach this mathematical result. Despite this one can achieve good numerical results, for instance with Newton-Raphson methods. It shows that an analog of Cardano's formula cannot exist in some cases. In 1824, it was shown that a certain group did not have a composition series with Abelian quotients, and hence was not solvable. The group of interest is called a Galois group. FTP, name this algebraic result proved by Niels Abel which demonstrates the inability to generalize the exact forms of solutions for polynomials above a certain degree.;;insolvability of the quintic|Abel-Ruffini theorem;;quintic|factoring (the) quintic|quintic factoring
Literature;;There are no known copies of this man's Latin comedy Philologia.  This man's prose works include an attack on "a man of high rank with no knowledge or virtue" and the essay "On His Own Ignorance and That of Many Others," which are among his four Invectives.  His more uplifting works include a set of three imaginary dialogues with Saint Augustine, On Contempt for the Worldly Life, and the autobiographical Letter to Posterity.  More famously, he wrote the biographies collected in On Illustrious Men and the poetry collection Triumphs, not to mention an unfinished epic about Scipio, Africa.  FTP, name this Italian poet whose Canzoniere contains many sonnets written to his love Laura.;;(Francesco) Petrarch|Petrarca
Religion/Mythology;;They included a boar who brought the earth back from the bottom of the ocean after winning a 1,000-year-long battle against the demon Hiranyaksha. Another was a turtle who himself lived on the bottom of the ocean, supporting Mount Mandara. Yet another was a dwarf who tricked Bali into assuming responsibility for the underworld.  In addition to Varaha, Kurma, and Vamana, they include the fishy Matsya and the leonine Narasinha.  FTP, name this group of mythical figures which also includes Kalki and Rama, the ten terrestrial incarnations of a Hindu deity.;;(the) avatars of Vishnu;;avatars
Music;;One work named for this man was composed for the marriage of his daughter to Franz Xaver Spath, and is the longest of its composer's serenades.  A better-known work of this name begins with an allegro con spirito movement, and the composer noted that the  direction sciolto in its first movement called for "a clear and aggressive separation of the bowstrokes". Written in D major, it features a menuetto third movement followed by a lighthearted presto finale, which borrows from Osmin's comic aria "O how shall I triumph" from The Abduction from the Seraglio. FTP, name this 35th symphony of Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart which was originally composed to honor the ennoblement of the namesake citizen of Salzburg.;;Haffner (symphony)|(Sigmund) Haffner
Chemistry;;In oceanography, the f-ratio is the total primary production of organic compounds caused by them.   They have a trigonal planar arrangement, and are a hybrid of resonance structures that give each of their oxygen atoms either a double bond or a formal charge of minus one.  The copper type can be impregnated on zeolites, forming a catalyst useful in treating diesel fumes, while their hydroxylamine variety undergoes violent autocatalysis. The calcium type, also called Norgens-salpeter, inhibits steel corrosion by reacting with ferrous ions. The sodium salt combines with sulfuric acid and then can be fractionally distilled to form sodium bisulfate and nitric acid. The ammonium and potassium varieties are powerful oxiders used in fertilizers and explosives. FTP, name this polyatomic ion with formula NO3 N O 3 minus.;;nitrates
United States History;;His namesake "plan" was developed with Paul Warburg at the secret Jekyll Island Conference.  He was accused along with Arthur Gorman of taking corporate kickbacks in David Graham Phillip's Treason of the Senate.  Though he earlier declared it communistic, he later introduced an amendment for a national income tax and served as the first chairman of the National Monetary Commission. The father-in-law of John D. Rockefeller, Jr, he was elected to the Senate to replace the deceased Ambrose Burnside. FTP, name this senator from Rhode Island who sponsored an act with Vreeland which led to the formation of the Federal Reserve, and also sponsored a tariff bill with Representative Sereno Payne.;;(Nelson) Aldrich
Art;;In 1997 Edwin Hall wrote a book about this work which discussed the inclusion of St. Margaret emerging from the belly of a dragon, which can be seen carved above the back of a chair, to argue that Erwin Panofsky's influential interpretations are too simplistic. Commissioned by its subject, a counselor to the Duke of Burgundy who made his money as a silk merchant, the year and the artist's signature can be seen above the mirror whose reflection depicts the artist himself.  That artist would go on to paint other famous portraits like The Madonna with the Chancellor Rolin. Filled with details like a lit candle, a little dog, and a pair of discarded clogs, FTP, identify this work that depicts a man dressed in dark heavy wool and a big hat holding the hand of his betrothed, a painting by Jan van Eyck.;;(The) Arnolfini Wedding|(The) Arnolfini  Marriage
Noncomputational Math;;The mathematical formulation of this physical theory is based on a namesake function on a symplectic manifold. The symplectic form of the manifold defines the Poisson bracket of the theory. When the symplectic manifold is the cotangent bundle of a space, it directly corresponds to the physical idea of phase space, i.e. of coordinates and momenta. This differs from the Lagrangian formulation, based on coordinates and velocities. The namesake function is the generator of time translations, and plays the role of total energy. FTP, what is this formulation of mechanics named for the discoverer of quaternions?;;Hamiltonian (mechanics)
Literature;;Based on notes for a play tentatively titled Nostalgia, its setting features cheerful wallpaper and an inoffensive rug.  The character Nat is based on Fred Latimer, a former boss of the author, while Sid frequents the Sachem Club. One character quotes to his wife Essie from Edward Fitzgerald's Rubaiyat, the work which inspired its title. The main character quotes from his favorite works and authors, include "The Ballad of Reading Gaol," Shaw, and Ibsen. Opening at the senior dance, the main character begs his girlfriend to go boating with him but after she breaks up with him on the Fourth of July, he meets Belle at a bar. Ending with Richard reunited with his love Muriel McComber, FTP, name this only comedy by Eugene O'Neill.;;Ah(!) Wilderness
World History;;It was originally chronicled by Jean le Bel and Jean de Venette. One faction was defeated by Gaston Phoebus and Jean de Grailly at Meaux, and on the next day at Clermont-en-Beauvaisis they were defeated again, this time by Charles of Navarre.  Vigilantes under Saint-Dizier indiscriminately hanged suspects and a leader was tortured on a hot iron throne in the aftermath, after a failed attempt to unite with the Parisian rebels of Etienne Marcel. Theorized to be a result of seigneurial oppression and plague by Simeon Luce, Marie de Medeiros emphasized its spontaneous and anarchical nature. Best known from an unsympathetic account by Froissart, FTP, identify this 1358 rebellion in France which is named for the revolutionary Guillaume Caillet, who was better known as Simple Jack.;;(The) Jacquerie (Rebellion)
Noncomputational Math;;Nicholas of Cusa studied them while attempting to find the area of a circle by integration, Vincenzo Viviani found a method of constructing tangents with them, and Charles Bouvelles discussed them in 1501 as a mechanical means of squaring the circle. Pascal thought about them to take his mind off of a toothache, and later wrote a "History of" them. No matter where a particle is placed on an inverted one of these, it takes the same time to slide to the bottom, according to the Tautochrone problem. Also the solution to the Brachistochrone problem, this was named by Galileo, who suggested that arch bridges be built in the shape of this, and Huygens proposed that pendulum clocks swing in this kind of arc. FTP, name this curve traced out by a point on the circumference of a circle as the circle rolls along a straight line.;;cycloid(s)
Literature;;His early works, like the plays William Ratcliff and Almansor, were mostly failures, and he switched to prose for works like Florentine Nights and the unfinished Rabbi of Bacharach.  In another of his works, this man wrote about a dancing bear who escapes and must be hunted down.  He criticized a contemporary in Ludwig Borne, and works like the Letters from Berlin were collected in the four-volume Pictures of Travel. Returning to the mock epic form in a work translated by Engels, Germany: A Winter's Tale, his most famous collection includes the poems "Nordsee" and "Lyric Intermezzo".  FTP, name this author of the poetry collections Romanzero and Book of Songs, a German writer perhaps best known for a poem often set to music, "The Lorelei".;;(Heinrich) Heine
United States History;;Lord Dorchester prematurely reported its acceptance in a letter to Lord Sydney. Its 8th article called for a "council of revision" which could examine the authority of the legislature, and the 7th allowed only one term for the executive officer for an indeterminate number of years. This was later amended to a three-member executive council of geographical diversity, but its main proposal was the most controversial.  That proposal called for one legislative house to be directly elected by the government, while a second house would be elected by the first house. FTP, name this constitutional plan proposed by Edmund Randolph, which proposed a stronger national government than the rival New Jersey Plan and was named for the state of its formulator, James Madison.;;Virginia (Plan)
Economics;;Using Beveridge-Nelson or Hodrick-Prescott decomposition, it can be applied to business cycles. Due to its static nature and lack of causality, it is often replaced by the more dynamic model of Martin Zagler. Other variations on it include a Vector Autoregression approach by Blanchard, and one which included expectational variables by Milton Friedman, who has also related it to the Philips Curve. It implies that an increase in labor productivity will cause "jobless growth," and according to its formulator its factor "a" is approximately .3.  FTP, identify this economic law that describes the relationship between unemployment and the GNP gap, named for an American economist whose first name is Arthur.;;Okun('s) (Law)
Religion/Mythology;;He founded a school for Torah study with Eber, and the laws he promulgated from his school prevented Esau from killing Jacob and caused Judah to condemn Tamar. He gave the name of "Salem" to a town which Abraham had called "Jireh," and he is often identified with Melchizedek. In Christian tradition he is the father of Lud, Aram, and Arpachshad, through whom his genealogy continues to King David. In Judaism he is associated with the tallis and phylacteries because he covered up the nakedness of his father, and he is also said to have offered sacrifices when his father was crippled by a lion. The father of Elam and Asshur, FTP name this son of Noah, the brother of Ham and Japheth from whose name the term "Semitic" is derived.;;Shem
Biology;;Signal transduction through this molecule is mediated by dimerization and binding to an unusual tetramerized tyrosine kinase receptor whose activity is inhibited in part by PTP-1B and enhanced by IRS-1. This molecule is activated upon excision of an internal 33-residue segment called the C peptide, levels of which can be assayed in the serum. This enzyme also stimulates dephosphorylation of Acetyl-CoA carboxylase during fatty acid synthesis, promoting formation of active polymer, and is also capable of stimulating glucose uptake into all cells except those of the liver and brain. Critical for stimulation of synthesis and inhibition of breakdown of metabolic fuels, FTP, name this enzyme produced by pancreatic beta cells, functions of which are opposed by glucagon, and whose functions are deficient in diabetes mellitus.;;insulin
Art;;The figures in the background are predominantly portrayed in brown and blue in order to distinguish them from the more brightly colored central group, which is surrounded by shades of red. Two horses can be seen in the rear as the sun creeps up illuminating the scene. Its artist used the Rhine as a model and copied the title figure's dress from an exhibition he had seen on a visit to America. Featuring several actual personages including Prince Whipple, a black patriot, and James Monroe, it depicts various men in fur hats struggling with ice floes that threaten to hit the foregrounded boat. Depicting an event that took place on Christmas Eve of 1776, FTP, identify this painting of the first president leading his army over a certain river, a work by Emmanuel Leutze.;;Washington Crossing the Delaware
Literature;;In one part of this work a dwarf threatens to castrate a tall German who obstructs his view in a theater, and in another part the main character mourns a dead ass in the town of Nampont. The protagonist demonstrates his views on sex with quotes from the Dutch physician Bevoriskius, and he has a tryst with a maid in the incomplete last chapter, "The Case of Delicacy". That chapter follows one at Moulines where the protagonist meets Maria, a character from one of the author's earlier works. The doctor Samuel Sharp appears as the character Mundungus, while Tobias Smollett, who wrote a work with a similar title, is parodied as Smelfungus.  FTP, name this book narrated by a descendant of Hamlet's jester, Parson Yorick, a work by Laurence Sterne detailing a trip through France and Italy.;;(A) Sentimental Journey (through) (France) (and) (Italy)
World History;;The foremost scholar of this man is Jadunath Sarkam.  This man's grandson came to the throne five years after his death, but only ruled for a year before being succeeded by a man who would be murdered after being overthrown by the Saiyid brothers.  This man fought early battles at Samugarh, alongside his brother Murad, and at Deorai where he secured his throne against Dara Shikoh. Later in life he executed the guru Tegh Bahadur and imposed the jizya tax on non-Muslims. His military history mostly consists of failures: his son nearly overthrew him with the help of the Rajputs, and he was never able to suppress his greatest enemies, Sambhaji and Sivaji, who were chiefs of the Marathans. The father and predecessor of Bahadur Shah I, FTP, name this son of Mumtaz Mahal and Shah Jahan, the Mughal emperor from 1658 to 1707.;;Aurangzeb
Pop Culture;;One of these creatures from the sad, sad, world of anime is a giant with one eye who is the nemesis of Silver Fang, Akakabuto. One of these from the Achewood webcomic is Téodor Orezscu, and Gus Allegretti played one on Captain Kangaroo. In a Richard Adams novel, Kelderek purseus one of these named Shardik, and one of these from the His Dark Materials trilogy is Iorek Byrnison.  Current ones in the world of football include Leon Joe, Peanut Tillman, and Justin Gage. On an episode of The Simpsons, Homer complains about paying a patrol tax concerning these animals. FTP, name these godless killing machines that are mobilized against humanity, which frequently appear on the Threatdown segment of The Colbert Report ree-pour.;;bear(s)
Literature;;He caused stir with his essay "Is Verse a Dying Technique"? which along with an essay about Paul Elmer More, "Mr. More and the Mithraic Bull," appeared in a collection whose title was taken from the letters of Gustave Flaubert.  He wrote about "Uncomfortable Casanova" and "The Dream of H. C. Earwicker" in a collection whose longest essay, which was subtitled "The Two Scrooges," offered a psychological interpretation of the works of Charles Dickens.  His own creative works include poetry collected in books like Night Thoughts and such novels as I Thought of Daisy, though he is better known for non-fiction works like the polemical The Cold War and the Income Tax and the literary criticism collected in The Triple Thinkers and The Wound and the Bow.  FTP, name this man considered by many to be the greatest 20th-century American literary critic, who also wrote Patriotic Gore and To the Finland Station.;;(Edmund) Wilson
World History;;Cicero charactized one of its causes as metus iudiciorum, possibly referring to a corrupt quaestio stationed in Cisalpine Gaul. Its first strike was led by Pompaedius Silo, and though this was stopped by Caius Domitius, Varius Hybrida presided over an inquiry concerning the event. It was crushed militarily by Gnaeus Pompeius Strabo and politically by Lucius Caesar's creation of the Julian Law. Triggered by the assassination of Marcus Livius Drusus, Mithridates used it as a distraction to enable his invasion of Bithynia, and Sulla first came to prominence as a general during it. Involving mostly Marsi and Samnites, FTP, name this rebellion which began in 90 BC, in which the other Italian peoples rose up against, and were crushed by, Rome.;;Social (War)|Italic (War)|(War) (of) (the) Allies
Music;;The work begins with three different versions of a story, followed by a character singing the aria "Give these orders". A partner of that character ends Act I by singing "Those birds flying," an aria that contrasts with the earlier "I have often reflected".  The second act opens with the Hagar Chorus, which is followed by the title character singing "I've never been a violent man," to which Rambo replies "You are always complaining". It had its American premiere in 1992 by the San Francisco Opera, and the cast included Jamer Maddalena as the Captain, who asks to be killed after Mamoud declares "Every Fifteen Minutes, One More Will Be Shot". FTP, name this two-act opera about the 1984 hijacking of a passenger liner which features the death of the Jewish title character, composed by John Adams.;;(The) Death of Klinghoffer
Physics;;A recent experiment that attempted to replicate its namesake's original set-up was done by Gianni Carugno and Roberto Onofrio, but its value only agreed to within 15% of the expected theoretical value, in part because of the technical difficulties involved in calculating it. Predicted while its namesake was working with colloidal solutions, it shows that the mass of the nucleon is independent of the bag radius in the chiral bag model of the nucleon. It was measured in 1996 by Steven Lamoreaux, and its formula is pi-squared times c times h-bar times area, divided by 240 times distance to the fourth power. FTP, name this consequence of QED, a type of van der Waals force between two parallel plates in a vacuum, which is named for a Dutch scientist and which is not as related to zero-point energy as many like to think.;;Casimir (force)|Casimir (effect)
Literature;;One character in this work shows his lack of education by not knowing the meaning of the word "roué" and mispronouncing "brooch," while another character is an eight-year old named Bert, who provides much-needed comic relief.  A 2001 performance at the Royal National Theatre in London included soil and live grass, to make the yard setting as realistic as possible. Also included was a small apple tree stump, which was originally planted in memory of one of the protagonist's children, Larry, who was declared missing three years earlier on a "favorable day". The protagonist's other child, Chris, wished to marry Ann Deever, the daughter of a man who wrongly went to jail for selling defective airplane parts to the Army during World War II.  FTP, name this drama that ends with the suicide of Joe Keller, a work by Arthur Miller.;;All My Sons
Religion/Mythology;;Gregory Vlastos's dissertation on this work took an unusual literal interpretation, and Julia Kristeva borrows its term chora to refer to her "maternal receptacle".  It begins with Hermocrates relating a tale about Solon to the title character, a citizen of Locris, who responds by distinguishing between that which always is and that which was created. The title character then goes on to relate the planets to the Pythagorean intervals. It introduces the demiurge and posits five elements, those being the quintessence and four others that correspond with certain "perfect" solids.  Considered the most important Platonic dialogue during the Middle Ages, FTP, name this work that includes a description of Atlantis and that details Plato's theory of creation.;;Timaeus
Geography;;The seaside resort town of Agbodrafo lies on its largest lake, and the city of Palimé lies northwest of its tallest point, Mount Agou.  Tourism and fishing have increased thanks to the Nangbeto hydroelectric dam, a partnership between this country and its eastern neighbor which dams the Mono River.  The northern portion of this country, which contains a region noted for its iron-rich soil, the terre de barre tear day bahr, is characterized by a gently rolling savannah, and its southern portion, which includes the cities of Atakpamé and Notsé, is characterized by a plateau that extends to the Gulf of Guinea.  Coastal erosion has declined its former capital, Aneho, and its second largest city, Sokodé, is noted for its agriculture.  FTP, name this narrow African country sandwiched between Benin and Ghana, whose capital is Lomé.;;Togo(lese) (Republic)
United States History;;He died during a commencement speech at Washington & Lee University, and his autobiography, That Reminds Me, appeared posthumously. In his last campaign he defeated John Sherman Cooper in 1954, nearly 50 years after he won his first election as prosecuting attorney in Kentucky, his home state. A disciple of Woodrow Wilson, he became Senate majority leader after the death of Joseph Robinson in 1937, serving for ten years. In the 1938 Senate election he nearly lost to Happy Chandler after evidence of illegal donations from the WPA, and he only attained his most famous post because of the refusal of William O. Douglas in 1948.  The first man to be called "Veep," FTP, name this oldest vice-president in history, who served under Harry S Truman.;;(Alben) Barkley
Chemistry;;Since Soai reactants are rigid gamma-aminoaldehydes, they cannot function as these. In plants, they increase the availability of nutrients and prevent nutrients from leaching, since free ions are not very stable. Vitamin B12 is an example involving a central cobalt ion and a corrin system, and they are generally chemical compounds that are found in the form of a heterocyclic ring that contains a metal ion attached by coordinate bonds to at least two nonmetal ions. FTP, give this word, which in medicine is used as a verb designating the process of removing a heavy metal from the bloodstream by one of the namesake objects, a coordination complex involving a polydentate ligand.;;chelate(s)|chelation
Music;;Roger Norrington founded an amateur choir with this composer as its namesake. His works include The History of the Birth of Jesus Christ, which is notable since it sets the Nativity story in his homeland and features the words of the Evangelist being sung in recitative, rather than chant. His use of resplendent polychoral and concertato styles is similar to that of his teacher, Giovanni Gabrieli, with whom he studied while in Italy, and Einstein declared him "the most spiritual musician the world has ever seen". Sacred music by this composer includes Seven Last Words on the Cross, Psalms of David, and Symphoniae sacrae, and his best-known piece was written for the wedding of the Elector of Dresden's daughter to the Landgrave of Hessen-Darmstadt, a work that used the same libretto Jacopo Peri had used 30 years earlier. FTP, name this composer of the first German opera, Dafne.;;(Heinrich) Schütz|(Heinrich) Schutz
Literature;;This author worked with Jonathan Demme on the documentary The Agronomist. In a work by this author, the word parsley cannot be pronounced correctly by the two main characters, a sugarcane cutter named Sebastian and a maidservant named Amabelle. The short story "Nineteen Thirty-Seven" follows a woman imprisoned and starved during a witch hunt and is found in a collection that follows the inhabitants of the town Ville Rose across several generations, entitled Krik? Krak!. The title of her most recent serious novel refers to the members of the Tonton Macoutes, and her most famous work tells the story of a twelve-year-old girl named Sophie, who comes to New York to be with Martine, her insomniac mother. FTP, name this author of Farming of Bones, Dew Breaker and Breath, Eyes, Memory who was born in Haiti.;;(Edwidge) Danticat
Astronomy;;The instability of the predecessors of these objects may have been eroded by fast gas accretion in their nearest neighbor, causing the kinematic equation that describes their position to evolve from horseshoe-like to tadpole-like dynamics. The chaotic divergence of members of the largest group may be modeled via application of Lyapunov exponents to the three-body problem, of which they form a special case. The density of the binary system 617 Patroclus suggests that many are composed of ice and a layer of dust, and thus give a probable origin in the Kuiper Belt. Examples exist for Mars and Neptune, though the majority are found at 60 degrees ahead of and behind another planet. FTP, name these astronomical bodies that occupy the Lagrangian points of Jupiter, whose largest examples include Anchises, Priam and Hector.;;Trojan (Asteroids)
United States History;;A place by this name was governed by Miles Macdonnell, founded by Thomas Douglas, and briefly wiped out by the Seven Oaks Massacre. One conflict by this name was a result of the Treaty of Medicine Lodge and saw Satanta and Big Tree lose to forces under William Tecumseh Sherman. A Civil War campaign by this name led to the Union capture of Fort DeRussy and Alexandria and a Confederate victory at Sabine Crossroads. Led by Nathaniel Banks and David Dixon, that campaign targeted cotton production and was named for a tributary of the Atchafalaya which receives the Kiamichi, Wichita, and Sulphur rivers and forms much of the border between Texas and Oklahoma. FTP, give this geographical term which names a river which enters the Gulf of Tonkin after passing through Hanoi, as well as a 1948 Western starring Montgomery Clift and John Wayne.;;Red River
Literature;;A seizure of guns follows the protagonist's failure to prevent territorial war with Okperi, and a crisis erupts when the Feast of the New Yam goes unobserved, though the Festival of the Pumpkin Leaves went off properly before Obika's death. Lesser characters representing two forms of Christianity include the orthodox John Goodcountry and the open-minded Moses Unuachukwu. The Christian convert Oduche attempts to kill the python worshipped by Ezidemili, who, along with commissioner Winterbottom, challenges the authority of the title character, Ezeulu, who is the leader of the Umuaro confederation and the chief priest devoted to Ulu. FTP, name this novel set during the implementation of indirect rule of Nigeria, written by Chinua Achebe.;;Arrow of God
Psychology;;A 2002 biography by Theron Raines attempted to rehabilitate this man's reputation.  He hypothesized that the cicatrization component in male coming-of-age rituals symbolizes vagina envy, and studied child-rearing on an Israeli kibbutz in Children of the Dream. Richard Pollack's book debunking his work shows that his fabricated credentials and lack of medical training led him to attribute autism to distant parents rather than genetics, a claim this man advanced in the books The Empty Fortress and Truants from Life. FTP, name this psychologist who discussed fairy tales in The Uses of Enchantment and whose "Individual and Mass Behavior in Extreme Situations" is based on his experiences in Nazi concentration camps.;;(Bruno) Bettelheim
Art;;While studying philosophy at Harvard he visited Alfred North Whitehead's lectures at Radcliffe, which were to influence his artistic philosophy starting with At Five in the Afternoon. He used large calligraphy for the painting Africa and dabbled in the style that would make him famous in "Indian Summer, #2," fully adapting that technique for the Open series. That same color-field method would inspire his wife to paint This Morning's Weather and Mountains and Sea, and characterized his most famous work, a cycle he described as the "black of death contrasted with the dazzle of a Matisse-like sunlight". FTP, name this husband of Helen Frankenthaler who created the 150-painting series Elegy to the Spanish Republic.;;(Robert) Motherwell
Literature;;The "contexts and interpretations" of this man's poetry were the subject of a 1965 book by David Kalstone, who traced the influence of Jacopo Sannazaro on him.  The title character is wooed by a shepherd named Espilus and a forester named Therion in this man's pastoral masque The Lady of May.  In his major prose work, two women named Pamela and Philoclea are loved by Pyrocles and Musidorus after they arrive in the title location.  His other major work is a collection of 11 songs and 108 sonnets addressed to Penelope Rich.  FTP, name this Elizabethan author of Arcadia and Astrophel and Stella.;;(Sir) (Philip) Sidney
Chemistry;;It can be detected and quantitated using the Marsh test, which involves reduction by zinc and reaction with hydrogen to form a gas that can be decomposed to give this element in pure form.  With copper, it forms a number of brilliant green compounds such as Scheele Green and Paris Green; these compounds have also found use as insecticides.  In combination with gallium, it forms a direct bandgap semiconductor material used in high frequency applications and semiconductor lasers.  While it has found use in medicine for centuries, including Paul Erlich's "magic bullet" for syphilis, its chemical similarity to phosphorus makes it an allosteric inhibitor of many enzymes, making it and most of its compounds poisonous.  FTP, name this toxic metalloid with atomic number 33.;;arsenic
World History;;Maximilian of Bavaria and Karel Buqouy led wings of the victorious army at this battle, which fought against forces that were led by Jindrich Thurn and Arnost Mansfeld. The losers failed in their goal of holding the Ruzyne hill and the Hvezda arboretum in order to protect the previous year's Act of Confederation. As a result of this engagement, the nephew of James I of England and ruler of the Palatinate earned the epithet "Winter King," as it ended the rule of Frederick V after less than one year. Christian of Anhalt's army set up here in order to defend Prague, and was easily defeated by Tilly in November 1620. FTP, name this battle which ended the Bohemian phase of the Thirty Years War.;;(Battle) (of) White Mountain|Bila Hora
Art;;He worked as a script doctor on Les Visiteurs du soir and Return of the Pilot and started his directorial career with a series of short documentaries, including an analysis of rayon production.  One of his films shows an Italian cigarette smuggler, an Englishman who tries to become a media star after finding a woman's body, and a French student killed for money in three parallel murder narratives. He directed a film about a detective named Carloni who has to investigate a young wife named Paola in 1950's Story of a Love Affair. Perhaps his most notable film is based on Las babas del diablo by Julio Cortázar, and shows a photographer named Thomas finding something mysterious in a picture of Vanessa Redgrave's Jane. FTP, name this Italian director of The Mystery of Oberwald, Zabriskie Point, Eclipse, and Blow-Up.;;(Michelangelo) Antonioni
Geography;;The county by this name borders Lewis on the north and Madison on the south, and is separated from Herkimer to the east by the Hinckley Reservoir and West Canada Creek. That county is home to Griffiss Air Force Base and the cities of Rome and Utica. The lake by this name is linked to the Mohawk River by a canal, while its namesake river joins it to the Oswego.  FTP, name this largest lake in New York, located about ten miles from Syracuse, which shares its name with a commune founded by John Humphrey Noyes which practiced complex marriage and silverware manufacture.;;Oneida
Biology;;Their synthesis branches off the mevalonate pathway and starts with isopentyl pyrophosphate, which becomes isopentenyl adenine and eventually one of their three forms. After being detected in coconut endosperm, the first one to be isolated was zeatin, extracted from corn by Miller in 1961. In addition to stimulating the conversion of etioplasts into chloroplasts, they make stomata open larger and promote shoot and bud formation, leaf expansion, and cell division. FTP, name these plant hormones, manufactured in the root meristem, which exhibit an adenine-like structure.;;cytokinin(s)
Religion/Mythology;;A 2003 study by Yohanan Grinshpon claims that Western commentators have misrepresented these books as pure philosophy and argues that they can only be understood as a story of characters. They first emphasized the importance of cosmic knowledge in avoiding punarmrtyu poo-nahr-murt-yoo, or "repeated death".  The Chandyoga volume contains the central doctrine "tat tvam asi," while others advance the "neti-neti" concept through the character of Yajnavalkya yahj-nah-VALK-yuh.  Including the Great Forest Texts, they directly answer questions about the sacrifices described in the Rig Veda, and the earliest ones, such as the Isa and Kena, are the basis for the Vedanta school.  FTP, identify these texts with a name meaning "sit down near" which outline the philosophy of Hinduism and were a major influence on Arthur Schopenhauer.;;Upanishads
Literature;;In the first book of a trilogy by this author, the protagonist bags Zenobia Brockelbanck and observes Reverend Colley's habit of urinating on the deck of the ship, and later undergoes a conversion after Billy Rogers escapes a charge of fellatio by charging his superior officers with "buggery". In addition to the Billy Talbot books, he wrote a book about Ha, Mal, and Lok, while another of his books describes the attempted murder of Nathaniel Walterson by a man who slowly dies on an ocean rock.  He is probably best known for a book based on Ballantyne's The Coral Island, in which the "littluns" and "Samneric" fear a mysterious beast. FTP, name this author of the naval trilogy Rites of Passage, Close Quarters, and Fire Down Below as well as The Inheritors, Pincher Martin, and the story of Jack, Ralph, and Piggy, Lord of the Flies.;;(William) Golding
World History;;The first rigged election during his rule coincided with a hurricane, and he is alleged to have thrown political prisoners out to sea with the storm victims. After his rule ended, his son's attempt to succeed him was cut short by American intervention, and that son was replaced by Joachim Balaguer. This man got his start during an American occupation. and became head of the national police after overthrowing Horacio Vásquez. His regime began to unravel shortly before his death, when his attempt to assassinate Rómulo Betancourt led to OAS sanctions. Less than a year later, in 1961, J.T. Díaz engineered his assassination, carried out via machine gun fire on his motorcade. FTP, name this dictator who renamed Santo Domingo after himself during his 31 years as ruler of the Dominican Republic.;;(Rafael) (Leónidas) Trujillo (Molina)
Noncomputational Math;;In iron meteorites arranged in this kind of structure, treatment with weak acid can produce visible bands of kamacite bordered by taenite, called the Widmanstätten pattern. Pollock conjectured that every number is the sum of at most seven of this kind of number, which is defined as the sum of two consecutive pyramidal numbers. The gyrobifastigium and tridiminished icosahedron have the same number of faces as this solid, which Plato associated with air and which has six vertices and twelve edges. FTP, give this term which is the most common structure and which is more frequently seen than trigonal prismatic, a polyhedron with eight faces.;;octahedron|octahedral
Music;;The second movement ends with an emphatic organ part, while a "wordless" female chorus and a wind machine also make appearances. Excerpts from Coleridge's "Hymn Before Sunrise in the Vale of Chamouni," Psalm 104, and Shelley's Prometheus Unbound are spoken before each movement of this work, to which Peter Maxwell Davies wrote a sequel in 2001. The homesickness of the person who inspired much of this work is represented by a quote from The Lark Ascending, and the line "I do not regret the journey" from that person's recovered diary concludes the piece. FTP, the score to a film about Robert Scott was reworked into what 7th symphony of Ralph Vaughan Williams?;;Sinfonia Antartica
World History;;He was court-martialed for illegally arresting Captain Wathem, but his parents bribed him back into command of the Eleventh Hussars. He apparently didn't learn his lesson, as he arrested Captain Reynolds for failing to use a decanter in serving wine in 1840. After Harvey Tuckett exposed that so-called "Black Bottle Affair," he challenged Tuckett to a duel and wounded the reporter. He argued with his commander, Lord Lucan, during the battles of Varna and Alma, and he left camp to reside on his yacht in the harbor the day before his most notable achievement, ordered by Lord Raglan. He inexplicably became a hero on October 25, 1854 as he entered the "Valley of Death" at the Battle of Balaklava. FTP, name this British general who led the Charge of the Light Brigade, the namesake of a kind of sweater.;;(James) (Thomas) (Brudenell,) (7th) (Earl) (of) Cardigan(,) (Baron) (Brudenell) (Of) (Stonton)|(James) (Thomas) Brudenell
Earth Science;;It was created at the same time as the Manson structure, which was likely caused by a renegade fragment of the same object that caused this. The Brazos Sandstone is partially traced to events that created it. Grains of stishovite, or "shocked quartz," are found here, and it is the major non-volcanic source of sphaerules or microtektites. It divides plant populations between 10 to 30 percent fern representation on one side and 70 to 100 percent fern representation on the other, and it displays high levels of platinum-family metals, especially iridium. Formed as a result of the event at Chicxulub in the Yucatan, its nature was identified by Luis Alvarez. FTP, name this dark clay layer which represents the results of the dinosauricidal asteroid impact and is named for the two geologic periods whose fossils it separates.;;K-T (boundary)|Cretaceous-Tertiary (boundary)
Religion/Mythology;;In the Republic, Socrates proposes that this story only be told to trusted individuals who take a pledge of secrecy and sacrifice an animal larger than a pig. This event directly caused the creation of ash-tree nymphs and occurred at Cape Drepanum in Achaea, and its proximity to the abode of the Phaecians is why their island is called Drepane. Grey flint was created in order to accomplish it, and it occurred as a result of the imprisoning of the Hecatonchires heh-cah-tahn-CHEE-rays and Cyclopes. Oceanus was the only Titan who did not participate under the leadership of Cronos, who used an adamantine sickle given him by Gaia. FTP, what action, whose resultant foam created Aphrodite, made a eunuch out of a Greek sky god and led to the ascendancy of the Titans?;;castration of Uranus
Literature;;In one of his novellas, a man drowns along with the newly purchased fishing boat which he had been saving to buy, and in another the vicar Dooley advances a scheme for "compulsory salvation" throughout England. He made an analogy between low-ranking revolutionaries and holstered revolvers in "A Story About the Most Important Thing" and wrote the script for Jean Renoir's film adaptation of The Lower Depths. He died while working on The Scourge of God, his third attempt to tell the story of Attila the Hun, and in fact this author of the play The Fires of Saint Dominic completed only one full-length novel. That book discusses the building of the Green Wall following the Two Hundred Years War, and depicts a rebellion against The Benefactor.  FTP, name this author who described I-330 and D-503 in the anti-Soviet dystopian classic We.;;(Yevgeny) (Ivanovich) Zamyatin
United States History;;A Sicilian navigator, Salvatore Catalano, was employed by Edward Preble in a mission targeting it.  That mission used the ketch Intrepid and enlisted the skill of the commanding officer from the schooner Enterprise. Its construction was funded by its namesake during the Quasi-War and it made eleven captures in the West Indies during that conflict. Later its companion, the Vixen, was sent away on a scouting mission, leaving it to pursue an enemy corsair, which led to it running aground and the imprisonment of its captain, William Bainbridge. FTP, name this ship captured during the Barbary War, which was then burned in Tripoli harbor by Stephen Decatur.;;(USS) Philadelphia
Philosophy;;Its ninth chapter critiques Anselm by arguing that God can be proven to exist with reason, but the nature of the trinity and other aspects of God can be comprehended only through faith. It divides knowledge into three types: knowledge of God, the creatures proceeding from God, and the "ordering to an end" of those creatures. Each of those topics receives a book, while the fourth book discusses various doctrinal errors. It opens with a defense of philosophy as the most perfect, sublime, useful, and joyful of disciplines and identifies the "narrow" philosophy as properly Christian. Commissioned by Raymond of Peñafort, it contains a four-part definition of faith and first identified Aristotelian metaphysics with Christian philosophy. FTP, name this work written to dispute certain non-Christians by the author of the Summa Theologica, Thomas Aquinas.;;Summa Contra Gentiles|Sum(ma) Against the Gentiles
Miscellaneous;;He was an artillery captain at Yorktown but proved less apt with smaller weapons, blinding himself in one eye during a botched suicide attempt. After his death, a faction following him joined the July Revolution and demanded women's suffrage and an end to inheritance. Felix Markham identified this man's call to make aid to the poor the new religion as the source for cults of the state in 20th-century communist countries; he had said that scientists should become the new priests in Letters of an Inhabitant of Geneva to His Contemporaries. FTP, name this socialist who worked with Auguste Comte on "Industry" and explored his theological ideas further in The New Christianity.;;(Claude-Henri) (de) (Rouvroy,) (Comte) (de) Saint(-)Simon
Literature;;One character performs in The Duchess of Malfi before marrying a music critic, which factors into another character's treatise, The Gothic Symbolism of Mortality in the Texture of Jacobean Stagecraft. At an award banquet for necrophile Russell Gwinnett, we learn that Scorpio Murtlock has started a new cult based on the teachings of Dr. Trelawney. The protagonist learns about sex from Peter Templer and has an affair with Peter's sister Jean before marrying Isobel Erridge.  Kenneth Widmerpool is one of two characters who appear in each volume, including Casanova's Chinese Restaurant and A Question of Upbringing, which are narrated by Nicholas Jenkins.  FTP, name this twelve-novel series by Anthony Powell whose title comes from a painting by Nicholas Poussin.;;(A) Dance to the Music of Time
