Music;;Sometimes replaced by a violin in Glinka's Trio Pathetique, it was invented in the 1710's by Johann Christoph Denner and only became a staple of orchestras in the 1780's. Weber and Copland wrote concertos for it but the most famous is Mozart's in A major, which was his last major instrumental work. He and Brahms also wrote famous quintets for strings and this wind instrument, whose virtuosi include Gervase de Payer, David Shifrin and Sabine Meyer. FTP, Elaine's Bar on New York's Upper East Side is where you go to hear Woody Allen play what wind instrument tuned in B-flat and played with a single reed, whose famous jazz artists have included Woody Herman, Artie Shaw and Benny Goodman.;;clarinet
Art;;This building contains the grave of its country's first king, who also has a grandiose monument in the same city that is colloquially referred to as "the typewriter". It also contains the graves of an eighteenth-century composer of concerti grossi and a sixteenth-century painter. Its facade columns are disproportionately tall, apparently because its original planned height was greater than what was achieved. Still, its most famous feature was the largest of its kind in the world until 1436, when a structure in Florence surpassed it. FTP, the Church of Santa Maria ad Martyres is an alternate name for what structure on Rome's Piazza della Rotonda that was built first by Agrippa and then again by Hadrian as a temple to all the planetary deities of Rome?;;(the) Pantheon
World History;;Towards the end of his career, he supposedly considered diverting the course of the Nile to destroy the power of Egypt. His poor health induced King Emmanuel to send Lope Suarez to succeed him. He made his first trip to Cochin in 1503 with his cousin Francisco and later commanded part of the fleet of Tristan da Cunha during the capture of Socotra. The second son of the lord of Villaverde, he became estribeiro-mor to King Joao II and was later given his command position by King Manuel I. In 1512, his ship, the Flor do Mar, was wrecked and his amassed treasure scattered, but he quickly rebounded to put down a revolt in Goa. FTP, name this Portuguese admiral and conqueror who shares his name with a city in New Mexico.;;(Afonso) (de) Albuquerque(,) (the Great)
Physics;;They are admitted as topological defects, a special case of dyons, and are generally supermassive. One-dimensional analogues of cosmic strings, they were posited by Dirac to explain conservation of angular momentum and charge. Most grand unified theories predict their existence at a density such that a small loop of superconducting wire should be able to detect one per year, but none have been detected yet, even in searches of lunar rocks. They are classically forbidden, since the field they ostensibly generate must be divergence-free by Gauss' law for it. FTP, name these hypothetical charges; theoretical sources for the magnetic field.;;(magnetic) monopole(s)|magnetic charge(s)
World History;;William of Tyre notably wrote about this engagement, discussing the difficult advance through narrow roads and orchards, and the desertion of the traitor princes. Otto of Friesing wrote about the failure of Prester John to come to the aid of the losing side and Osbernus described in detail the capture of Lisbon. Baldwin III received the invading army who then proceeded to meet at Acre and whose central leaders included Conrad III of Germany, who arrived in Jerusalem long before Louis VII. FTP, name this engagement prompted by the fall of Edessa and called by Pope Eugenius III; a crusade supported by Bernard of Clairvaux in which the Christian army was turned back from Damascus in 1154.;;(the) Second Crusade
Philosophy;;Condillac's Treatise on Sensations claims of this thinker that "his imagination had too much sway over him". Bossuet referred to his system as "Beautiful, new, and false". His 1709 "Responses" were to the pillory of Antoine Arnauld. He claimed that the Chinese were atheists, but was himself accused of pantheism by Jesuits, who banned publication of his Treatise of Nature and Grace. That work expanded upon his Search After Truth and Christian Meditations, both of which emphasize Cartesian dualism. FTP, name this French philosopher who attempted to reconcile Augustinian thought with Neoplatonism as the foremost proponent of occasionalism.;;(Nicolas) Malebranche
Chemistry;;These correspond to first-order saddle points on reaction coordinate-potential surfaces, so they can be located by optimizing the potential energy of the corresponding quantum system. Positronium acts as one of these for the annihilation reaction of anti-electrons. For an Arrhenius reaction, the rate is proportional to the negative exponential of the enthalpy required to form it, which is known as the activation energy. Often denoted with a star to indicate that it is energetic, ideal irreversible reactions always go to completion on reaching it, and its structure resembles that of the reaction species closest to it in free energy according to the Hammond postulate. FTP, name this point in a reaction, the structure of which is the activated complex.;;transition state(s)
Literature;;Samuel Coleridge wrote a sonnet titled "to the author of" this work and the author claims Cervantes' character Roque Guinart as inspiration for one character. In one scene, a man berates his father's servant, Daniel, claiming that he gave him poisoned wine and later that same man engages in theological debate with Pastor Moser, who notices the man turn white when he speaks the word "parricide". Roller, a friend of the protagonist who is kidnapped and tortured; Schufterle, a child murderer; and Kosinsky, a man who has lost his beloved, are part of the title group, along with the lover of Amelia von Edelreich. FTP, name this play concerning the rivalry of Franz, the plotting son of the Count von Moor, and Karl, the leader of the titular group of bandits; a work by Friedrich Schiller.;;(The) Robbers|(Die) Räuber
Literature;;The title object of this poem is mentioned twice: once in the last line and once in the first, where the speaker hopes it will not moan, but that there will be "such a tide as moving seems asleep". The poem's four stanzas alternate iambic pentameters with trimeters except the last line of the third and the first lines of the first and third stanzas, which are respectively "when I embark," "twilight and evening bell" and "sunset and evening star". The speaker hopes that he will see his pilot face to face after completing the title action, which serves as a nautical expression for leaving harbor. FTP, name this poem that, at its author's request, is published last in many collections of the work of Tennyson.;;Crossing the Bar
Philosophy;;The author of this work claims that Jews interpreted their misfortune as the consequence of their own sinfulness and created a set of overly strict commandments in reaction to their fate. The author disputes the idea that new technology automatically improves quality of life and critiques communism based on the inability to reform human nature in order to eliminate all motivation for the exploitation associated with capitalism. Major themes include the restraint of instinctual aggression, the concept of a "death drive," and the threats posed by conscience and guilt. It ends by questioning which force will prevail, "eternal Eros" or his potent adversary. FTP, name this essay by Sigmund Freud about the titular misery-causing society and the people who hate it.;;Civilization and its Discontents
Noncomputational Math;;Spivak's definition requires that they admit a metric, but this is not really necessary for most purposes. The Nash embedding theorem states that those having metric tensors can be isometrically embedded in Euclidean space. They are typically required to be Hausdorff and second countable, but must always be locally Euclidean. The differentiable type has smooth transition maps, unlike the topological version, and the Riemannian type has a metric tensor. The Poincaré conjecture states that all simply connected closed examples of these in 3-space are homeomorphic to the 3-sphere. FTP, name these mathematical objects coverable by many open sets homeomorphic to Euclidean space; generalizations of surfaces.;;manifold(s)
Literature;;One of this man's novels consists entirely of the dialogue between a young history professor named Larry and the elderly amnesiac Ramirez, whose wheelchair Larry pushes around New York City three times a week. Other works include Pubis Angelical, Blood of Requited Love, and a novel about the relationship between Gladys Hebe D'onofrio and Leo Druscovich. Nene Fernandez sends a series of letters to Leonor declaring her love for Leonor's dead son Juan Carlos Etchepare in Heartbreak Tango, but he is better known for novels about the movie buff Toto Casals and the political prisoners Valentin and Molina. FTP, name this Argentinean author of Betrayed by Rita Hayworth and Kiss of the Spider Woman.;;(Manuel) Puig
Religion/Mythology;;One man of this name was a companion of Aeneas on his journey in Italy and one fought the advance of the seven against Thebes. A better-known man of this name had an affair with Hippo and fathered a daughter, Canace, who committed suicide after incestuous relations with her brother, Macareus. Another one was a son of Hippotes and Melanippe and lived in an abode surrounded by a bronze wall. One of them married Enarete and fathered Sisyphus, but is better known for founding a tribe of Greeks like his brother, Dorus. The other gave a gift of a leather bag tied with silver wire that was foolishly opened by greedy sailors. FTP, name this Greek god of all winds in the Odyssey.;;Aeolus
Miscellaneous;;The lead singer of this band never released Hoodoo largely due to issues with Fantasy Records. The rhythm section played in the Don Harrison Band and Southern Pacific. The entire band participated in the Zephyr National sessions. Originating as the Blue Velvets, they were later called the Golliwogs. Their final album, Mardi Gras, terminated a streak of eight consecutive gold albums, including Cosmo's Factory and Pendulum. Doug Clifford and Stu Cook were two members, and the band's singles included "Travelin' Band" and "Up Around the Bend". FTP, name this 1960's heartland rock band fronted by John Fogerty, best known for songs like "Green River," "Born on the Bayou," "Fortunate Son," and "Proud Mary".;;C(reedence) C(learwater) R(evival)
Biology;;Kearns-Sayre syndrome is caused by faults in this, and its normal direction of heritance, which is caused by ubiquitination of it, can be reversed in certain species of Musa. Analysis of this commonly consists of sequencing of HVR regions and was used to establish woolly mammoth descent as described in a December, 2005 Nature article. Its existence strongly supports the endosymbiotic hypothesis with respect to its namesake organelle. In humans, it contains 37 known genes, most coding for tRNA's. FTP, name this genetic material generally inherited only for the mother; a ribonucleic acid present in the "power plant" of cells.;;(mitochondrial|mt){1}? d(eoxyribo)n(ucleic) a(cid)
Philosophy;;This lecturer spoke on "Nation-States under the Pressure of Globalization" during a 2001 visit to China. A 1968 work of his traces the "dissolution of epistemology" and argues that all knowledge is rooted in interest. His political arguments include one that democracy and constitutionalism are conceptually interdependent. Author of The Postnational Constellation, The Inclusion of the Other, Legitimation Crisis, Towards a Rational Society, and the aforementioned Knowledge and Human Interests, he posits an arena to mediate between the state and society in his first work, The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere. FTP, name this German philosopher best known for The Theory of Communicative Action.;;(J(ü|u){1}?rgen) Habermas
World History;;One ancient city of this name, in Pisidia, was the largest Roman veteran colony in Asia Minor. In the Book of Acts, Paul preaches a sermon there on Jesus as the successor of David before the leaders of the synagogue run him and Barnabas out of town. The larger one, on the Orontes, was captured three times by Persians, after itself having been annexed by Pompey in 64 BCE. It had early served as the capital for the Seleucid kings, many of whom shared its name. FTP, a college near Dayton, Ohio shares the name of what city now in Turkey that was the capital of Roman Syria; the third-largest city in the Empire and, according to Acts, the place where Paul and his associates were first called Christians.;;Antioch(us)|Antakya
Art;;His two altarpieces, the Virgin with Saint Bernard and Saint Ildefonsus Receiving the Chasuble, were probably painted for the convent of Saint Clemente, and his Flight Into Egypt resides at the Detroit Institute of Art. His first documented works are the Vision of Friar Lauterio and the Virgin Presenting the Rosary to St Dominic. Palomino wrote that he first worked as a festival painter and in 1645 he married Beatrice Villalobos. The Ecstasy of Saint Francis reflects the influence of Zurburan and Boy De-Lousing Himself was the first of his canvasses depicting children, another of which is the Grape and Melon Eaters. FTP, name this seventeenth-century Spanish realist best known for his numerous versions of the Immaculate Conception, especially that of the Escorial.;;(Bartolome) (Esteban) Murillo
Geography;;The Clarence Strait runs parallel to this body of water, which takes its name, meaning "divine wisdom," from a variant of that of a deity. In 1971, the nation that borders it to the North seized three of its islands due to their importance in governing its ship channels. When approaching it from the East, ships must pass south of the Makran coast and, upon reaching the Musandam Peninsula, make an extreme Southwestern turn to avoid running aground at the base of the Zagros Mountains. Located between the United Arab Emirates and Iran, this is, FTP, what strait strategically important as the entrance to the Persian Gulf?;;(the) (Strait of) Hormuz
Literature;;The tutor Putana is gagged, kidnapped, and blinded in this play after she lets it slip that the title character is pregnant. Hippolita dies when she drinks a glass of poison meant for her former lover at the wedding scene, in which her husband, the fake doctor Richardetto, coats a sword with poison for Grimaldi, who mistakenly uses it to stab the nephew of Donado. A double agent can be found in the servant Vasques, who both assists and attempts to assassinate his master Saranzo and Father Bonaventura acts as a go-between for the two sibling lovers at the center of the play. FTP, name this play about the incestuous love between Giovanni and Annabella by John Ford.;;(')Tis Pity She(')s a Whore
Physics;;For a homogenous system, the ratio of the rate of this reaction to that of absorption is the thermal utilization f, which is one of the factors in the four-factor formula. Solid-state actinide detectors for very-high-energy photons use the gamma-induced variety of this reaction. Plotted against atomic number, its usual yield curve is normally hollow, double-humped and symmetric, but can shift right if the inducing particles are highly energetic. It is energetically favorable to the right of iron-56 so power generation methods utilizing it use heavy elements like thorium as fuel. FTP, name this nuclear reaction often accompanied by release of energy and neutrons; the break-up of large nuclei into smaller ones, discovered by Hahn and Meitner.;;(nuclear) fission
United States History;;An agreement of this name was entered into by Secretary of War James Barbour in order to supercede the Treaty of Indian Springs, which was spearheaded by governor George Troup and signed in 1826. Another agreement of this name saw an attempt to seek a renewal of the Marcy-Elgin Reciprocity Treaty and was negotiated by a commission led by Lord Ripon. This agreement also sought compensation for the raids of the Fenians, but John Macdonald was disappointed once again. Hamilton Fish also signed it and more pressing concerns addressed by it included the San Juan boundary dispute. FTP, give the name that identifies this Anglo-American treaty of 1871 as well as a 1921 international conference on naval limitation held in a capital city.;;Washington
World History;;Among those present at its signing were Alexander Cadogan and Sumner Welles. It included the provision that the participants would "endeavor... to further the enjoyment by all States... of access... to trade and to... raw materials". Its third point emphasized "the right of all peoples to choose the form of government under which they will live" and its eighth encouraged all nations to abandon militarism. The meeting at which it was adopted also included a discussion of the Lend-Lease Act but it was not adopted by Josef Stalin. FTP, identify this document signed on the Augusta and Prince of Wales off Newfoundland in August 1941 and in which Churchill and Roosevelt laid out the Allies' war aims.;;(the) Atlantic Charter
Biology;;Commercial examples of these include Vitaxin, which binds to vascular integrin to inhibit angiogenesis and one which binds to tumor necrosis factor-alpha, infliximab. Their usefulness is limited by the HAMA problem and the first step to creating them is finding myeloma cells that cannot synthesize HGPRT. A method to produce them entails fusing a cancerous B-cell with a spleen cell that has already developed a response to a given antigen. FTP, identify these immune-system molecules so named because they are all identical reproductions of the original cell and because they target only one antigen, the invention of which won Kohler and Milstein the 1984 Nobel Prize in Medicine.;;monoclonal antibodies
Music;;Singing "Avant de quitter ces lieux" in the second act of this opera, an officer entrusts his sister to the care of Siebel. In the fourth act, after returning singing "Gloire immortelle," that officer duels with the title character and in the last act, the title character and his love sing "Oui, c'est toi que j'aime". The Tintin character Bianca often sings the Jewel Aria from this opera, the third act of which features a ballad about the King of Thule sung by the main female character at a spinning wheel. That character, Marguerite, appears in a vision for the title character in the first act. FTP, identify this opera beginning with the gift of a magic potion of youth and about a deal with Mephistopheles; the masterpiece of Charles Gounod.;;Faust(,) (opera)
World History;;Prior to this battle, the losing side attempted to ally with Christian forces who were forbidden to participate by Pope Alexander IV. Following the execution of envoys in Cairo, the winning forces marched on the losers' position in Galilee. They met at a site that was supposedly the location of David's legendary victory and is known as the Spring of Goliath. The winning side, under Qutuz, used a feint to lure the forces of Kitbuga into a trap, which was sprung by the leading general on the victor's side, Baybars. FTP, identify this battle fought in 1260 between the remnants of Hulagu's Mongol forces and the Mamelukes and which ended the westward expansion of the Mongol empire.;;(the) (Battle of) Ayn Jalut
Literature;;The crumpled pages of this work alert a rescue party to the location of train wreck survivor Ashoke Ganguli in a 2004 novel. This work's protagonist, a short pock-marked man with reddish balding hair, goes home at night to make capital and lower case letters. He later resolves to deprive himself of nighttime tea and other small comforts to supplement the fourty kopecks he had already saved. The protagonist dies delirious in a snowstorm but his ghost returns to rob the Person of Consequence. FTP, all of these events are related to Akaky Akakievich's obsession with the title object in what Nikolai Gogol short story?;;(The) Overcoat|Shinel
Noncomputational Math;;One example of this class of programs is the operator-precedence type which has difficulty processing symbols with multiple meanings. Top-down ones include the packrat and the LL algorithm while chart ones include the Earley and the CKY algorithms and are frequently used for natural languages. Handle pruning is a technique used in shift-reduce types of them. Some compilers use a namesake generator, such as GNU Bison, to create one of these for each code. These usually operate on the output of a lexical analyzer and themselves output a tree of tokens. FTP, identify these programs that analyze an input sequence and determine its grammatical structure.;;parser(s)|parsing (programs)
Religion/Mythology;;In the Merseburg Incantations, this character is also referred to as Phol and is aided by his family when his mount sprains its foot. The Gylfaginning claims that "none may gainsay his judgments" while Saxo Grammaticus held him to be a historical rival of Hotherus in the Gesta Danorum. Due to the treachery of Thokk, and despite the use of Hringhorni, the largest ship in the world, Hermod failed in his mission to retrieve this god. However, the Voluspa foretells his resurrection following Ragnarok. FTP, identify this son of Frigg mistakenly killed by his brother Hoder's mistletoe arrow; the Norse god of beauty.;;Bald(u|e){1}?r
Physics;;One of these bodies is combined with an axial magnetic field through a compact object to extract energy in the Blandford-Znajek process. The Eddington limit gives the upper bound for the rate of their formation and, hence, characteristic temperature and the formation of one of them around a black hole at the center of a galaxy gives rise to an active galactic nucleus. In cases such as those involving dwarf novae, the gases in these objects behave like highly viscous fluids; these gases are heated by frictional churning as they dissipate angular momentum, a process especially notable in the Roche lobes of certain binary systems. FTP, identify these circular objects formed when material coalesces around a gravitational source.;;accretion disk
Religion/Mythology;;In a discourse against this concept, John Tillotson claimed that a man could do "nothing more unworthily towards a friend". In the Eastern Orthodox tradition, the notion of metousiosis forms the basis for this concept and Ignatius of Antioch defended it in 106 CE in his Epistle to the Smyrnaean. Exegetical support for it can be found in First Corinthians 11:27, Matthew 26:26-28, and especially John 6:26. Its justification rests on the distinction between accidents and substance and an analogous Anglican doctrine is known as Real Presence. FTP, identify this dogma confirmed by the Fourth Lateran Council that states that the wine and wafer of the Eucharist literally become the blood and body of Christ.;;transubstantiation
Literature;;In one historical novel, this author depicts Mr. Bartholomew who sends a prostitute, Rebecca Hocknell, to a cave where she gives birth to Shaker founder Ann Lee. Another novel of his centers on Miles Green who, while in a hospital room, believes his nurse to be the muse Erato. Work on a translation of Claire de Duras's Ourika inspired him to begin his most distinguished work. That work is set in this author's home, Lyme Regis, where Ernestina Freeman's fiancé, the amateur paleontologist Charles Smithson, dumps her to obsessively pursue Sarah Woodruff, the title character. FTP, name this recently deceased British author of Mantissa, Maggot, and The French Lieutenant's Woman.;;(John) Fowles
Miscellaneous;;This character is first seen as one of the twelve survivors of the wreck of the Hunter Gratzner, after which he dislocates his shoulders to escape. In a 2004 game by Starbreeze Studios, he escapes from Butcher Bay with the bounty hunter Johns and his special sight is the result of an operation performed on him by Pope Joe. Aeon Flux creator Peter Chung based a short film subtitled Dark Fury on his adventures and, in a more famous appearance, he defeats the Lord Marshall and the Necromongers, finding out in the process that he is a Furyan warrior. FTP, identify this character first appearing in a movie loosely based on Asimov's Nightfall, Pitch Black; a Vin Diesel character whose Chronicles were told in a 2004 David Twohy movie.;;(Richard) (B(.)) Riddick
Literature;;At the beginning of this work, one character is asked "May you not hurt your enemy when he struck first"? To carry-out his mission, the protagonist plans to "assume the Parnassian dialect" and his former nurse, Cilissa, is sent to fetch the king without his bodyguards following the advice from the chorus that "it is the messenger who makes the bent word straight". Disguised as a Daulian from Phocis, the main character enters Argos with his friend Pylades and is told to "let Loxias touch [him]" following his murder of his mother and her lover. FTP name this work centering on the vengeance Orestes visits on Aegisthus and Clytemnestra; the second play of Aeschylus' Oresteia, whose title characters are a chorus of women bearing offerings to the grave of Agamemnon.;;(The) Libation-Bearers|Choephori
Chemistry;;This pathway has a vanishing small reaction rate for tertiary halides due to steric hindrance so an alternative carbocation pathway is strongly preferred. During reactions of this type, a complete inversion of configuration takes place and, in them, the substituent concertedly attacks opposite the leaving group. One example of them is the reaction of n-butyl bromide with iodide to produce a bromide and n-butyl iodide, while another example is the reaction of chloromethane and sodium hydroxide to produce methanol and sodium chloride. FTP, identify this type of chemical reaction initiated by the approach of an electron donor species and entailing a nucleophilic substitution with two species.;;SN2
Art;;This painting was the inspiration for Rilke's poem Der Berg and was also used for the cover of the first edition of Debussy's La mer. This work inverts the traditional meisho-e conventions by placing the famous place in the background and the titular entity in the foreground. Three fishing boats can be seen in this painting, one moving against the titular object and the other two resting in its trough. The background of this work depicts a snow-capped peak which is also depicted in thirty-five other paintings from the same series by this work's artist. FTP, identify this ukio-e print from Thirty-Six Views of Mount Fuji; the most famous painting of Katsushika Hokusai.;;(The) (Great) Wave (off|of) Kanagawa|(Fugaku sanjurokkei)(:) Kanagawaoki namiura|(In) (the Hollow of a) Wave (off the Coast at) Kanagawa
Philosophy;;In the second part of Ludwig von Mises' book Human Action, Mises claims that this concept should be understood metaphorically and that its tools can only operate in times of peace. Richard Hofstadter traced it in American thought, identifying Lester Ward as one of its main opponents. This two-word concept titles a book with such sections as "Sociology," "War," and "Some Natural Rights" written by William Sumner, but its first and best-known proponent was the man who, in his 1864 work Principles of Biology, coined the term "survival of the fittest". FTP, name this theory most famously advocated by Herbert Spencer and which sought to apply evolutionary methods to the study of society.;;social Darwinism
Literature;;"To pierce intellectual depths" and "to speak" with "the perfect rectitude" "of the movements of animals" were two of its preface's stated objectives. In a later additions to the collection, the author describes how "on a little promontory... stood, isolated" "A Noiseless Patient Spider" and how, "Aroused and angry," he resigned himself "To sit by the wounded and soothe them, or silently watch the dead" The fifty-second and final section of its first poem begins "The spotted hawk swoops by and accuses me" before "over the roofs of the world" the untamed poet sounds his "barbaric yawp". FTP, name this quintessential American poetry collection by Walt Whitman.;;Leaves of Grass
Chemistry;;The symmetry-preserving Kosterlitz-Thouless type of these occurs in two-dimensional superconductors. Mean-field theories break down in the vicinity of these events, leading to inaccuracies in the Ehrenfest scheme by which they are classified. In the neighborhood of these, fluids may exhibit critical opalescence. Those involving latent heat are known as first-order; the second-order ones are continuous and include the one between paramagnetism and ferromagnetism and the one between viscous flow and superfluidity. FTP, identify these physical events typically characterized by a critical point such as the Curie temperature and some common examples of which are the boiling and freezing of water.;;phase transition(s);;transition(s)
World History;;This man changed sides after being ousted by a pretender and hiding out in the Lesser Syrtis region and he won an early victory when he came to the aid of Indibilis, Prince of the Ilergetes. As the second-in-command to Laelius, he coordinated the burning of the camp of Syphax and led the left wing at the battle of the Great Plains. Confirmed as king by the Senate in 203 BCE, this son of Gaia built on his predecessor's founding of Siga and Cirta to build his empire. However, he is most famous for having led the right cavalry wing at a 202 BCE battle against Hannibal. FTP, identify this chieftain of the Massyles and grandfather of Jugurtha; one of the victors at Zama and the founder of the Numidian kingdom.;;Masinissa
United States History;;An attempt to take advantage of it led to the death of Edward Gorsuch and the Christiana riots that erupted in the aftermath. State legislation attempting to counteract it was held to be unconstitutional in Prigg v. Pennsylvania. One provision of a piece of legislation with this name stipulated a payment of ten dollars when a certificate was granted but only five dollars when it was refused and Abraham Lincoln supported a version of this legislation in his 1854 Peoria speech. A later law with this name was one component of the Compromise of 1850, but the first law with this name was created in 1793 in response to the kidnapping of John Davis. FTP, identify the common name of these two laws which stipulated penalties for aiding escaped slaves.;;Fugitive Slave (Act(s)|Law(s))
Noncomputational Math;;This mathematical object can be approximated with the Lanczos formula and represented in the Weierstrass form. The Legendre duplication formula gives the relationship between this function for an argument and for twice that argument, and its product with itself is given by the Gauss multiplication formula. It can be defined through a power series whose kth coefficient is proportional to the Riemann zeta function evaluated at k. Its values for half-integer arguments are proportional to the square root of pi and, as a function of z, it is typically given as the integral from 0 to infinity of t to the z minus 1, times e to the minus t, dt. FTP, identify this mathematical function; a generalization of the factorial to the complex numbers.;;(Euler) gamma (function)
Art;;It was said to be the model of the android Hadaly in Villiers de L'Isle-Adam's Tomorrow's Eve and the first paper written on it was by Antoine Quatremere. A tabletop replica of this work is the object of admiration in Honore Daumier's The Connossieur. Its missing plinth was depicted in a drawing by Auguste Debay; this helped classify this work as Hellenistic rather than Classical, as believed by Louis Forbin, the director of the Louvre at the time of its discovery. Due to the efforts of Adolf Furtwangler, who conjectured that this statue originally held a golden apple, it is now believed to have been sculpted by Alexandros of Antioch. FTP, identify this statue discovered on an Aegean island by a Greek farmer and easily recognized due to its missing arms.;;(the) Venus de Milo|(the) (Venus|Aphrodite){1}? (of) Melos
Economics;;Klein determined that it was related to the H/M [H-over-M] ratio while, in Tobin's review of Friedman's Monetary History, he attributed the fall in this value from 1880 to 1915 to the spread of commercial banking. Irving Fisher famously predicted that this quantity would rise with increasing level of technology and Keynes attacked the concept, claiming that it was not independent of the level of money stock. It can be defined as the ratio of GNP to the supply of money, but it is more often given as P times Q divided by M in the quantity theory of money. FTP, name this term, defined as the rate at which money changes hands, which in physics refers to a speed with direction.;;velocity (of money)
Literature;;The accuracy of scenes in this work is confirmed in William Libbey's "Autobiography of a Quondam Sailor" and Libbey is one of the "Yankee lads" that the narrator and his friend work with at the plantation of Shorty the Cockney and Zeke the Yankee. At the end of the novel, the narrator decides to sail to Japan on the Leviathan after being driven out of the court of King Tanee and Queen Pomaree Vahinee. The novel begins on the Julia where the two main characters are imprisoned in the Hotel de Calabooza after an attempted mutiny. The title refers to the Polynesian term for a "wanderer," which describes the narrator and his companion, Dr. Long Ghost. FTP, name this sequel to Typee, a work by Herman Melville.;;Omoo(:) (Adventures in the South Seas)
Miscellaneous;;His most recent release is the bilingual opera Ca Ira, his longtime pet project backed by Francois Mitterand, and other recent efforts include the singles "Each Small Candle" and "To Kill the Child" and a concert in support of fox hunting. His older solo work includes the albums Radio K.A.O.S. and an album featuring the songs "Go Fishing" and "The Sexual Revolution", The Pros and Cons of Hitch-Hiking. Work with his most famous band includes a tribute to his father who died at Anzio, "When the Tigers Broke Free", which appears on The Final Cut. FTP, name this man who wrote much of Animals and The Wall, a bassist, guitarist, and singer for Pink Floyd.;;(Roger) Waters
World History;;Heinrich von Treitschke called it "a glorious beginning to a glorious history," a view criticized by William Henderson. Its greatest advocate was imprisoned in Wurtemberg in 1822 and deported to America for supporting the idea, which was inspired by Napoleon's Continental System. Karl Bruck advocated the entry of Austria, but this plan was halted by the minister of commerce, Delbruck. Founded through the efforts of Friedrich List, it was dissolved during the Seven Weeks War, but was reformed in 1867 with the state veto power removed by Bismarck. FTP, name this economic association founded in 1834 among the German states, whose name is German for customs union.;;Zollverein
Chemistry;;When it involves a silyl enol ether, it is known as the Mukaiyama reaction. The first step is an acid-base reaction that removes an alpha-hydrogen from one of the reactants, forming an enolate. When this is followed by an aldol condensation, sometimes the ethoxide can combine with the ketone to form an ether, but generally bicyclic ring systems are formed in a process called Robinson annulation. The reaction donors are usually active methylenes like nitroalkanes and malonates. FTP, name this reaction involving a 1,4-addition of a carbanion to an alpha, beta-unsaturated carbonyl compound, most often used to create carbon-carbon bonds.;;Michael (addition|reaction)
Noncomputational Math;;Hurwitz's Theorem gives the bounds for the best approximation to an arbitrary one of these. Ones that have periodic continued fractions are known as quadratic surds, and Rivoal proved that the form gamma of 2n+1 can generate infinitely many of them. Topologically, the set of them is a Baire space but is not locally compact. The Erdos-Borwein constant is this, as is Gelfond's constant, but this property is not known for pi to the e power or for the Euler-Mascheroni constant. FTP name these numbers that were feared by the Pythagoreans and that are non-terminating and non-repeating.;;irrational (numbers)
World History;;During this man's reign, he quarreled with Rezon of Aram and was allied with the pharaoh, who burned down the Canaanite city of Gezer and offered it to him as a gift. His deeds included conquest on the sea with Hiram of Tyre and the founding of the city of Megiddo. The prophet Ahijah of Shiloh predicted that the son of Nebat would succeed him instead of one of his own sons, and this came true when Jeroboam succeeded him, but he may never have become king if not for defeating the conspiracy of Adonijah with the help of the prophet Nathan and of his mother, Bathsheba. FTP, name this man who recommended cutting a baby in half; the son of King David and the purported author of Ecclesiastes, Proverbs, and the Song of Songs.;;(King) Solomon
Art;;It is often called the classical companion to the artist's Vow of Louis XIII and was lambasted by Champfleury as "insincere mannerism" after its installation in room nine of the Musee Charles X. The artist himself can be seen peeping out from behind a pedestal, gazing at the central figure, which is flanked by a man holding a sword and another holding an oar in a triangular composition. Boileau, Racine and Moliere appear, but only in half-portrait, and men holding out a lyre, mallets, and scroll, represent Pindar, Phidias and Aeschylus, respectively. Based on a Hellenistic relief by Archelaus of Priene, the painter's master, David, is notably absent, but Tasso appears in the lower-left corner as does a cropped portrait of Shakespeare. FTP, name this painting by Ingres depicting the author of the Iliad being raised to godhood.;;(The) Apotheosis of Homer
World History;;It was followed by the naval battle of Ahvenanmaa five years later, and immediately after it, the losing commander fled to Bendery in the Ottoman Empire. Drunkenness and a battle at Ljesna prevented Marshal Lewenhaupt from linking-up with the main body, and a brave but foolhardy charge led to the injury of the losing commander, who was replaced by field marshal Count Rehnskold. Although the turncoats Konstatin Hordienko and Ivan Mazepa had joined the other side, superior numbers and artillery allowed Boris Sheremetyev and Prince Menshikov to withstand the enemy attack and force the surrender at Perevolochna. FTP, name this 1709 battle of the Great Northern War, a victory of Peter the Great over Charles XII of Sweden.;;(Battle of) Poltava
Physics;;The flux-flow coefficient for this effect in type II superconductors is directly proportional to the Hall effect coefficient. The basic equations involving it were formulated by Lord Kelvin and are now considered a special case of the generalized Onsager relations. One source of it is phonon-electron collision, or drag, in the material, which can be estimated from the lattice heat capacity, and the other source, charge carrier diffusion, from Mott theory. When its coefficient is multiplied by the Thomson coefficient, the Peltier coefficient is produced. FTP, name this effect where a potential difference is created by a temperature gradient, utilized in thermocouples.;;Seebeck (effect)
World History;;A lesser-known group of this name was written about by Trebellius Pollio and was said to exist during the reign of the Roman emperor Gallienus. They were established by the decree of Drakontides of Aphidna during the archonship of Pythodoros and the failed campaign to restore them by Pausanias followed their being driven out by Thrasyboulos. Their deeds included the murder of one of their own by hemlock for lack of ruthlessness and the removing of the laws of Ephialtes from the Areopagus. FTP, name this group including Theramenes and the author of Sisyphus and uncle of Plato, Critias, established in Athens after the Battle of Aegospotami by Lysander; a group named for the quantity of men involved.;;Thirty Tyrants;;Tyrant(s)
Literature;;This novel may have been inspired by a Grandville drawing. In the author's preface, he defends his biological knowledge against that of J.B. Charcot. The main character is a scion of a royal family of Cambria and often sits on a cliff by the sea, a place now known as his "chair". Later, the country he founds declares war on Alca and later still a society called Atlantis becomes a rival. The greatest leader of that country is Draco the Great, the son of Oberosia and of a man who dresses up like a dragon to steal from the poor, Kraken. FTP, name this book containing a scene where the saints argue over whether the title group should be given a human soul and in which St. Mael baptizes a flock of birds; a novel by Anatole France.;;Penguin Island|(L')Ile des Pingouins
Biology;;One system of their classification divides them into minor, replication-dependent, and replication-independent types. In the lab, they are isolated by cleavage of the source material followed by salt elution in a hydroxyapatite column. They never contain tryptophan and are usually rich in lysine and arginine. A type found in Euryarchaea may be the evolutionary precursor to those found in eukaryotes. Four of their classes form an octameric nucleosome, while the linker or H1 type regulates the formation of thirty-nanometer fibers. FTP, name this class of proteins which forms chromatin when DNA coils around them.;;histone(s)
World History;;He blinded and imprisoned his brother-in-law and ordered his father-in-law and prime minister, Asaf Khan, to murder the rest of the royal princes. He had to quell several rebellions, such as those of the Orchha chief Jujhar Singh in the region of Bundelkhand, and of the governor of the Deccan, Khan Lodi, whom he killed at Shihonda. At his death, he had been imprisoned by his son, who warred with Dara Shikoh, Shuja, and Murad Bakhsh over the succession. His greatest military success was probably the pacification and conquest of Bijapur, but he is better known as a patron of the arts, supporting the painters Govardhan and Bichitra and building the Red Fort in Delhi and the Jami Masjid. FTP, name this son of Jahangir and father of Aurangzeb, best known for building a mausoleum for his wife, Mumtaz Mahal.;;Shah Jahan
Geography;;The Nazi scientist Edith Ebers superimposed an image of one of these over a car with a swastika on it in a seminal paper on them. Regionally, they are alternately called whalebacks, sowbacks, schildrucken and ispatinow. Two rival theories attempting to explain their formation are the mobile bed theory and John Shaw's flood theory, and examples include the location where Smith discovered the Mormon tablets, as well as Bunker Hill. When many of them appear together, it is known as a "basket of eggs" topography. FTP, name these hills formed by the action of glaciers over the land that are generally teardrop-shaped.;;drumlin(s)
Religion/Mythology;;This figure appears with the Cynic philosopher Menippus in the twenty-second dialogue of Lucian. Depictions of him in Greek art include a painting by Polygnotus at Delphi and he often appears on lekythoi dressed as a laborer. In Etruscan myth, he is represented as a large-winged demon with a hammer, and it is said that he can be bribed by giving him a golden bough from a Sibyl. The son of Erebus and Nyx, he is sometimes said to be located at Cocytus or Acheron, but is usually associated with another river. FTP, name this man who receives the obolus from the souls of dead man and ferries them across the river Styx in Greek mythology.;;Charon
Literature;;One character in this work is referred to as a "water-drinker", a reference to the tee-totaling general that the character is based on. Some claim that Eupolis contributed to the second parabasis, although this is unlikely considering the author's accusations of plagiarism of this play by Eupolis in his Marikas. In the conclusion, a character dons a frog-green mantle and takes the place of his rival at the side of his master after stating that "because he lived on the market place in the midst of lawsuits," his name is Agoracritus, the name written on the oracles stolen by Demosthenes and Nicias. FTP, name this play where the Paphlagonian, a caricature of Cleon, is defeated for the love of Demos by a sausage vendor; a work of Aristophanes named for the chivalrous chorus.;;(The) Knights|Hippeis
World History;;The first seven years of his reign were dominated by the Italian adventurer, Concino Concini, who was shot to death by the royal guard on the order of Charles de Luynes and this man. His later reign saw the conspiracy against him by "les Importants" and the duchess de Chevreuse as well as the plotting of a favorite, the marquis de Cinq-Mars, with the Spanish court. Francis Bassompierre and this man's brother, Gaston of Orleans, were exiled from Paris in the incident known as the "Day of the Dupes," echoing the exile of his wife, Anne of Austria, ten years earlier. FTP, name this man, the son of Marie de Medici and Henry IV, who made France the greatest continental power in Europe with the help of his favorite minister, Cardinal Richelieu.;;Louis (XIII|the Thirteenth|the Just|le Juste){1}?
Music;;Unusual features of this work include the built-up diminished seventh and the conclusion, which includes a minor plagal cadence, a detail that indicates a possibly faulty transcription or even a wrong attribution to the composer by the transcriber Johann Ringk. Peter Williams places the work a fifth higher, so that the famous opening is in E and the dominant key is A minor, because he believes it to be originally a composition for violin that had been transcribed to its usual instrument. Edith plays the piece in Strindberg's Dream Play and, because it was Stokowski's favorite piece, it famously appears in the opening scene of Fantasia. FTP, name this spooky-sounding organ work, a two-part piece by Johann Sebastian Bach.;;Toccata and Fugue(,) (for organ) (in D minor)(,) (BWV 565|BC J37)|(Toccata and Fugue (,) (for organ in D minor)(,) ) (BWV 565|BC J37){1}?
Literature;;In this author's story "Hell Screen" a painter attempts to recreate hell on Earth in order to create a more accurate canvas for a wealthy patron. A soldier receives equine limbs in his "Horse Legs". A Buddhist priest regrets his unnecessary surgery in his "The Nose," and the theme of overindulgence in pleasures is emphasized in "Yam Gruel". His "Memorandum to a Certain Friend" determines that a drug overdose is the best way to commit suicide, which he did in 1927. FTP name this author of the Japanese fairy tale "Kappa" and namesake of Japan's most prestigious literary prize, author of "Within a Grove" and "Rashomon".;;Akutagawa (Ryunosuke)|Chokodo (Shujin)|Gaki
Miscellaneous;;Robert Dahl analyzed the government of New Haven in response to this book and, in The End of Ideology, Daniel Bell chastises this work's glossing over the differences between the Republican and New Deal administrations. In the final chapter, "The Higher Immorality," Washington is praised because he read Voltaire and Eisenhower is berated for reading detective stories. In the thirteenth chapter, "Mass Society," the author attacks the idea of the "great American public" and in Chapter fourteen, "The Conservative Mood," the author stresses that the title group respects civil liberties and has an open membership. FTP, name this 1956 work about military, political and business leaders that comprise the title group, written by C. Wright Mills.;;(The) Power Elite
Literature;;The main character of this work is invited to a vacation in the Aran Islands by Miss Ivors, but turns down the offer by claiming that he is going on a cycling trip instead. At the central event, the maid Lily yells at the main character for asking about her love life while Mr. Browne, an old man, attempts to calm down the drunk and late Freddy Malins. At the close of the festivities, the central couple listens to the tenor Bartell D'Arcy while Mary Jane accompanies him on the piano, causing the wife to think about her childhood love, Michael Furey. FTP, name this short story taking place at the party of the elderly sisters Kate and Julia Morkan, which is attended by Gretta and Gabriel Conroy, the last and longest story in Dubliners by James Joyce.;;The Dead
United States History;;His early career included working as an army scout during the Battle of Monmouth and as the adjutant general to William Alexander, Lord Stirling. His treatise A View of the Conduct of the Executive defended his conduct as minister to France and viciously attacked Washington, who never forgave him. His diplomatic career continued as he assisted Robert Livingston in negotiating the Louisiana Purchase and argued against impressment in Britain. He supported the founding of the Liberia colony and was known as the "Last-Cocked Hat" for being the last of his generation to be President, but his best-known contribution was actually written by John Quincy Adams. FTP, name this man whose isolationist stance is now known as his "Doctrine," the fifth President of the United States.;;(James) Monroe
World History;;A man from this family with the cognomen Laetus was a Hippo Regian knight in the service of Otho. A Paulinus of this gens was governor of Britain during Boudicea's revolt. The most famous man of this name was dismissed from secretarial service due to a mutual disgust for Vibia Sabina after having been aided into Imperial favor by Pliny the Younger. His once-popular Prata has not survived and, though he's often considered the least rhetorical of the Silver Age authors, he recalls Julius Hyginus in his De Grammaticis. FTP, name this family of Romans whose most famous member, with cognomen Tranquillus, was the author of De viris illustribus and De vita Caesarum, The Lives of the Caesars.;;Suetoni(us|i){1}?
Literature;;A seminal translation of these was made in the APR by Poulin in 1975. Claiming of "the hero" that he "strangely resembles those who die young," the sixth of these nevertheless notes "Thousands fermented in [his mother's] womb, wanting to be him". The fourth begins by asking the "trees of life, when is [their] winter"? The fifth is "dedicated to Frau Hertha von Koenig," while this work as a whole is "property of Princess Marie von Thurn und Taxis-Hohenlohe," who is also dedicatee of The Notebooks of Malte Laurids Brigge. They are named for the Swiss town in a tower in which they were composed and the poet calls The Sonnets to Orpheus their "natural overflow". FTP, name this volume of ten poems by Rainer Maria Rilke.;;Duino Elegies|Duineser Elegien
World History;;In this engagement's fourth year, one of its central figures was replaced by the duque de Caxias and a key turning point was the destruction of a flotilla near Corrientes, at Riachuelo. After the fall of Humaitá, this conflict culminated with the Campaign of Lomas Valentinas in which the army assembled by Bartolomé Mitre forced Francisco Solano López to run to the hills in the North, where he was killed in 1870. FTP, name this 1864-1870 conflict, the bloodiest in the history of South America; a war fought between Paraguay and the namesake entity consisting of Argentina, Brazil, and Uruguay.;;(the) (War of the) Triple Alliance
Noncomputational Math;;The first polynomial-time test for this property was written by Shih and Hsu in 1999, but it is still outperformed by the 1974 algorithm of Hopcroft and Tarjans in many cases. A famous instructive example regarding this, the Petersen star, does not possess it because removing an outer vertex creates an object homeomorphic to K-three-three. Kuratowski's theorem given the necessary and sufficient conditions for it to hold for a graph and every graph with this property is four-colorable by the four-color theorem. FTP, name this property of graphs that may be unambiguously embedded on a surface, or drawn without crossing a line or lifting the drawing implement.;;planar(ity)
Religion/Mythology;;Donatello's 1415 marble of this person with a forked beard and book is in the Duomo while El Greco's unorthodox depiction of him with a bear-skin and cross has a lamb at lower-right. Masaccio depicts him with St. Jerome on the Colonna Altarpiece and shows his death alongside that of St. Peter on the Pisa Altar. Rodin depicts him "Preaching" and the Ansidei Altarpiece includes Nicholas of Bari and this man. Ghirlandaio relates his life in Santa Maria Novella. Michelangelo's The Holy Family with this person is also known as the Doni tondo; he is also depicted as an infant in the Madonna of the Rocks. FTP, name this Saint often depicted in art performing his most famous function: baptizing Jesus Christ.;;(St(.)_|Saint) John the Baptist
Literature;;Its author dedicates this work to the soul of Coquelin, which he claims is the main character's. Opening at the Hôtel de Bourgogne, this drama has several lines for the orange girl, who finds it difficult to please Lignière. The title character is presumed lost at the end of the fourth act after leading "men so fond of death," the Cadets of Gascoyne, who are stationed at the Castel-Jaloux. The central ruse is uncovered when the female lead notices that the title character is able to read a faded letter ostensibly from Christian de Neuvillette that she's kept in a silk bag around her neck. FTP, name this work with a title character who's based on the author of A Voyage to the moon and who loves Roxane; a play by Edmund Rostand.;;Cyrano (de Bergerac)
Physics;;Considering a point of far beyond the scattering interaction range in the zeroth of these approximations yields the asymptotic boundary condition used by the method of partial waves, an alternative to them. The incident and zeroth-order waves are defined as Laplacian eigenfunctions. The key to deriving these is regarding the integral of the unknown state function as an inhomogeneous term, as this yields a Friedholm integral equation of the second kind. That integral equation is equivalent to the Schrödinger equation for scattering in a two-particle system, for which these approximations iteratively determine the wavefunction. FTP, name this series of successive approximations from the quantum theory of scattering, named for a German physicist.;;Born approximation(s)
Religion/Mythology;;The creator of inada, the sight of this creature at birth was unbearable, which lead to banishment via the Celestial Ladder. This deity's main holy place, which contains a mirror in its inner sanctum and is pulled-down and rebuilt every two decades, is at Ise-Jingue. Enraged by the noise of her brother, she had to be lured from hiding by the antics of Uzume. As Tamayori is the son of Owatatsumi, her brother, Jimmu is a lineal, not direct descendant of this goddess. With a name meaning "shining heaven," this eldest daughter of Izanagi and Izanami is antagonistic to Susanowa. FTP, name this Shinto goddess of the sky and sun.;;Amaterasu
Literature;;The preface to this work likens it to a try at the "bow of Ulysses" as the "subject has been treated by the greatest wits of our nation," while its prologue likens critics to "vultures gaping for the carcase of a play!" As it opens, Serapion tells a nightmare he's had to Myris but this is overheard near the temple of Isis. After a flourish at the beginning of Act III, Scene 1, the female lead crowns the male who responds by calling her his "brighter Venus!" Her offstage suicide in Act V, Scene 2, is communicated to him in Alexas' "Sir, she is gone". FTP, name this blank verse drama based on Antony and Cleopatra; the greatest tragedy of John Dryden, which describes what the main characters sacrifice in the title phrase.;;All for Love(;) (or the World Well Lost)
Philosophy;;This system's chief objective of autarkeia is open to wide interpretation, as is its chief virtue, anaideia, but the means for attaining them, askesis, is well-defined. Sayre argues that this sect did not arise until the second century BCE but it claims descent from Socrates. Seeking a "natural life" by "defacing the currency" through parrhesia, this philosophy's practitioners valued shamelessness and self-sufficiency over all else and the shocking qualities of their lectures led to their being labeled as barking "dogs". FTP, name this school of philosophy usually considered to have been founded Antisthenes, who claimed that "nothing exists," but which is best exemplified by Diogenes of Sinope.;;cynic(ism)
Chemistry;;Their namesake value is the mass iodine equivalent of maleic anhydride used per unit mass of sample undergoing maleic hydride addition. Danishefsky's namesake one of these chemicals, H4C4Me4SiO2, produces a heterocyclic ring in the reaction named for it. This class of chemicals is especially amenable to Ziegler-Natta polymerization with cross-linking and allenes are a type of the less-common cumulated variety of them. The three varieties are classified by bond separation; the two most common are the unconjugated and conjugated varieties, of which the 1,3-buta- type is the simplest. FTP, name these hydrocarbons containing at least two double bonds, the conjugated type of which undergo Diels-Alder reactions.;;diene(s)
Miscellaneous;;The beginning of this work is notably anti-Semitic and draws a distinction between the author's home and the one addressed by discussing the case of "Lord George Gordon fast in Newgate". Calling nobility "the Corintian capital of a polished society," this work's political philosophy is centered on the idea that, as the people are "prejudiced," any government not taking advantage of their ignorance is doomed to instability. It was closely followed by An Appeal and by Paine's Rights of Man, which is a response to it. FTP, name this early work of social history which was originally addressed to Charles-Jean-François Depont, "a very young gentlemen in Paris;" a lengthy letter about the French Revolution by Edmund Burke.;;Reflections on the Revolution in France
Music;;The composer of these works created some new material for a piano four-hands version of the second released before the last four, which were added from 1882 to 1885. The first with a subtitle is called "Héroïde-élégiaque" while the one in E-flat major, the ninth, is known as "The Carnival of Pest". The entire collection of nineteen has Rabbe number 106 and Berlioz set a scene in their namesake location to incorporate the fifteenth, in A minor, in The Damnation of Faust. FTP, name this set of solo piano pieces, Searle 244; the best-known works of Franz Liszt, named for his country of origin.;;Hungarian Rhapsodies (19)(,) (for piano, S. 244) (LW A132)
Noncomputational Math;;A velocity-space generalization of this lemma is used to take moments of the Boltzmann equation, because it trivially shows that the velocity-space integral of the distribution function under the namesake operation in velocity space vanishes. A special case of the generalized Stokes theorem for a Hodge-starred exterior derivative, it can be used to reduce by one the dimensionality of the set over which a scalar field is integrated as long as that scalar field can be expressed as a vector field under the namesake operation. FTP, name this fundamental theorem from vector calculus; a multi-dimensional analogue of integration by parts sometimes called Guass' theorem and named for the operation symbolized by del-dot.;;(divergence|Ostrogradky('s)-(Gauss)){1}? theorem
Biology;;This pathway's first enzyme, a transcarbomylase, requires an input of carbomyl phosphate. The synthetase at this pathway's antepenultimate step requires aspartate, which is dehydrated and combined with citrulline. Sometimes called the Krebs-Henseleit cycle, it requires three ATP, which it reduces to two ADP and an AMP. This double-celled cycle regenerates its required fumarate from arginosuccinate, after which arginase produces its namesake compound. FTP, name this biological pathway, the first metabolic pathway discovered, that degrades amino acids to a certain nitrogenous waste product.;;(Krebs-Henseleit) urea (cycle)|ornithine (cycle)
Literature;;Kaiser's similarly titled 1963 work on this book is frequently referenced in Clarence Miller's important 1979 translator's introduction to it. After attacking the distinction between grace gratis data and grace gratificans, this work challenges the authority of the Speculum maius and Gesta Romanorum. It is often published today with a letter defending it to Martin Dorp. Claiming that worshipers of Saints Barbara, George, Hippolytus and the author's namesake are "closely related [to gamblers]," who engage in the title action, the narrator herself concludes that activity by noting that she "hate[s] a listener with a memory". FTP, name this 1511 religious tract; the best known work of Desiderius Erasmus.;;(The) Praise of Folly|Moriae encomium
World-History;;The "Everlasting Remorse" addresses an episode during this event, a mutiny at Ma-wei that resulted in the death of Yang Kuei-fei. That favorite of T'ai-tsung had a somewhat inappropriate relationship with this upheaval's central figure, allegedly having compelled him to wear a large diaper at one point. Precipitated by the death of Li Lin-fu and subsequent grab at power by Yang Kuo-chung, this event was finally ended with the defeat of Shih Ch'ao-i. Its leader, eventually assassinated at the behest of Ch'ing-hsü, proclaimed the Yen dynasty shortly after taking Lo-yang in 756. FTP, name this eigth-century rebellion against the T'ang dynasty, led by a namesake Turkic general.;;An Lu-shan('s) (Rebellion)
Literature;;This author confronts sexual issues in A Patriot for Me and Under Plain Cover, one of his Plays for England, which deals with incest. Having collaborated with his mentor Stella Lindon on The Devil Inside Him and with Anthony Creighton on Personal Enemy, he received effusive praise from Kenneth Tynan. Autobiographized in A Better Class of Person, one of this playwright's last works, 1992's Déjàvu, is a sequel to the work set in a "one-room flat in the Midlands" for which he is best known. FTP, name this creator of Helena Charles, Cliff Lewis, and Jimmy Porter; the Angry Young Man behind Look Back in Anger.;;(John) Osborne
Miscellaneous;;This film's protagonist is able to find Zhora due to her use of a synthetic snake, a scale from which he locates in a bathtub. A vision of an origami unicorn in its director's cut is a crucial clue regarding his nature omitted from the original. At its beginning, Leon is unable to answer a question about his mother and attacks Holden while, near its end, Gaff notes "It's too bad she won't live, but then again, who does"? of the protagonist's love interest, Rachel, who almost passes the Voight-Kampff test. FTP, name this film by Ridley Scott based on Dick's Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep and featuring Harrison Ford as Deckard, one of the title replicant hunters.;;Blade Runner
Literature;;This character is unable to return the amorous advances of his interlocutor, a "dung goddess," who wishes to get his "other pencil to work". Though his penis survived an attempt on it by electric shock while he was himself a dog in the CUTIA, he lied about his virility to avoid having sex with his wife, so his testicles were fried and fed to dogs, "drainage below". He gained a tonsure when an abusive history teacher ripped-out some of his hair and lost his psychic powers due to "drainage above," a sinus operation. This founder of the MCC participates in a love triangle with Shiva and Parvati the Witch. His mother Anita died giving birth to him at midnight, August 15, 1947. FTP, name this main character of Rushdie's Midnight's Children.;;Saleem (Sinai)
United States History;;Nehemiah Abbot's March twenty-second speech regarding this article was a key point in the debate about it and the proposer of a namesake compromise regarding it later ran with Winfield Scott Hancock on 1880's Hancock/English ticket. Robert Walker resigned over the legitimacy of this document, the first Section of the seventh Article of which states that "the right of property is higher than any sanction". It was defeated in two referenda largely due to that Seventh article, which is entitled after the controversial issue that it addresses, "Slavery". Predecessor to the Wyandotte and Topeka documents of the same type, it drew the ire of Stephen A. Douglass. FTP, name this pro-slavery constitution drafted in 1857 for Kansas.;;(the) Lecompton (Constitution)
World History;;This dynasty's artisans rediscovered the tin glazing and luster painting techniques in an attempt to imitate Chinese wares. Its backing of the Qays led to the revolt of Abu Harb in Palestine. Nominally beginning with the Battle of the Great Gab River, after which its namesake took the epithet "blood-shedder," as-Saffah, its decline began with the revolt of Babak, which compelled the import of mercenaries by al-Mu'tasim, son of Harun ar-Rashid. Taking over after the death of Marwan II, this Caliphate moved the capital to Baghdad. FTP, identify this second great Muslim empire, after the Umayyads.;;(')Abbasid (Dynasty|Caliphate)
Miscellaneous;;This thinker's 1966 work looks at its titular phenomenon in "Coral Fish in the Laboratory" and in "Rats," before declaring "Ecce Homo!" in chapter thirteen. Conducting A Search for a Natural History of Human Knowledge in 1973's Behind the Mirror, a late work of this writer examined The Foundations of the discipline he founded. The monumental The Natural Science of the Human Species is a recent posthumous publication of his, but better known are King Solomon's Ring and the aforementioned On Aggression. FTP, name this ethologist perhaps most famous for discovering imprinting by training some ducklings to follow him around; the winner of the 1973 Medicine Nobel with Tinbergen and von Frisch, a fellow Austrian.;;(Konrad) Lorenz
Religion/Mythology;;The originator of this legend may have been Heliodorus, the chancellor of Seleucus IV Philopatorm, who was prevented by the priest Onias from looting the Temple. A similar story from a cuneiform tablet lends veracity to this legend, which is set during the years following the victory at Carchemish by Nebuchadnezzar. Three Talmudic units of weight, the peras, shekel, and mina, have been hypothesized to be represented. After "the gods of gold and silver, bronze, iron, wood, and stone" are praised at a banquet, the central event occurs and the inability to vocalize three verbs meaning "to count," "to weigh," and "to divide" render an inscription undecipherable. Depicted in the fifth chapter of Daniel, this is, FTP, what harbinger that, according to the prophet, foretold the downfall of King Belshazzar of Babylon?;;(the) writing on the wall|Mene Mene Tekel Parsin
United States History;;Passed three years after the Moro Rebellion, this bill attempted to appease Filipinos by loosening restrictions on the importation of hemp and sugar. Referred to as "the best bill the Republican Party ever passed," it would ironically lead to the election of a Democrat after a party split. The bill's Senatorial sponsor won support by pandering to anti-trust sentiment through a hike in rates on urban products, including those from his home state of Rhode Island. Signed into law against the wishes of Robert Lafollette by William Howard Taft, this is, FTP, what 1909 Tariff that lowered Dingley rates and the rates of which were later lowered by the Underwood Tariff?;;Payne-Aldrich (Tariff)
Physics;;In 1978, DRAM soft errors in Intel chips were linked to these entities. Created in the fifth step of the proton-proton cycle, their production is modeled by preformation and tunneling in the Gammow model of their namesake decay. In 1908, Hans Geiger and Ernest Marsden incorrectly hypothesized that their angular deflection would be approximately one-one-hundredth of a degree in a certain experiment; three years later Geiger and J. M. Nuttall noted the empirical relationship between their kinetic energies and half lives. FTP, name this ionizing form of radiation that was deflected in Rutherford's gold foil experiment; free helium-four nuclei.;;alpha (particle(s))
Literature;;Thomas Nashe's Pierce Pennilesse included an allusion to Talbot, the hero of one of this author's lesser-known works. That work included the line "O, tiger's heart wrapped in a woman's hide" which was used in Groatsworth of Wit by Robert Greene, who criticized the author as an "upstart crow beautified with our feathers". This critique was not unfounded, as the author later directly adapted Greene's Pandosto into work featuring Florizel, the prince of Bohemia. Florizel is in love with the daughter of the King of Siciliy whose maid's husband is the subject of the stage direction, "Exit, pursued by a bear". FTP, name this Elizabethan playwright known for his prodigious output including Henry VI and The Winter's Tale.;;(William) Shakespeare
Miscellaneous;;In one Friends episode, Monica has a bathroom mishap while singing this song whose royalties support the soup kitchen alluded to in its lyrics. Though a live version is now most often played, the original, with background vocals by the I-Threes, was featured on the Natty Dread album. After a long night, the artist recalls cooking cornmeal porridge by "fire light". He mentions the Yoruban goddess Oba, observes the hypocrites as they "mingle with the good people we meet...the good friends we've lost" and notes "in this great future, you can't forget your past". Taking its title from a Jamaican manner of consoling, this is, FTP, what Bob Marley song whose female object, after being assured that "Everything's gonna be all right!" is urged "little darlin', don't shed no tears"?;;No Woman(,) No Cry
Religion/Mythology;;While attending a feast hosted by Cybele on Mt. Ida, this deity fell asleep and was nearly violated by Priapus, but the braying of an ass woke her up and saved her. Considered both the youngest and oldest of the gods, since Cronus swallowed her first and disgorged her last, she caused a great rift between Apollo and Poseidon when she was asked by both of them to be their bride. But she refused both of them, taking a vow in front of her brother Zeus to remain pure. FTP, name this goddess whose symbol was the circle whose duties included tending the sacred fire on Mt. Olympus.;;Hestia
World History;;A Guido Reni rendition of the archangel Michael was based on the features of this pontiff whose sister-in-law, Olympia Maidalchini, wielded influence in his court. During the seventeenth century, the dukes of Parma waged the Wars of Castro against his family and that of his predecessor, Barberini. Originally, he was elected as a compromise against the candidate put forth by Mazarin, with whom he bickered almost continuously for the eleven-year duration of his papacy. He issued the Bull Zelo Domus Dei in protest against the French-negotiated provisions of the Peace of Westphalia. The successor to Urban VIII and commissioner of Bernini's Fountain of Four Rivers for his family's piazza this is, FTP, what Pamphili Pope whose portrait was painted by Velasquez?;;Innocent (X|the Tenth){1}?
Chemistry;;This reaction involves a tetrahedral alkoxide intermediate which is created by a nucleophilic addition of a hydroxide to a carbonyl group. The intermediate becomes a carboxylate ion which is protanated by addition of aqueous mineral acid to yield a carboxylic acid. Completed in a basic solution, its namesake constant indicates the amount of lye required to facilitate the breaking of ester linkages. That constant is 0.1330 for avocado and sesame seed; the relative amount of potassium hydroxide needed for them to undergo this process. FTP, name this triglyercide hydrolysis which takes its name from its use in the manufacture of soap.;;saponification
Literature;;After a scene in which the protagonist falls comatose on the floor, he is kissed by his seventeen-year-old crush and told "Run on, little brother". The events of the novel all take place in a single March day in 1935, the protagonist's fourteenth birthday. That morning he awakes, watches a movie, and comes home to find that his stepbrother has been stabbed. Likened by the author to Noah's son Ham, the protagonist is disliked by his father who sees in him the now-deceased son Royal, whom he abandoned. The novel's second section, "Prayers of the Saints," tells the history of members of the central family including that of the stepfather, Gabriel, who, after being "blood-washed," becomes a preacher. FTP, name this novel centering on John Grimes and by James Baldwin.;;Go Tell It on the Mountain
United States History;;In the year prior to this agreement, Alexandre Pétion and Jean-Jacques Dessalines defected from army posts and England broke a promise made in the Peace of Amiens to evacuate Malta. The negotiations for it occurred in the wake of the Treaty of San Ildefonso, the exact provisions of which were in dispute until the Transcontinental Treaty of 1819. Lacking sufficient military force to secure his foreign territories, the emperor looked to extend the right of deposit established by Treaty of Madrid. Completed by ambassadors Robert Livingston and James Monroe, this is, FTP, what Franco-American agreement of 1803 which facilitated the transfer of more than five hundred million acres?;;(the) Louisiana Purchase
Biology;;T.H. Huxley first coined the name of this feature, which is partially due to accretions during the tertiary period. It is contiguous with the Makassar Straits after which it turns forty-five degrees, continuing almost due East, North of the Spice Islands. At its Western extent, it cuts the Malay Peninsula between Lombock and Bali. The feature shares its name with Rhacophorus nigropalmatus, one of the species which Darwin's predecessor used during the 1850's to explain the lack of some oriental species South of about ten degrees South latitude. FTP, name this line; the hypothetical boundary between the zoogeographical regions of Asia and Australasia.;;(the) Wallace (line)
Art;;Among the supplementary depictions on this work of ebony, enamel and gold are the "handsomest" earthen creatures and four seahorses with interwoven tails. Eight cartouches of reclining figures alternating between representations of winds and times comprise the base, atop which sit two central figures whose legs are interwoven. With their right hands, the pair respectively cover a breast and hold a trident while their left hands hold an Ionic temple and an a boat, both sculpted for a practical purpose. FTP, name this Mannerist sculpture and condiment holder by Benvenuto Cellini.;;(The) Salt Cellar (of Francis (I|the First){1}?)
World History;;The movement which led to a daughter branch of this dynasty was inspired by the Cry of Ypiranga. Thirteen years after its initiation, that branch was rocked by the War of Tatters, in which one side was led by Giuseppe Garibaldi and which hastened the ascension of its founder's five-year-old son. The founder returned to his home nation and fought the War of the Two Brothers to return his daughter to the parent nation's throne. That parent dynasty was a collateral line of the House of Aviz, which ruled until the Habsburgs seized its throne in 1580. Sixty years later, John IV wrested that throne from the control of Phillip II, while it was John VI who sent his son, Pedro, to initiate a daughter line in Brazil. FTP, name this royal house of Portugal.;;Bragan(z|ç){1}?a
Noncomputational Math;;A corollary of the Lyusternik theorem is that, at a certain point, the Frechet derivative of the map between Banach spaces has this property. According to the Fredholm alternative theorem, either the adjoint of a continuous linear operator with a closed range has a non-trivial kernel or the operator is of this type. More generally, a function is said to have this property if and only if the composition of it and its inverse is everywhere the identity function. Only applicable to functions whose domain spans the entire codomain, this is, FTP, what property, functions having which are bijective only if they are also injective?;;surjective(ness)|onto
Philosophy;;One logical positivist derided emotivism as a "Boo Hurrah theory" of this field while, in the Provincial Letters, Pascal attacked casuistic approaches to it. G.E. Moore elucidated the naturalistic fallacy, which occurs when approaches to it appeal to some definition of a certain "indefinable" construct, which Henry Sidgwick considered across three primitive paradigms of the field. Kant's categorical imperative is hailed as the most reasonable approach in deontology, a stance that John Rawls clarified by defining with respect to justice and right the construct of good. FTP, name this branch of axiology concerned with philosophical morality.;;ethics
World History;;During this conflict, one of the leaders used the island of Lido as a prison for those in his debt. The course of the war was altered by a meeting in Hagenau between Phillip Hohenstaufen and Boniface of Montferratt; their decision eventually led to the deposition of the "bushy-eyebrowed" Alexius V and the subsequent ascension of the Latin Empire. Earlier, Simon de Montfort had deserted the effort after he refused the overtures of Enrico Dandolo to sack a Dalmatian city. Originally aimed at conquering Egypt, this is, FTP, what war, which saw the first sack of Constantinople and a repeat of the failure of Frederick Barbarossa and Richard the Lion-Hearted to take Jerusalem?;;(the) (4th|Fourth){1}? Crusade
Miscellaneous;;The characteristic communitas, which was influenced by Robert Merton's definition of society as "patterned," was attributed to Ndembu practitioners of this anthropological phenomenon in works such as The Drums of Affliction and The Forest of Symbols. The term for it was first used by Arnold van Gennep, whose work in rural France formed the basis of a model with three-phases: separation, liminality, and incorporation. In the previously named works, Victor Turner elucidated theories to explain the process of first humiliating, secluding, or testing before allowing a new societal role to be taken. Exemplified by the Norwegian russefeiring, Lakota vision quest, and Jewish Bar Mitzvah, this is, FTP, what phrase used to refer to any ritual symbolizing a change in status?;;rite of passage
Biology;;Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease is caused by a recessive mutation of the gene on the long arm of the X-chromosome that code for PLP1, which is responsible for the generation of this feature by oligodendrocytes in the central nervous system. An action potential may be initiated by the depolarization of one node of Ranvier, after which saltatory conduction is able to propagate at higher speeds to the hops affected by this insulator. Responsible for the brain's "white matter," this is, FTP, what phospholipid layer that surrounds axons?;;(the) myelin sheath
Literature;;Its last two lines, "Into the red Eye, the cauldron of morning" refer to the sun, to which the poet is suicidally flying like an arrow. As the poet continues on her path, she sees "Foam to wheat, a glitter of seas" and hears "the child's cry melt in the wall". The poem begins, "Stasis in darkness. Then the substanceless blue" as he exits a stable and suddenly "How one we grow, Pivot of heels and knees!" as she is unable to reach the reins and loses control of the namesake animal, whose name is taken from the Hebrew for "god's lioness". FTP, what is this namesake lyric of a poetry collection by Sylvia Plath?;;Ariel
Music;;After this composer "discovered" Boris Godunov, he adopted Balakirev's time signatures for an orchestral triptych and employed a women's chorus for its third section, "Sirens". Two trips to Bayreuth influenced him and he parodied Wagner's "Tristan chord" in the "Golliwog's Cakewalk" section of one his Children's Corner Suites. His friend Gustave Doré conducted the premier of a well-known piece which was intended as the first of another triptych and which, according to Pierre Boulez, marked the beginning of modern music. That work's first section is dominated by the flute, which represents the title animal from a Mallarme poem. FTP, name this French composer of Three Nocturnes and Prelude to the Afternoon of a Faun.;;(Claude) Debussy
Literature;;His characters include Formosante, who searches for her lover in The Princess of Babylon, and the Scythian Babouc, who sees the fall of Persepolis in The World as it Is. His poetic works include The Wordly One, an apologia about the author's love of physical comforts; Epistle to Urania, which rejects Christian orthodoxy; and An Essay on Epic Poetry, which was written in English to promote his epic, The Henriad. One of his plays centers on a queen of Messina who marries Polyphonte, Merope, while, in his most popular tragedy, the sultan Orosman kills the title slave girl, Zaire. FTP, name this prolific author whose most famous tale follows the adventures of Cacambo, Cunegonde, and Pangloss and is called Candide.;;Voltaire|(Jean) (Francois Marie) Arouet
United States History;;In the speech that announced this program, the speaker gave reference to revolution as igniting "a spark never to be extinguished". By contrast, Noam Chomsky derided this program as increasing beef production while citizens starved. It was formulated as a Ten Year Plan, with provisions to examine commodity market problems, to expand the Peace Corps, and to fulfill the Act of Bogota. The charter was formed at a conference in Punta del Este, Uruguay in 1961, and created a council to initiate social planning. Despite this, America contributed less than they had promised and it was dissolved in 1973. FTP, identify this American program which was announced by John Kennedy to aid Latin American economic development, abbreviated AFP.;;Alliance for Progress
Literature;;One of his novels concerns a man who has a stroke due to excessive sexual arousal, while another depicts a disintegrating marriage through the use of parallel diaries. His first novel is about a westernized engineer named Joji and is called Naomi. A prolific translator, his early work, like the short story "The Tattooer" bears the influence of Edgar Allen Poe. He treated the conflict between modernity and national identity in his essay "In Praise of Shadows". Other works include Quicksand, Captain Shigemoto's Mother, and The Key, but he is best known for a novel about four sisters living in Osaka. FTP, who is this Japanese writer, best known for Some Prefer Nettles and The Makioka Sisters?;;(Junichiro) Tanizaki
Art;;The creation of this painting was influenced by a similarly titled 1619 work by Thomas de Keyzer as well as by its painter's studies with Pieter Lastman, while the commission itself was suggested by an art dealer named Ulyenburgh. Its subject was a man named Adriaan Adriaanson who had been found guilty of robbery, though the painting is named for a man known in his own time for his treatises on monsters. One of the men in the background holds a list of government officials, while in the foreground is another open book. The title figure is holding forceps, not a pointer, suggesting to some that he was trying to demonstrate something about muscle movement. FTP, identify this painting which shows a group of men watching a dissection, a work of Rembrandt.;;(The) Anatomy Lesson (of (Dr(.)|Doctor){1}? (Nicholas) Tulp)
Literature;;This novel's title character procures her job due to the abrupt departure of Filomena, an incident related in the novel's first sentence. Many of this novel's central characters are infatuated with Gloria, a beautiful prostitute who often spends the day at her window; these include Professor Josue, who publicly recites a paean to her. One subplot considers the rebellion of Malvina from her father, the powerful Colonel Melk Tavares. One of the main plots concerns a political battle between Amancio Leal and Mundinho Falcao, while the other concerns the title character's culinary battles. FTP, what is this novel set in Ilheus concerning the heroine's relation with Nacib; a work by Jorge Amado?;;Gabriela, Clove, and Cinnamon
Religion/Mythology;;In one story, this being ends a drought and heals the goddess of beauty after she tries to fly to his kingdom, burning herself ugly. He commanded his son to fashion a golden chain and dangle an egg from it, from which was born the bird Sankofa. He sent his maid Arugba out with a divine bag, which began life on Earth. In the Ketu cult of Bahia, he is worshiped as Yansan, while in other traditions he is called Ogus. Never worshipped directly, he owns everything that is white on Earth, so he is the god of purity and ruler of the sky. FTP, what is this father of Obatala and Odudua; the Yoruba creator god?;;Olurun|Oludumare
World History;;They worshipped the god Huang Lo, a tradition that had originally been approved of by Emperor Xuan. They believed in the Magic and Immortality Tradition and wore amulets to ward off an epidemic caused by flooding of a nearby river. After being defeated at the battle of Yanzhou, their remnants were absorbed into the Qingzhou army. Ts'ao Ts'ao then used this army to win the battle of Guandu and establish the Wei Kingdom. Originally led by Chang Chueh, they were the partial cause of the foundation of the Three Kingdoms. FTP, identify this group that rebelled in 184 against the Han and that took its name from the color of heaven that would replace the blue heaven, the color of their headdresses.;;Yellow (Turban(s)|Scar(f|ves){1}?){1}? (revolt)|T'ai Ping Tao
Physics;;COUPP proposes to use these to search for WIMPs. There are proposals to use them as breeding blankets for fusion devices as they sometimes contain dense deuterium. These devices have no direct energy spectroscopy, but have a lower refresh time and higher reactant density than their predecessors. They work by changing the pressure in a tank, which causes its contents to become superheated; charges moving in the detector volume then create the namesake objects. FTP, identify these devices largely replaced by spark chambers, used to detect charged particles, and invented in 1952 by Donald Glaser.;;bubble chamber(s)
United States History;;At a break in this battle, fortifications were built at Great Redoubt, Balcarres Redoubt, and Breymann Redoubt. This battle would have been an even more complete victory had John Paterson's brigade supported the final charge. The main assault was commanded by a former Colonel at Wolfenbuttel, Friederich von Riedesel. In the final stage, a sniper mortally wounded Simon Fraser on the order of Daniel Morgan. This battle was fought in two areas, on Bemis Heights and in Freeman's Farm, and the rebel victory might be credited to the tactics of a wounded Benedict Arnold. FTP, identify this Revolutionary War battle fought in September and October 1777; a victory for Gates over Burgoyne in upstate New York.;;(the) (Battle of) Saratoga
Biology;;The first atomic structure of one of these was published by Ban et al. in 2000. Its leading end is labeled P and is followed by A. In prokaryotes, it is made of three strands and consists of 30S and 50S subunits; in eukaryotes it has four strands. It uses an initiator called fMET and then works by using peptidyl transferase to bind two amino acids, creating a peptide bond; it does this by reading mRNA and using tRNA to create its product. FTP, these, sometimes located within the mitochondria or in the cytoplasm, are, what protein-assembling organelles, most commonly located on the rough endoplasmic reticulum?;;ribosome(s)
Noncomputational Math;;One form of this, due to Lindeberg and Feller, applies to the difference of variates. While it does not hold for general stochastic processes, there is a version for martingales. The rate behind this relation is determined by the Berry-Esséen theorem. It holds generally under the Lyapunov condition, but the conventional statement of it requires that the variance be finite and that the mean of the sampling distribution of means be the population mean. FTP, identify this theorem stating that the distribution of a sample of independent random variables approaches a normal distribution with sample size.;;central limit (theorem)
Literature;;In one line, a patriarch of sheep is compared to the Egyptian God Amun. One activity described is a reading from The Chief of Gambia, an allusion to a poem by Sarah Wentworth Morton. One character in the poem is compared to Apollonius and Hermes and he discusses "the eagle's eggs he got" and his "prodigies of rod and gun". After this, the old Doctor comes around to make sure everyone is all right. Then they try to assuage their boredom by studying the Almanac. FTP, identify this poem, subtitled "A Winter Idyll," which concerns a group of people trapped by a blizzard; a work of John Greenleaf Whittier.;;Snow-bound(:) (A Winter Idyll)
Miscellaneous;;This work's inside cover shows the artist playing a Fender J-bass at left and near an upturned barstool at right. This album's tracks were produced by Bob Johnson except for its first, which was recorded at an ersatz New York studio with Al Kooper on Hammond. The title track is the seventh and discusses a location where Georgia Sam may run, but it is not nearly so famous as "Queen Jane, Approximately;" "Desolation Row;" "Just Like Tom Thumb's Blues;" or "Like a Rolling Stone". FTP, identify this 1965 Bob Dylan album, ostensibly about returning to the title roadway.;;Highway 61 Revisited
Pysics;;Maxwell's equations may be derived by extremizing the time integral of the one of these corresponding to a charge in an electromagnetic field. Its form for a mechanical system is motivated by requiring the virtual displacements in d'Alembert's principle to vanish. Generalized momenta are velocity partials of this function. If it is cyclic in a coordinate, that coordinate's generalized momentum is constant due to the equation of Euler and this function's namesake. FTP, identify this function central to a non-Newtonian formulation of physics and conventionally equal to the difference of kinetic and potential energies.;;Lagrangian (function)
Art;;Marcel Proust criticized the 1906 translation of this work by Madame Cremieux, complaining that it left out an index with information on San Giorgio dei Schiavoni as well as a discussion of Vittore Carpaccio. The theme of decay can be seen in the discussion of the Church of St. Moise and its most famous section contrasts the feudal relations between workers and authority with the subsequent relations during the rise of English mass production. Containing the essay "The Nature of Gothic", this work describes the architectural transition from Byzantine to Gothic and finally a decline to Renaissance. FTP, what is this three-volume artistic treatise on a Italian city written by John Ruskin?;;(The) Stones of Venice
Religion/Mythology;;This figure caused a group of men led by Heinin Vardd to be struck dumb; when questioned about his actions, he says that he had "borne a banner before Alexander," was in Canaan when Absalom was killed, and that Heinin and Idno call him Merddin. He protected a woman's honor by tricking Rhun into cutting off another woman's finger. By using a twig of holly, he is able to win a race on Dobbin to settle a feud with Maelgwyn. He was found by Elphin, who saved him from Ceridwen. FTP, identify this Welsh mythological figure, Gwion reborn, who lent his name to Frank Lloyd Wright's house.;;Taliesin
Miscellaneous;;This work describes the totality of all of the beliefs common to people as the "conscience collective". One way that people feel connected to one another is through these shared beliefs, which the author terms "mechanical solidarity". But the more important determinant of connectedness is through the title concept, which creates "organic solidarity. " Building on Adam Smith's discussion, the author casts this functional role as a necessary precondition for civilization. The author then shows how the title concept is coextensive with similar biological collective strategies. He also describes an abnormal form of it, in which citizens suffer from anomie. FTP, what is this 1893 sociological work that discusses specialization, written by Emile Durkheim?;;(The) Division of Labor in Society
Literature;;The king is tricked by Villuppo into arresting Alexandro for murdering his son; once that is revealed, Villuppo is sentenced to death. The murder of Serberine is a set-up of Pedringano, who is further tricked into keeping silent about his earlier crimes and hanged. The play opens with a visit to the palace of Pluto and Proserpine, who command Revenge to accompany a ghost back to earth. Climaxing at a performance of Solyman and Perseda, the end features the murder of Lorenzo, Balthazar and Bel-Imperia. Hieronimo thus satisfies the ghost of Don Andrea and avenges the death of his son, Horatio. FTP, what is this 1589 Thomas Kyd revenge tragedy that inspired Shakespeare's Hamlet.;;(The) Spanish Tragedy
Chemistry;;An ester modification of these is the Fries rearrangement, and it was first published in Comptes rendus in 1884. One form of them is strongly inhibited by the presence of electron acceptors and carbocation rearrangement decreases its useful yield. The reactivity of one of their constituents increases with the polarity of the C-X bond. Both forms are limited to fairly reactive arenas and use a Lewis acid catalyst, typically aluminum tri-chloride. FTP, identify these electrophilic aromatic substitutions that synthesize either an acyl or an alkyl from benzene, named for their French and American discoverers.;;Friedel-Crafts (reaction(s))
World History;;His religious policies were steered by his brother, Bruno, who later became an archbishop. He defeated Duke Eberhard and Giselbert at the Battle of Andernach after they aligned with this man's half brother, Thankmar. Later, he intervened in Northern Italy after the assassination of Berengarius and gained power there after marrying the daughter of Rudolph II, Adelaide. After further rebellions by his son Ludolph and by Conrad the Red, this man terminated their powers at the Imperial Diet of Auerstadt. Following this, he rushed to Augsburg to defeat the Magyars. FTP, Identify this man who ruled out of Magdeburg and the victor at Lechfeld; a German king who consolidated power and in 962 was crowned the first Holy Roman Emperor of the Saxon line.;;Otto (I|the First|the Great){1}?;;Otto
Philosophy;;Book Five of this work considers the causes of factional conflict and asserts that middle classes are crucial to mitigating unrest. Distinguishing between numerical and merit-based equality, this work also outlines three deviations from the ideal: tyranny, oligarchy, and democracy. A key idea in this work is the notion that the city is a kind of association called koinonia. Book Two discusses competing constitutional theories like those of Hippodemus of Miletus and Plato. FTP, identify this work concerning the nature of government, written by Aristotle.;;(The) Politics|Politika
Music;;In 1816, this man composed his first paid work, a cantata for the students of a Professor Watteroth entitled "Prometheus". Other works around that time include his libretto for the founder of the schoolmasters' widows' fund and an opera, Die Burgschaft. Due to the inept writing of men such as Georg von Hoffman, Josef Kupelweiser, and Franz von Schober, operas such as Alfonso and Estrella and Fierrbras were poorly received. Other works include a famous sonata for piano and arpeggione as well as an Ave Maria that was based on a poem by Sir Walter Scott. He is best known, however, for his Grand Duo Piano Sonata in C Major as well as songs like "The Doppelganger" and "Die Schone Mullerin". FTP, identify this German Romantic composer of Die Winterreise and the Trout Quintet.;;(Franz) Schubert
United States History;;The site of a minor 1862 victory by Ambrose Bierce and of a Civil War-era colony for freedmen, it was first explored in the sixteenth century by Philip Amadas and Arthur Barlowe. Among its first residents were the third man to circumnavigate the globe, Thomas Cavendish; the scientist Thomas Hariot; and the friendly native Americans Granganimeo and Wingina. Its early leaders included Richard Grenville, the captain of the Tyger, and John White, a surveyor whose granddaughter Virginia was the first English child born in the Americas. White returned to England in 1587 to get more settlers but on his return found only a tree-carving of the word "Croatoan". FTP, name this "Lost Colony" located in the Outer Banks of North Carolina.;;Roanoke
Philosophy;;In the fourth chapter of this work, the author describes the need for social interaction, beginning with a struggle to the death. Having learned that a corpse cannot provide validation, the next interaction becomes a struggle for dominion, resulting in lord and bondsman forms of self-consciousness. Its famous Preface outlines the author's characteristic method of Zusehen. Contrary to popular belief, this work was not finished the night before Napoleon's invasion of Jena, where its author had a university position. FTP, name this book tracing the path of consciousness to absolute knowledge, the first major work of Hegel.;;(The) Phenomenology of (Spirit|Mind){1}?|Phänomenologie des Geistes
Biology;;The Maleficent system allows this tool to be used stably in mammalian cells. Proteins from the Argonaute family and Dicer make up the RISC complex that carry out the cleavage step in this process. First studied by Jorgenson in petunias, it is known as "quelling" in Neurospora. While it is now primarily used as an alternative to gene knockout, it may someday be useful therapeutically in silencing viral gene expression. FTP, name this tool from molecular biology, so named because it uses double-stranded RNA to disrupt gene expression.;;RNA i(nterference)|interfering RNA
Astronomy;;This location's deposits of KREEP basalts are thought to date from the Pre-Nectarian period, and it has the largest known minable deposits of the advanced fusion fuel helium-three. Low volatile abundances provide evidence against George Darwin's of its formation, but oxygen isotope ratios argue against gravitational capture, so this body may have formed during an encounter involving a Mars-sized impactor after terrestrial core-formation. Its tidal locking has led to a thicker crust on one side, explaining the uneven distribution of smooth basalt plains with relatively little cratering, known as maria [MAH-ree-uh]. FTP, name this natural satellite of the Earth.;;(The) Moon|Luna
United States History;;His books include a thriller called The Canfield Decision, in which a radical Jewish group teams up with the Iranians to destroy détente, and a 1980 memoir entitled Go Quietly or Else. His political career began through the connections of Judge Herbert Moser, a supermarket executive, and another judge, E. Lester Barrett, influenced his decision to turn Republican. He defeated a segregationist named George Mahoney in his state's 1966 gubernatorial race. Well-known for quotes like "if you've seen one city slum, you've seen them all" and for his William Safire-written attack on reporters as "an effete corps of impudent snobs" and "nattering nabobs of negativism," he was fined ten thousand dollars for taking bribes as governor of Maryland. FTP, name the man who resigned as Richard Nixon's vice president in 1973.;;(Spiro) (Theodore) Agnew
Literature;;This author's first published work discusses the issue of racial stereotyping in the interactions between Boyd and the Wilsons. This author of "A Cauliflower in Her Hair" also wrote about a man who tells his cabbie to only bet on horses with names containing the letters C, R, and L in the story that gives its title to a posthumously published collection. In addition to "After You, My Dear Alphonse" and "One Ordinary Day, with Peanuts," this author also wrote about the mentally unstable Natalie Waite in The Hangsaman and Merricat Blackwood in We Have Always Lived in the Castle. FTP name this writer commonly associated with a story whose title event is led by Mr. Summers on June twenty-seventh; the American writer of The Haunting of Hill House and "The Lottery".;;(Shirley) (Hardie) Jackson
World History;;His uncle enraged St. Dunstan by leaving his coronation feast to cavort with his foster-mother and foster-sister. His mother Elfrida, in her quest to put him on the throne, killed his half-brother, who was later considered a martyr, and during his reign his theigns defeated the Norwegians at Maldon. According to William of Malmesbury, he defecated in the font at his baptism, and he brought disaster to England on St. Brice's Day when he ordered a massacre of the Danes. In response to this, Sweyn Forkbeard launched a campaign to conquer England, but died several weeks after achieving his goal, allowing this man to retake his throne in 1014. FTP, name this father of Edmund Ironsides and Edward the Confessor, a pre-Norman English king whose epithet means "without counsel".;;Aethelred (II|the Second){1}?(,) (the) (Unraed|Unready)|Aethelred (II|the Second)(,) (the) (Unraed|Unready){1}?
Art;;This work was a response to the artist's rejection by Augusta Boogaerts, who he called "La Sirene". In an etching of the same subject, this work's artist included an advertisement for Colman's Mustard and a banner with the slogan "Noisy Wagner Army". A decorated general appears near a banner proclaiming "Doctrinaire fanfares always succeed". The white-sashed man on the green stage at the right edge is the mayor of the title city. The title figure, a self-portrait of the artist, can be seen riding on a donkey behind a marching band. FTP, name this painting first shown publicly forty years after it was listed in the 1889 exhibition catalogue of Les Vingt; a James Ensor painting imagining the reaction to Jesus's appearance in a Belgian city.;;Christ(')s Entry into Brussels (in 1889)|(The) Entry of Christ into Brussels (in 1889)
Chemistry;;This technique may be used to find Fermi resonances in acid chlorides. Preparation of compounds for use in this technique may involve making a mull in nujol, mixing with potassium bromide, or depositing a thin film on a sodium chloride cell. A molecular dipole moment shift is required for a vibration to be visible using this technique. Hydrogen bonding lowers the frequency of the hydroxyl group stretch, and vibrations between four hundred and one thousand, six hundred wavenumbers are considered the fingerprint region for organic compounds studied using this method. FTP, identify this type of spectroscopy useful in identifying functional groups whose vibrations are excited by wavelengths of light that are longer than visible light.;;i(nfra)r(ed) (spectroscopy)
Music;;Several of his early works, including such operas as Cleonice, Demofoonte, and Artaserse, were written with librettist Pietro Metastasio. He had begun composing an opera based on the Song of Roland, but the discovery that Niccolo Piccini was given the same libretto to work on sparked a rivalry in the Parisian press and motivated him to compose Armide. Collaboration with the librettist Calzabigi resulted in the composition of the ballets Semiramide and Don Juan, as well as an opera featuring the "Dance of the Blessed Spirits" and another in whose preface he declared his intent to "restrict music to its true office of serving poetry". FTP, identify this German classical composer of "reform" operas such as Alceste and Orfeo et Euridice.;;(Christoph) (Willibald) (von) Gluck
World History;;In his early life he was influenced by the theosophism of his tutor, Ferdinand Brooks. During World War II, the envoys Lord Wavell and Stafford Cripps failed to reconcile his party with the rival party, founded by Aga Khan III. In his most important post, he put through the Community Development Program and the 1951 five-year plan, going against the conservative politics of his father, Motilal. Although under the influence of his minister Menon he was a leader of the non-aligned movement, he called for western aid when China encroached upon the Brahmaputra River. FTP name this continuing leader of the Congress Party despite the protests of Sardar Patel and Gandhi, the grandfather of Sanjay and father of Indira Gandhi and first prime minister of independent India.;;(Jawaharlal) Nehru
Miscellaneous;;This text's author described it as a "loathsome, distended, tumefied, bloated, dropsical mass," and shortly after its publication he arranged for Hugo Münsterberg to take over his duties in the title field. The fourth chapter opens by describing living creatures as "bundles of habits," and later in that chapter the author concludes, "Habit is thus the enormous fly-wheel of society". A later chapter argues that the arousal of a physical response precedes the appearance of the associated emotion, a theory similar to that of Lange. FTP, name this work published in 1890 that introduced the term "stream of consciousness," a textbook on "the Science of Mental Life" written by William James.;;(The) Principles of Psychology
Literature;;Its narrator attended school with Apthorpe, who would later serve in the army with Guy Crouchback in another work by this book's author. The search for Effie lands Boy Mulcaster and the narrator in jail but they are bailed out by Rex Mottram, who later marries Julia. After meeting the narrator by vomiting into his window, Julia's brother Sebastian ends up serving in a monastery in Carthage. The siblings are the children of the staunchly Catholic Lady Marchmain, on whose death the narrator received his first commission. The story begins when the narrator, an architectural painter-turned-soldier, recognizes his new army camp as the titular mansion. FTP, name this novel narrated by Charles Ryder; a work by Evelyn Waugh.;;Brideshead Revisited
Literature;;According to one account, this character was placed in charge of Anjou after his liege defeated Frollo. Another account credits him with killing the terrifying cat of Anglesey. His father predicted he would have several strange traits, including cold hands and a cold heart; when he carried a load, no matter the size, it disappeared, and he could hold his breath underwater for nine days. These traits are mentioned in The Tale of Culhwch and Olwen, in which he frees Mabon to help his lord's cousin, Culhwch. He sent Perceval to fight the Red Knight and gave Gareth the nickname Beaumains when he put Gareth to work as a kitchen boy. FTP, name this seneschal of King Arthur; the rather boorish son of Sir Ector.;;(Sir) (Kay|Cei|Cai){1}?
Literature;;One of this work's characters is interrupted repeatedly with the phrase "lost his oil jar," while another is made to understand human desire by analogy to his love of pea soup. After the central character dons the robe of the pea-soup-loving character, he is accused of stealing Cerberus by Aeacus, leading him to switch costumes with his servant, Xanthias. The central conflict is eventually resolved by considering what to do with Alcibiades and with the weighing of verses. FTP, identify this work culminating in the return to Athens of the victorious Aeschylus; an Aristophanes comedy in which Dionysus enters the underworld to fetch Euripides and, while crossing the River Acheron, meets a chorus of the titular amphibians.;;(The) Frogs|Batrachoi
Physics;;In cgs units, for an isolated spherical conductor, this quantity is equal to the radius. A low-pass filter may be created by placing an element with this property in series with a shunt resistor and parallel with the load, since the reactance associated with this property varies as the signal period. A circuit with an element with this property in series with a resistance has an associated time constant given by this quantity times the resistance. An element with this property stores energy equal to half its value times the square of the potential difference across the element. FTP, name this quantity, defined as the ratio of potential difference to charge stored, and measured in MKS units of farads.;;capacitance
Biology;;Deficiency of this compound can result in skin lesions known as Casal's necklaces, as well as diarrhea and dermatitis. When administered in gram quantities, it can be used as a cholesterol-lowering drug with flushing as a major side effect. It can be biosynthesized in a multi-step pathway via cleavage of the five-membered ring of tryptophan and rearrangement of the remaining six-membered ring. Its coenzyme form acts as a substrate for poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase and is synthesized in the light reactions of photosynthesis along with ATP. FTP, identify this water-soluble vitamin whose nutritional deficiency is called pellagra and was originally isolated as an oxidation product of nicotine.;;niacin|nicotinic acid|(vitamin) B3
Literature;;One character bemoans his blind worship of Ashtaroth, while another rejects the Bible in favor of Caesar's Commentaries on the Gallic Wars. Hobomok is present at the beginning of the conflict incited by the title character, whose death is announced in the section entitled "The Spinning Wheel". Earlier, the central female character, as she sang the hundreth Psalm, was interrupted and insulted, after which she inquires of her interlocutor, "Why don't you speak for yourself"? FTP, name this Longfellow poem in which Priscilla Mullins marries John Alden rather than the titular Puritan captain.;;(The) Courtship of Miles Standish
World History;;Leading historians of this institution include Henry Kamen and Benzion Netanyahu, the father of the Israeli prime minister. Abolished in 1834, it was overseen by a five-member commission known as the Suprema, which sought to ensure the observance of "terms of grace" for those who came before it. Among its actions were several edicts against the Alumbrados, or Illuminati, and its last action was the garroting of the deist Cayetano Ripoll in 1826. Juan Antonio Llorente, a former Suprema secretary, claimed that it killed thirty thousand people between 1480 and 1808, though other scholars and the infamous "black legend" hold that many more were killed under its most famous leader, Tomas de Torquemada. FTP, name this effort to stamp out religious heresy on the Iberian peninsula.;;(the) Spanish Inquisition;;(The) Inquisition
World History;;This man's ward Valentinian II was murdered twenty years after this man attained his most famous post by succeeding the persecutor Auxentius. Following Valentinian's death, the usurper Eugenius caused this man to lose a long-standing literary argument with Symmachus by reestablishing the Altar of Victory in the Senate chamber. An enemy of the Empress Justina, he famously exacted public penance for the murder of Thessalonian citizens by the Emperor Theodosius. In art, he is represented with bees or honey to symbolize his gift at oratory, a gift shared by his most famous protégé. FTP, identify this Saint, bishop of Milan and spiritual father of St. Augustine.;;(St(.)|Saint) Ambros(e|ius){1}? (of Milan)
Music;;Erik Satie wrote a set of six of them in 1919, of which the first three were all written in D major. One by Samuel Barber is his Opus thirty-three, written for solo piano. This term also names a collection of three pieces that may have originally been written as a violin concerto for Eugene Ysaye, of which the third movement features a wordless chant for eight mezzo-sopranos. One in the key of A-flat Major follows a Polonaise in Les Sylphides, a ballet inspired by the music of the composer most often associated with this musical form. FTP, identify this type of musical composition giving its name to a set of three orchestral works including Fetes, Sirenes, and Nuages by Debussy, developed by the Irish composer John Field, and naming twenty-one piano pieces by Chopin and a painting of a falling rocket by John Whistler.;;nocturne(s)
Literature;;One character from this novel criticizes the railroads of Europe as the Star Wormwood of Revelation. The end of the first part is highly praised; it ends with the central female character spiting the greedy suitor she has just jilted by telling him he can have the money she just threw into the fireplace. Biblical allusions are prevalent in the work: the protagonist views Hans Holbein's Christ in the Grave in the home of his romantic rival, Rogozhin. After leaving the protagonist at the altar, Natasha flees with his rival and the work culminates with the dead girl in the arms of the Christ-figure, the infirm Myskin. FTP, name this work by Fyodor Dostoevsky.;;The Idiot
World History;;In the peace treaty ending this war, the loser was forced to give up the Pescadores Islands and open four ports to merchants from the winning nation. It followed a revolt by the Tonghak Society, after which the eventual winner of this war invaded the capital of a nation neighboring the loser and captured that nation's royal family. The loser of this war asked for peace a month after the battle of Weihaiwei, while their fleet was dealt a serious blow the previous year at the battle of the Yalu River. After Russia, Germany, and France intervened, the peace treaty of Shimonoseki was made less punishing to the loser. FTP, name this war which ended in 1895 and which also involved the loss of Taiwan to the victorious island nation.;;(the) Sino-Japanese (War)
Religion/Mythology;;This object's eventual maker spent three days searching for a place to build it before coming upon a rainbow-colored rock where he made his furnace. That maker created a crossbow, a skiff, a magic cow, and a plow before he made this item, and he later stole it from the goddess of the underworld to whom he had given it after she defaulted on her promise of the hand of the Maiden of Pohjola. That goddess, Louhi, had this quern made for her by Ilmarinen, who was assisted in taking it back by his brother Vainamoinen. FTP, name this life-giving mill from Finnish mythology which figures in the Kalevala.;;(the) sampo
Geography;;Herman Melville's Battlepieces included sketches set at this location, whose man-animal relations are the subject of studies by anthropologist Eugene Guribye. Sunsets at picturesque locations like Post Office Bay last only minutes due to its proximity to the equator, and the first black smokers were found near them, close to the boundary of the Cocos and Nazca plates. The Five Hills on its largest island, Isabel, are actually volcanoes, an eruption of which in 1998 forced naturalists to airlift its namesake local fauna to safety. FTP, name this archipelago known in Spain as los Encantatas; the site of evolutionary studies by Charles Darwin.;;Galapagos (Islands)
Biology;;In Arabidopsis, a crucial function of the first part of this period seems to be controlled by SOLO DANCERS. In the Xenophus model species, Chk1 kinase arrests oocyte development at this point. Secondary replication occurs during its second sub-phase and it terminates with attachment of non-kinetochore microtubules. Divided into leptotene, zygotene, pachytene, and diplotene sub-phases, this phase ends with diakinesis. During it, the process of synapsis is completed, homologous chromosomes join into tetrads, and crossing-over takes place. FTP, name the phase followed by metaphase I; the first stage of meiosis.;;prophase (I|one|1){1}?
Literature;;In the book in which it appears, it precedes a poem in which the author wishes that anyone who "guesses, thinks, or dreams" he knows who the author's mistress is be withered by a curse. In the second stanza of this poem, the author asks that "self murder" and "sacrilege" not be added to a woman's sins. The title creature is meant to show "how little that which" a woman denies to the poet is, and is said to be both a "marriage temple" and a "marriage bed," while the poet and a woman are met "and cloistered" and "living walls of jet". FTP, name this poem about a creature which sucked a woman and then sucked John Donne, thereby mingling two bloods.;;(The) Flea
World History;;It initially experienced success when Tinius Rufus decided to evacuate a major city, after which Julius Severus was brought in to oppose it. Its causes included the creation of a new coin that showed a certain province as a woman taken prisoner and a plan to build a new city called Aelia Capitolina. In its aftermath, a group of wise men who had supported it were executed, after which they became known as the Ten Martyrs. Its namesake leader had a name meaning "son of a star" though his advisor, Rabbi Akiba, announced that he was the anointed king. FTP, name this uprising against Roman rule which began in 132 CE, when Jewish rebels captured Jerusalem.;;Bar-Kochba('s) (Rebellion|Revolt){1}?
Miscellaneous;;In one episode, this character was called "the Doctor" and his scheme to sell some dangerous eggs went awry when he forgot to keep them refrigerated. In another episode, he went to Los Angeles to retrieve a powerful ring that had been taken from him, but it ended up in the hands of a torturer he had hired to ascertain its location. He killed a number of people due to brainwashing triggered by the song "Early One Morning," but it was defused after he fought Robin Wood. He slept with Anya after she was left at the altar by Xander, and died while using a powerful amulet that enabled him to save the world in the final episode of Buffy the Vampire Slayer. FTP, name this peroxided character played by James Marsters.;;Spike|William
Philosophy;;In the 18th book of this work, we learn that the central figure got down from his carriage in hopes of speaking to a madman, but the latter avoided a conversation by hurrying away. That book also includes a list of "men who withdrew from society" and an episode where the central figure announces that "one cannot associate with birds and beasts". In the 20th and final book, we learn that a man who embraces the five excellent practices can take part in government. Along with the other Sishu, this book was published by Zhu Xi in 1190 and consists of remarks compiled after a sage died in 479 BCE. FTP, name this Chinese classic containing the sayings of Confucius.;;(The) Analects (of Confucius)|Lun yü
Chemistry;;This procedure was first published with Claparede in 1881 in two forms, the second for a hydroxyl-substituted benzene. As performed today, it usually requires an initial acylation but, even with this, the relevant methanoate derivatives are notably unable to carry out the self- form of this reaction. One of the reactants contains a hydrogen alpha to a carbonyl; a deprotonation occurs at this site in the first step and the resulting conjugated system attacks the other reactant, an ester. It requires a strong base catalysis, so the relevant alkoxide is often added to the system. FTP, name this reaction of two esters to yield a beta-keto ester; a condensation named for a German chemist.;;Claisen (condensation|reaction)
United States History;;He used the pseudonym Achates in writing a pamphlet in response to the slave rebellion led by Denmark Vesey. In the War of 1812 he was appointed Major General and given command of the southern district, and later commanded military forces during the Creek War, as well as negotiating the treaty that ended it. He was the Federalist choice for Vice President in 1796, having been selected as their candidate while he was in Europe negotiating a treaty with the so-called "Prince of Peace," Godoy, which provided for free navigation of the Mississippi River. FTP, name this politician from South Carolina who negotiated the 1795 Treaty of San Lorenzo with Spain; a treaty also known by his name.;;T(homas) Pinckney;;Pinckney
World History;;A few minutes before William Fildes was killed, Charles Ethelston took action from Mr. Buxton's house. A year after it took place, Arthur Thistlewood led a group that planned an attack on a party at Lord Harrowby's house, though they were arrested at their house in Cato Street before anyone could be killed. The Earl of Liverpool's government responded to it by passing the repressive Six Acts. It took place on August 16, when an attempt to arrest Henry Hunt went awry and eleven people were killed. FTP, name this event in Manchester at which a crowd gathered to hear a lecture on Parliamentary reform was attacked, a "massacre" of 1819.;;Peterloo (Massacre)
Miscellaneous;;Leslie White suggested that the product of technical factor efficiency and per capita energy consumption is an appropriate quantitative measure of the "evolution" of this concept, which, according to another scientist, is best explained in terms of "webs of significance". Those "webs" are best "interpreted" through "thick description" of "deep play" such as the Balinese cock fight according to Cliffy Geertz. A 1944 essay by Bronislaw Malinowski offered a "scientific theory" of it, while a 1934 book about it considers such groups as the Kwakiutl and Zuni. FTP, name this concept whose "patterns" were discussed by Ruth Benedict.;;culture
World History;;One man of this name was put to death along with the poet Lentulus Gaeticulus after conspiring to assassinate his brother-in-law. That man was married to Drusilla, the sister of the man who eventually had him killed, Caligula. Another man of this name made an unsuccessful assassination attempt in 30 BCE, becoming the first man to try to murder an Emperor when he failed to kill Augustus. The most famous man of this name served as consul in 46 BCE before becoming pontifex maximus and, after the battle of Mutina, he joined with Mark Antony to march on Rome. FTP, name these Romans, the last of whom later assisted Octavian against Pompey as the third member of the Second Triumvirate.;;Lepidus(es)|Lepidi
Literature;;In the final episode of this novel, three of the title character's daughters are visited by a priest who forces them to discard all but five of the relics in their family's chapel, and the stuffed corpse of the title character's dog Bendico is thrown into a rubbish heap. That episode is set in 1910, after the death of the title character's dashing nephew, Tancredi, who married the daughter of the vulgar mayor of Donnafugata in the 1860's after fighting with the Garibaldists. This was the only novel written by its author and appeared in 1958, a year after his death. FTP, name this work about Don Fabrizio Corbera, the Prince of Salina; a novel by Giuseppe Tomasi di Lampedusa.;;(The) Leopard|(O) Leopardo
Literature;;The first poetic passage quoted in this work is from Charles Wolfe's "Burial of Sir John Moore at Corunna" and it also quotes from Shakespeare's King John, Tourneur's Revenger's Tragedy, and George Peele's The Battle of Alcazar. It ends by asking if democracy is the "last improvement possible in government" and suggests that a better state would "recognize the individual as a higher and independent power". It first appeared in the Aesthetic Papers published by Elizabeth Peabody in 1849 and begins with the motto "That government is best which governs least". FTP, name this essay by Henry David Thoreau.;;Civil Disobedience|Resistance to Civil Government
Music;;This man's first opera, The Magic Fountain, was not performed during his lifetime, though he used music from it in the swamp scene found in Act III of another of his operas. That opera was based on a section of George Washington Cable's The Grandissimes and features the suicide of the quadroon Palmyra after Simon Perez is murdered by the titular voodoo priest, Koanga. In the best-known opera by this man, the Dark Fiddler fails to persuade Sali and Vreli to join him on his travels. FTP, name this creator of the symphonic sketches Brigg Fair and On Hearing the First Cuckoo in Spring; the German-born British composer of A Village Romeo and Juliet.;;(Frederick) (Theodore) (Albert) Delius
Literature;;At the beginning of this story, the protagonist daydreams about "quiet vestibules, hung with Oriental tapestries, lighted by tall lamps of bronze" while watching her maid Brittany work. The actions of this story are precipitated when a junior clerk in the office of the Ministry of Public Information arrives home with a party invitation. The couple goes to the party but has to leave early so that the other guests do not see the protagonist's ragged coat. FTP, what is this inspiration for Henry James' "Paste;" a story in which Mathilde's life is changed when she has to pay 36,000 francs to replace the titular piece of costume jewelry and which is by Guy de Maupassant?;;(The) Necklace|(La) Parure
Physics;;This relation may be most directly derived by noting the commutation of the time derivative and bra-ket operators, then assuming harmonic time dependence for the solution of the time-dependent Schrödinger equation. It is not as intuitive for perturbed observables, since its familiar form assumes that the operator corresponding to the observable in question is not explicitly time dependent. A demonstration of the Bohr correspondence principle, it is most often cited for the case of the momentum observable in the coordinate representation, in which case it reduced to a highly familiar statement about the total time derivative of the momentum's expectation. FTP, name this theorem, often cited as a quantum analog of Newton's 2nd law.;;Ehrenfest('s) (theorem)
Art;;He depicted a man in a suit of armor standing on a small boat and kissing a naked woman whose pudenda are obscured by a metal chain in his painting The Deliverance of Arsinoe. The titular nude figure dips her left leg into a pool of water while looking at a mirror behind which can be seen a bald, bearded man in his The Bathing Susanna. A figure hanging horizontally in space and wearing a red robe holds a baby which sucks at the breast of another naked woman in his The Origin of the Milky Way. His other works include Vulcan Surprising Venus and Mars and a notable 1594 version of the Last Supper. FTP, name this mannerist painter who was born Jacopo Robusti.;;Tintoretto
Literature;;In one of his poems, this author claimed to "crave the stain / Of tears" and the "sweet of bitter bark / And burning clove" before concluding that he longs "to feel the earth as rough / To all my length". In another poem, he claimed to have "looked down the saddest city lane" and to have seen a "luminary clock against the sky" which "proclaimed the time was neither wrong nor right". In addition to "To Earthward" and "Acquainted with the Night," he wrote about a "dimpled spider" holding up a moth in his sonnet "Design" and about a "broken drinking goblet" hidden "so the wrong ones can't find it" in the poem "Directive". FTP, name this American poet of "The Gift Outright" and "The Road Not Taken".;;(Robert) Frost
Noncomputational Math;;"The lemma that is not Burnside's" is actually due to this man and his namesake problem is to solve a general first-order ODE with an analytic inhomogeneous term. With Euler, this person is the namesake of equations of the form x-squared times y-double-prime, plus a times x times y-prime, plus b times y, equals 0. With Riemann, he names two PDE's satisfied by all holomorphic functions and the completeness of a space is defined by uniform convergence of his namesake sequences. He is the namesake, with Schwarz, of an inequality comparing the norms of two vectors to the magnitude of their inner product, and he made the original definition of the limit. FTP, name this prolific mathematician; a French military engineer.;;(Augustin) (Louis) Cauchy
Art;;Appointed antiquarian to the pope by Clement XIII, his followers included Reiffenstein, Ermannsdorff and Angelica Kauffmann, who painted his portrait. He wrote works on the antique gems of the Baron de Stosch and on the recently discovered ruins at Herculaneum. Robbed and killed in Trieste on his way back to Rome, perhaps in an ill-fated homosexual encounter, he coined his motto, "noble simplicity and calm grandeur," while contemplating male nudes such as the Apollo Belvedere and the Laocoon Group. FTP name this man who emphasized the emotion that art could bring in his wildly popular History of Ancient Art; a German critic whose "classical ideal" was influential to both the Romantics and Neo-Classicists and who is often called the father of modern art history.;;(Johann) (Joachim) Winckelmann
Chemistry;;The underpinning of this phenomenon hinges on considering the ensemble average of expectation values of the intrinsic angular momentum resulting from using the S-O Hamiltonian, as these expectation values vary harmonically in a strong field. Its namesake spectrum corresponds to a proper limit of the Larmor equation. It is of especial utility in studying ring flipping in cyclic hydrocarbons and, in 1985, it was used to determine the structure of fullerene. Proteins are frequently studied using its namesake spectroscopy, which produces a graph of chemical shift as a function of applied frequency. FTP, identify this phenomenon in which atoms have large responses to certain frequencies of applied fields; the basis for MRI's.;;n(uclear) m(agnetic) r(esonance)
Literature;;The protagonist of this novel contemplates the etymology of the word "friend" while having tea with Bill Shaw and later has an affair with his wife during their sessions of "Lösung". He goes to a flat at Green Point on Thursdays to have sex with a prostitute named Soraya until he accidentally learns her true identity, after which he seeks the company of Melanie Isaacs. He visits his daughter in Salem, where he becomes a veterinary technician and befriends the bulldog Katy and the groundskeeper Petrus, but all falls apart when they are attacked by three men from the woods and Lucy gets pregnant. FTP, name this novel about the decline and fall of professor David Lurie; a work of J.M. Coetzee.;;Disgrace
Miscellaneous;;Research on levels of norepinephrine in the brain indicate that the motor activation deficit hypothesis may be more suitable than this theory, which arose in the late 1970's within the framework of attribution theory. The classic experiment in which it was first elucidated involved dogs who were shocked in one scenario and then were able to avoid the shock in a subsequent scenario. The theory opposes the hypothesis of operant conditioning as, in it, instead of learning to avoid negative stimuli, the dogs were "programmed" to recognize reinforcers as uncontrollable and, hence, did not avoid the shocks. FTP name this theory posited by Martin Seligman; a theory of depression where the patient acquires a debilitating inability to avoid trauma.;;learned helplessness
Chemistry;;The reaction of this molecule with oxalyl chloride was the subject of pioneering photochemical work by Kharasch and Brown. Hassel's study of this molecule yielded its molecular structure and his 1943 paper "On The Conformations" of it elucidated those for the first time. Reacting it with pure oxygen forms adipic acid, which is used in the production of nylon. Its strain energy-bond angle curve has minima at twenty-three kilojoules per mole and maxima at forty-five kilojoules per mole, the former corresponding to the skew configuration, but its stable configuration is non-planar with a bond angle of about one hundred nine point five degrees. FTP, name this molecule having conformations twist, boat, and chair; a cyclic alkane with formula C6H12.;;cyclohexane
Miscellaneous;;Entering a code for this game in MechWarrior II causes it to claim "This ain't [this game], bub!" and self-destruct the player's mech. It ends with the prominent image of a decapitated rabbit for which revenge will be taken in the sequel; that sequel, subtitled Hell on Earth, secretly has the head of a programmer on a stick as its final boss. Modifications could be made by .WAD file editors but built-in cheat codes include idspispopd for no clipping and idkfa for all weapons including the chainsaw, rocket launcher, and BFG-9000. Billed as "Wolfenstein on steroids," it would itself be followed by Quake. FTP, name this classic game by id Software in which you control a lone space marine on a Martian base overrun by the damned.;;Doom
World History;;The beginnings of this event were inspired by a lecture by the hydrologist Victor Prompt and the original plan was to send Parfait-Louis Monteil. After this event, the ambassador Paul Cambon signed an addition to Article IV of the Niger Convention the location was renamed Kodok, and a resolution was made through negotiations between Lord Salisbury and Delcasse. It began when Gabriel Hanotaux ordered a group of one hundred fifty sharpshooters under the future General Charles Mangin and Major Jean-Baptiste Marchand to march two thousand miles to this location, arriving there on July 10, about two months before the arrival of men under Lord Kitchener. FTP, identify this crisis named for the Nile outpost at which it occurred; a dispute that nearly led to war between France and Britain.;;(the) Fashoda (incident)
World History;;In 1877, James Prendergast called it a "legal nullity," a sentiment echoed by the MP Clem Simich in 1992. Preceded by a proclamation from Governor George Gipps on January 14, it was signed at the house of James Bubsy by men including William Hobson and Henry Williams. The Native Land Act of 1862 struck down the land-selling article, which had been the cause of the Wairau incident led by Te Rauparaha. Some of the signers felt that the distinction between "kawanatanga" and "rangatiratanga" was not sufficiently outlined in its English translation. FTP, February 6 is the celebration day of what treaty signed in 1840 by forty-three Maori chieftains, which allowed the British to annex New Zealand?;;(the) (Treaty of) Waitangi
Art;;He sculpted metal heads of Alexander the Great and Darius that were sent to King Matthias Corvinus of Hungary. He designed a fountain for the courtyard of the Villa at Careggi that depicted a curly-haired child holding an aquatic animal in Putto with Dolphin. He painted the Archangel Raphael holding a small box in Tobias and the Angel and depicted the title figure in David as a haughtily bragging youth wearing a leathern doublet. This creator of Madonna with the Saints John the Baptist and Donatus gave up painting after being overwhelmed by the angel that his famous pupil drew on his Baptism of Christ. FTP, name this fifteenth-century Florentine sculptor of the bronze works Christ and St. Thomas and The Equestrian Monument of Colleoni; the primary teacher of Leonardo da Vinci.;;(Andrea) (del) Verrocchio
World History;;He appears second in the chronology carved by Khnum-ib-re, immediately following his father, Kanofer. His name also appeared in the "Song of the Harper" next to that of Hardedef and he was said to have abated the Seven Years Famine. He or one of his followers may be the author of the Edwin Smith papyrus and those devoted to him spent the night in his temples in Memphis hoping that he would reveal miracles in their dreams. The temple of Edfu was thought to have been his work, but he is better known for his work with the pharaoh Djoser. FTP, identify this man identified with the Greek Asclepius and sometimes even with Jesus; a twenty-seventh-century BCE Egyptian sage, doctor, and architect who designed the first pyramid, the step pyramid of Saqqara.;;Imhotep
Biology;;Flannery and Groves discovered a new species and subspecies of these in 1998. Belonging to either the tachyglossus or zaglossus genus, they are endangered in some regions because of their edible meat. Different species are distinguished by the length of their beaks, which contain electroreceptors, and the length of their spines. Living in New Guinea, Tasmania, and Australia, they outwardly resemble the hedgehog, though they are in a different order from it. FTP, name this creature sometimes known as the spiny anteater; one of two varieties of monotreme, along with the duck-billed platypus.;;echidna
Religion/Mythology;;This person is sometimes pictured with a dog's head but de Voragine holds that he was a Canaanite ogre named Reprobus who left the employ of the devil upon seeing his master afraid. Tradition holds that he was martyred by Decius but apparent inconsistencies in his story drew Erasmus' especial ire for his venerators. The most famous incident in his life occurred while he was aiding a child, when that child proved extremely heavy because he was bearing the sins of the world; Christ, whom he was carrying across a river at the time, then immediately baptized him. FTP, name this Saint, the Patron of travelers and motorists, whose name literally means "Christ-bearer".;;(St(.)|Saint) Christopher
Noncomputational Math;;Kummer showed that early attempts at proof of this depended on the faulty assumption that factorization is unique in all rings of integers or algebraic number fields. The correct argument uses L-functions, which are generalized zeta functions; a combination of Kolyvagin-Flach theory and Iwasawa theory; and Hecke algebras. In 1983, Ribet noted that a counterexample to it would imply the existence of a non-modular elliptic curve, contradicting a special case of the Taniyama-Shimura conjecture. In 1995, Taylor and Wiles proved that special case of that conjecture and thus proved, FTP, what centuries-old math problem named for a French margin-scribbler?;;Fermat('s) last (theorem)
Music;;Eugène Ysaÿe and Paolo Gallico gave this work its Carnegie Hall premiere. Its second movement contains a theme and four variations and its third movement begins with a crashing A Major chord in the piano followed by an exuberant 6/8 tarantella in rondo form. Its first movement begins with a slow chordal introduction and ends with an anguished coda but is highlighted by a furious A Minor presto section. Originally dedicated to George Bridgetower, its current namesake never performed it and considered this 1802 work unplayable. FTP, name this most famous Beethoven violin sonata which shares its name with a short story by Leo Tolstoy and is dedicated to a French violinist with a German-sounding name.;;(Sonata) (for violin & piano) (No(.) 9 (in A major) (Kreutzer)(,) (Op(.) 47)|(No(.) 9)(in A major) Kreutzer(,) (Op(.) 47)|(No(.) 9) (in A major) (Kreutzer)(,) Op(.) 47){1}?
Literature;;The husband's affair with Barbara Lynch and his mother forcing his wife to eat eggplant and take harp lessons were some of the causes of the marital problems of the central couple in this novel. The action culminates aboard the aptly named New Fidelity, where the now seventy-two-year-old wife consummates her relationship with a seventy-six-year-old lost love. This reunion is made possible indirectly by the suicide of Jeremiah which, in turn, leads to the husband's accidental death after he falls from a mango tree while trying to recover a lost parrot. FTP, name this book centering on Fermina Daza, Florentino Ariza, and Juvenal Urbino; a novel in which, in order to have sex without scandal, two seventy-year-olds raise a quarantine flag; a work by Gabriela Garcia Marquez.;;Love in the Time of Cholera|El amor en los tiempos del cólera
Literature;;Stanza four of this poem states that "There is a Power whose care / teaches" the title creature its "way along that pathless coast / the desert and illimitable air, / lone wandering but not lost". The poet reassures his subject that "Soon shalt thou find a summer home" and "Scream among your fellows" and comments that, while "The abyss of heaven hath swallowed up thy form; yet, on my heart / Deeply hath sunk the lesson thou hast given". The narrator wonders whether the title creature "Seek'stthe plashy brink / Of weedy lake, or marge of river wide" as he compares its "certain flight" to "the long way he must tread alone". FTP, name this poem in which the poet prays that god will guide him as he guides the title bird; a work of William Cullen Bryant.;;To a Waterfowl
Religion/Mythology;;Some stories have it that this character was conceived by Math's rod in a test of his mother's virginity and, due to her meddling, his wife had to be created from flowers. His namesake nasad was a widely held August first festival. Though he survived birth unlike his two brothers, his mother Aranhrod often sought to murder him and he was saved only through the intercession of Gwydion. Having epithets Llaw Gyffes, or dexterous, and Lámfota, or long-armed, Caesar identified him with Mercury. FTP, name this member of the Tuatha Dé Danann; the patron of every skill and Celtic god of light.;;Lug(us|h)|Samild(á|a){1}?nach
Philosophy;;This person offered a "Contribution to the Correction of the Public's Judgments Regarding the French Revolution" and delivered "Some Lectures Concerning the Scholar's Vocation" after taking a chair of philosophy. His review of Aenisedimus led him to develop axioms based on Tathandlung. His Attempt at a Critique of all Revelation argued that the latter must be consistent with moral law but he broke from transcendental idealism over the separation of noumena and phenomena. From 1796 to 1797, he published an exposition of his system in Foundation of Natural Right and System of Ethical Theory. FTP, identify this German philosopher who developed the philosophy of the Wissenschaftslehre.;;(Johann) (Gottlieb) Fichte
United States History;;His autobiography, Thirty Years View, is one of the best of the period and Teddy Roosevelt wrote a later biography on him. He noted that the West must "share in the destinies of the Republic" while serving as editor of the St. Louis Enquirer and ran on a platform of redistributing public lands to settlers. His distrust of wildcat banks led to his nickname of "Old Bullion" and his recanting of his previous pro-slavery stance cost him his seat in the Senate in 1851. Despite the fact that the candidate was his son-in-law, he opposed Republican nominee John C. Fremont in 1856. FTP, name this longtime Missouri Senator known for his support of Andrew Jackson; the namesake and ancestor of a famous American muralist.;;(Thomas) (Hart) Benton
Literature;;In a poem drawn from a maiden's song from St. Winfred's Well, he contrasted "The Leaden Echo" with "The Golden Echo" and he claimed that "Christ plays in ten thousand places To the Father through the features of men's faces" in "As Kingfishers Catch Fire, Dragonflies Draw Flame". The poet reacts to the death from tuberculosis of his blacksmith friend in "Felix Randal," published posthumously in 1918 by poet laureate Robert Bridges. Other poems include a "curtal" sonnet in which he cries "Glory be to God for dappled things" and another dedicated to the "happy memory of five Franciscan nuns," but best known is a poem about the "kingdom of daylight's dauphin, dapple-dawn-drawn falcon". FTP, name this poet of "The Wreck of the Deutschland" and "The Windhover".;;(Gerard) (Manley) Hopkins
Literature;;In this work's opening chapter, the author notes the quote "I wake to sleep, and take my waking slow. I feel my fate in what I cannot fear" from a Theodore Roethke poem as the impetus for his novel. Towards the end of the work, the author describes the irony of the execution of Edgar Derby. That and other realistic details are interspersed with the optometrist protagonist's schizophrenic wanderings including his zoo-imprisonment with porn star Montana Wildhack on the planet Tralfamadore. FTP, name this book including appearances by Howard Campbell, Eliot Rosewater, and Kilgore Trout, three of the author's other protagonists; a 1969 novel centering on Billy Pilgrim's memories of the firebombing of Dresden, by Kurt Vonnegut.;;Slaughterhouse Five(:) (Or, The Children's Crusade, a Duty-Dance with Death)
Earth Science;;This material's namesake discovered that it effervesces slowly in dilute hydrochloric acid, differentiating it from the similar calcite. The exact mechanism of its low-temperature formation is an important open question, especially given its prevalence as massive crystals, but recent developments suggest organogenic mechanisms may answer it. It forms when its characteristic element replaces some of the calcium carbonate present in normal limestone and has a Mohs hardness around 3.5 and a specific gravity of about 2.85. Accounting for about ten percent of all sedimentary rock, it gives its name to a range of the northern Italian Alps. FTP, name this mineral consisting of crystalline calcium magnesium carbonate.;;dolomite
United States History;;Late in his life, he was exonerated for supporting Bonnie Prince Charlie while his early career saw him serve as aide-de-camp to Prince Eugene of Savoy. He helped defeat the Ottomans at Belgrade but, during the War of Jenkin's Ear, he tried to capture St. Augustine and was repulsed. His most influential friends included the former gentleman Robert Castell and the Yamacraw chief Tomochichi. After the former died, he began his crusade to reform prisons in England, while the latter convinced him to settle near the Altamaha River. FTP, identify this man who received his royal state charter in 1732 and who hoped to create a home for oppressed Protestants and falsely imprisoned debtors in the New World near what is now Savannah.;;(James) Oglethorpe
Economics;;Part seven of this eight-part work is anchored by a discussion of 1597's Boulston case, where the court tried to argue for corn-thieving rabbits as nuisance. Other sections focus on the "reciprocal nature" of the title concept and a dismissal of Pigou's ideas in The Economics of Welfare. Expanding on an earlier essay's arguments about the importance of transaction costs to the growth of the firm, this 1960 work argued that the initial allocation of legal rights doesn't matter when the economic result is efficient, an idea now known as its author's eponymous economic theorem. FTP, identify this classic article by Ronald Coase.;;(The) Problem of Social Cost
Geography;;After flowing South past Selinsgrove, it cuts through the Mahantongo Mountain and receives the Juniata River. The Chemung flows southeast past Elmira into it and its brook trout were once hunted by the namesake Indian tribes on its banks. While its Western branch rises in the Allegheny Mountains, the main portion of this river originates in Otsego Lake in New York and exits at Havre de Grace, Maryland. FTP, identify this mighty river that provides half of the fresh water for the Chesapeake Bay.;;(the) Susquehanna (River)
World History;;One brigade was deployed at the "brickworks" while another force, the African Hunters, attempted to scale the walls of one of the five forts that defended the namesake site, which had just survived the Wars of Reform. After fearing that his ill soldiers were threatened, General de Lorencz marched from Orizaba ready for battle. The infantry of the victorious force was led by future president Porfirio Diaz but it was the main force under the command of General Zaragoza that won the day. FTP, identify this battle that repulsed the French invasion of Mexico and is now remembered every fifth of May.;;(the) (Battle of) Puebla
Literature;;The second part opens with a woman on "a burnished throne" and ends with another woman at a bar telling her friend Lil about her decision to sleep with Albert. In this work, the Moon shines on Mrs. Porter and her daughter who wash their feet in soda water, a moment that is followed by a memory of Tereus raping Philomela. The middle section features Tiresias lamenting his man breasts and the final fragment features a cock standing on a rooftree calling out "Co co rico," which brings a flash of lightning and then, rain. That part, "What the Thunder Said," concludes with the repetition of the word "Shantih". FTP, identify this work full of footnotes; a modernist poem dedicated to Ezra Pound and written by T.S. Eliot.;;(The) Waste Land
World History;;It was exacerbated by the death of a Mrs. Sherwood and was preceded by Miles Irving arresting two vocal nationalists, Drs. Kitchloo and Satyapal. Partly caused by the reshuffling of domestic politics after the end of the war codified by the Black or Rowlatt Acts, it only took about fifteen minutes but was more deadly since there were no easy avenues to escape. Taking place in the Garden or Jallianwallah Bagh, it saw the death of more than four hundred Hindus. FTP, identify this event that saw the British General Dyer fire into an unarmed crowd in 1919 in the namesake capital of the Sikhs.;;(the) Amritsar (Massacre)
Literature;;Minor characters include the evangelist Drusilla Clack and the moneylender Septimus Luker. The prologue details a rivalry that begins after General Baird's forces storm Seringapatam and addresses the narrator's dislike of John Herncastle. Murthwaite later sees the ubiquitous jugglers in their true form, but this only happens after Mr. Candy's assistant, Ezra, reveals that it was opium that caused Franklin Blake to take what was once found in the forehead of a god's statue. FTP, identify this 1868 novel that focuses on Rachel Verrinder and Sergeant Cuff's attempts to find a lost gem; a work by Wilkie Collins.;;(The) Moonstone
Physics;;This distribution appears in and is the reason for the name of the distribution solution to Poisson's equation. Generalizations of this to vector arguments are non-unique but can be determined by normalizing its all-space integral in light of any relevant symmetries. Reciprocity for Green's functions for self-adjoint operators results from the odd parity of this since Green's functions are the solutions to operator equations with this as the inhomogeneous term. Its convolution with a function gives the value of that function at the point where its argument vanishes by its sifting property. FTP, name this function defined by Dirac and named for a Greek letter.;;(Dirac) delta (function)
Religion/Mythology;;His adventures are compared to those of Boreas in the first section of the Phaedrus. Often shown holding a chicken, he grew up in Phrygia and was indirectly responsible for his brother's immortality, an attribute bargained for by Eos, who originally fetched him. Grief over his departure was assuaged somewhat by the two swift horses that Hermes brought his father and his story was used by Appolodorus and Plato to argue for the superiority of male love. This brother of Tithonus and son of Laomedon eventually succeeded Hebe in her primary position on Mt. Olympus. FTP, identify this Trojan prince who was loved by Zeus and became the cupbearer of the gods.;;Ganymede
Music;;After the protagonist is arrested, this work refers to Beethoven's Fifth with a knock of fate. Other pieces sprinkled into this two-part work include the blackbird's song and a jota danced to the magistrate's humiliation. As it proceeds, the recurring Corregidor character dances various minuets while the flirty wife and her fandangos drive her earnest Miller husband crazy with jealousy. The opening, complete with castanets and an "olé" is often reproduced by itself. FTP, identify this work based on a story by Pedro de Alarcon and named for the antagonist's headwear; a ballet by Manuel de Falla.;;(El) Sombrero de tres picos(,) (ballet in 2 parts)(,) (G(.) 53)|(El) (Sombrero de tres picos)(,) (ballet in 2 parts)(,) G(.) 53|(The) Three-Cornered Hat
Miscellaneous;;His father was a successful paper manufacturer who wrote two books on the coins of the ancient Britons. His greatest discovery was made with his friend Duncan Mackenzie by his side, though he debated many points about the origins of culture with Carl Blegen and Alan Wace. A former keeper of the Ashmolean Museum at Oxford, he would inspire Michael Ventris to decipher a language he had always insisted was Greek. FTP, identify this archaeologist who wrote The Mycenaean Tree and Pillar Cult and restored the Palace of Minos at Knossos.;;(Sir) (Arthur) Evans
Biology;;The transcription factor for these chemicals is repressed by DELLA and they are received by a namesake "-insensitive dwarf mutant 1" complex. These nineteen- or twenty-member heterocyclic rings are unsynthesizable in the presence of ancymidol, function by altering transcription, and display an atypical sigmoidal dose response. Mendel's Le gene is for a protein synthesizing these hormones which is understandable since that gene affects pea height. Discovered by Kurosawa in 1926, they were later named for the fungus that he noted as the cause of "foolish seedling" disease  unnaturally rapid rice enlargement caused by these plant hormones. FTP, name this class of plant hormones that stimulate stem and leaf growth.;;gibberellin(s)
Literature;;A young lord is given three wishes by Jesus Christ in his Federigo while The Backgammon Game focuses on unspoken passion. He wrote plays about South America, like The Occasion, as well as the novel Tamango about a slave revolt, but his later life was taken-up with translating Pushkin and Gogol. Of his more famous stories, one concerns a shepherd who has to kill his son Fortunato, while another focuses on Orso, who tries to keep his sister from killing everyone. He used the name "Joseph L'Etrange" to publish the farcical Theatre of Clara Gazul but remains best known for works about life in Corsica such as Mateo Falcone and Colomba. FTP, identify this French author who also created the characters Don Jose and Escamillo in his work Carmen.;;(Prosper) Merimee
Chemistry;;In an October, 1997 JCE article, Parquet and Lin outlined a microwave-assisted version of this procedure that creates a reagent in situ by irradiation of isatin. This reaction is analogous to hydroxylamine-mediated oxime synthesis. It is sometimes cited as only its second step, which is usually catalyzed by an alkali ethoxide or potassium hydroxide, but that second step cannot proceed without an initial hydroxone formation by the carbonyl-containing reactants. It is now rarely performed since it requires extremely dangerous heating of hydrazine in the presence of ketones or aldehydes. FTP, name this organic reduction of ketones or aldehydes to corresponding alkanes, named for German and Russian chemists.;;Wolff-Kishner (reduction)
Literature;;Mary Carmichael is discussed for having "broken the sentence, broken the sequence," while an important scene features a Beadle telling the narrator to keep off the grass. Later, the petulant Mr. A is taken to task and the text reflects on the life of aunt Mary Beton. The final chapter forwards the concept of androgyny as a creative force. Celebrating such pioneers as Aphra Behn and the Brontes, it was based on two lectures delivered in 1928 it focuses on the importance of the novel to the development of the woman writer. Featuring the hypothetical Judith Shakespeare, it argues for the privacy and independence of the title location. FTP, identify this essay by Virginia Woolf.;;(A) Room of One(') s Own
Art;;Five hundred fifty-eight names are found on its inside walls while the outside bases are decorated by such reliefs as Peace, Resistance and The Departure of the Volunteers. The horses that once graced its roof have been returned to St. Mark's in Venice, but the eternal flame remains lit. Designed by Jean Chalgrin, it sits on top of the hill of Chaillot and its full name is usually appended with the designation "of the star". FTP, identify this structure originally commissioned after Austerlitz by Napoleon and modeled after the Arch of Constantine; the premier emblem of French patriotism.;;(L')arc de Triomphe|(the) Arc(h) of Triumph
Noncomputational Math;;Encapsulation can be accomplished by use of the opaque variety of this structure and segmentation faults are generally caused by access of a non-physical address by one. These explicitly allow manipulation of their contents, the namesake type of arithmetic. Iterators are an extension of these that are subject, usually, to postfix operators and a simple singly linked list object contains variable storage and one of these to the same type of object. As these do not contain literals but only the location of literals, they must be dereferenced before use, which is accomplished in C++ by the star operator. FTP, name these types of references that hold the memory address of something of interest, rather than the thing itself.;;pointer(s)
Philosophy;;According to his ideas, human children gravitated towards material exercises rather than study and "Celadony" was the most sublime love a human could feel. He argued that the passions were "untamed tigers" and that there were twelve common types that identified every human being. Inspired by works like The False Industry and Universal Harmony, his principal disciple, Victor Considerant, would try to found a colony in Texas, but it was Albert Brisbane who really helped popularize his The Theory of the Four Movements in the U.S. FTP, identify this French utopian philosopher who founded cooperative groups called phalanxes.;;(Charles) Fourier
Art;;Painted during the artist's shift towards more abstract watercolors, this oil work was created after two separate trips to Nassau. The scene features numerous stalks of sugar cane that lie scattered at the central figure's feet. Some critics have speculated that the "rigger" in the upper left-hand corner was added in order to offer hope and make the work more appealing to buyers. FTP, identify this picture depicting a tumultuous water spout, raging sharks, and a seemingly stoic black man awaiting his demise; a painting of a boat drifting along the titular ocean current by Winslow Homer.;;(The) Gulf Stream
Literature;;His Essay on the Unreal Dwelling focused on the artist's relationship to nature. Shriveled Chestnuts was collaboration with disciples while Winter Sun saw his emergence as a more lyrical poet. It is in travelogues like The Records of a Travel Worn Satchel and The Narrow Road to the Deep North where critics see his later life turning away from the style of sabi, or loneliness to karumi, or lightness; a concept that would dominate the short meditative form he made so prominent. FTP, identify this author named for the banana plant hut he once lived in; a master of the Haiku form.;;(Matsuo) Basho
Physics;;A lemma due to this person claims that all mathematical propositions are either trivial or unproven. This thinker's namesake point is the seven hundred twenty-sixth digit of pi. Wheeler supervised this scientist's thesis, A New Approach to Quantum Theory, in which the novelty is application of Hamilton's principle; this led to an analogue of Lagrangian mechanics; this physicist's namesake formulation of QM. Leighton and Sands co-authored his namesake Lectures on Physics. He formulated QED, which employs his namesake diagrams, and defined a namesake path integral. FTP, name this idiosyncratic Caltech professor who served as youngest division head for the Manhattan Project, enjoyed strip clubs, and played the bongos.;;(Richard) Feynman
Miscellaneous;;He edited the collection Science and Creationism, argued for "the human significance of Skin" in the volume Touching, and his namesake resolution names the World Court's effort to end genital mutilation of children. A pioneer in the study of human aggression, he argued for compassion his The Elephant Man: A Study in Human Dignity and popularized the idea of race as a social construct in Man's Most Dangerous Myth. FTP, identify this British anthropologist perhaps best known for his assertion that there must be equality between the sexes in his The Natural Superiority of Women.;;(Ashley) Montagu
World History;;His attorney general, Godfrey Lule, often had to defend this man's practices at the United Nations, while his defense minister, Mustafa Adrisi, was his brother-in-law. Upon taking power, he murdered his main rival, Pierino Okoya, and he created the Public Safety Unit and the State Research Center, whose employees spent most of the time murdering members of the Langi and Acholi tribes and feeding their bodies to Nile crocodiles. A member of the Kakwa ethnic group, after becoming chief of his country's army and air force, he deposed Milton Obote in a coup. FTP, name this man accused of helping the Palestinians at Entebbe, who, from 1971 to 1979, was dictator of Uganda.;;Idi Amin (Dada) (Oumee);;Amin|(Big) Daddy|Butcher
Philosophy;;This person once called Past and Present by Thomas Carlyle "the only work worth reading". Greatly influenced by Moses Hess, this contributor to the Volunteer Journal for Lancashire and Cheshire and the Manchester Guardian was the primary organizer of the League of the Just. A notable objector to the institution of marriage, as outlined in The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State, this author of Herr Eugen Dühring's Revolution in Science and 1844's The Condition of the Working Class in England is better known for collaborating on The Holy Family and A Critique of the German Ideology. FTP, who was this son of a cotton factory owner and lesser-known co-author of the Communist Manifesto?;;(Friedrich) Engels
Miscellaneous;;Taking place in the year 40000, this work's cast of bizarre characters include Pygar, a blind angel who has lost the will to fly, and an inept revolutionary named Dildano. The screenplay for this film was written by Terry Southern of Dr. Strangelove fame. Although the galaxy's best hope, the title character frequently crashes and is captured by wild children in the Tau Seti system. The action begins when that heroine, floating in zero gravity, is interrupted by a call from the President of Earth. Outlining the quest to find the young scientist Duran-Duran, who threatens the galactic peace, this is, FTP, what campy 1968 movie starring Jane Fonda as the title Queen of the Galaxy?;;Barbarella(:) (Queen of the Galaxy)
Religion/Mythology;;Described as the "offspring of silence, sky-bolt of Ninurta," this person dumbfounds a hunter who encounters him at the watering place. This character dreams of the council at which he is sentenced to death and of the "house of dust" that awaits him; his predictions prove accurate, as he is struck-down by illness for slaying the Bull of Heaven. Civilized by the attentions of Shamhat, in tablets III-V he prepares to fight Humbaba with his friend, who mourns for this clay-born bull-man in tablet VIII's lament, then goes off to seek Utnapishtam. FTP, name this character who was designed to "to match the ardor of the energies" of the King of Uruk, Gilgamesh.;;Enkidu
Biology;;This person claimed to have inspired the Woodward-Hoffmann rules while accepting the 2004 Priestley Prize. This scientist's namesake method for the asymmetric reduction of ketones to secondary alcohols using borane is widely used. The developer of PCC, which is used for the oxidation of alcohols to aldehydes, he is most renowned for the total synthesis of prostaglandins achieved by his lab in 1969. FTP, name this author of The Logic of Chemical Synthesis; a chemist who won the Nobel Prize for application of retrosynthetic analysis to organic synthesis in 1992 and who is the namesake of a molecular model with Pauling.;;(Elias) (James) Corey
Religion/Mythology;;Green, red, yellow, white, and blue make-up the symbolic star of this faith; these colors represent the five ministers that govern it. Members in Syria are known as Jabal and believe in the divine unity of humanity and reincarnation. A namesake revolt in 1925 resulted in the exile of its leaders to Palmyra, although this was ended two years later. Knowledge of the Kitab-al-hikma is restricted to those who have made the passage from juhhal to uqqal, from "ignorant" or "knower". It is likely that the object of their worship is the former Fatimid caliph al-Hakim. FTP, name this highly secretive sect of Islam which derives its name from that of a forerunner of the community, Muhammad al-Durazi.;;Druze
World History;;A letter found in 1878 shows that this man was not murdered, but rather escaped by killing the gate keeper, changing clothes with a servant, and living at Corfe Castle. He became heir to the throne at a young age after the death of his elder brother, Alfonso. His mother was Eleanor of Castile and he drew the ambivalence of his wife after restoring the Despenser barons to power. She teamed up with Roger Mortimer to depose him and he was later imprisoned at Berkeley Castle. Supposedly killed by a hot copper wire inserted in his anus, this is, FTP, what Plantagenet king, the subject of a Christopher Marlowe play and the effeminate son of Edward Longshanks?;;Edward (II|the Second){1}?
Art;;Its pictorial composition was inspired by an Emile Bernard painting and it was the painter's first definitive break with the orthodox Cloissonist style. Across the top center of this painting appears to run the trunk of a tree and it contains at least twelve distinct forms of life, one of which is a bull. The tree divides the scene on the right side from the Breton people with their hands clasped in prayer in the foreground. The strikingly red background punctuates the colors in the right-hand side of the painting, which shows one man dressed in black attempting to subdue another man who is dressed in blue and has wings. FTP, name this painting by Paul Gauguin depicting a memorable scene involving a son of Isaac.;;Vision After the Sermon|Jacob Wrestling the Angel
Music;;Its third movement includes such unorthodox instrumentation as a clarinet tuned to E flat and a bass drum meant to be struck by a bundle of twigs. The fourth movement contains a march that features offstage brass and timpani and a solo flute that plays a "nightingale song". Originally titled Totenfeier after a poem of Adam Mickiewicz, it includes the chorale Aufersteh'n heard at the funeral of the composer's friend Bülow and written by Klopstock and a scene representing a saint of Padua preaching to some disinterested fish. According to the composer, he was burying the hero of his last symphony in this one and, indeed, it starts with a funeral march. FTP, identify this epic symphony of Gustav Mahler, his second.;;(Symphony) (No(.) 2) (in C Minor) Resurrection
World History;;Martin du Gard's Jean Barois incorporates news clippings of this event and it led to a break between Anton Chekhov and his friend Suvorin. Its effects on politics included the formation of a new cabinet by Rene-Waldeck Rousseau and riots at the funeral of president Felix Faure. Although first brought to the public eye by Scheurer-Kestner, it had begun when an agent from the Section of Statistics discovered an unsigned document in the office of von Schwartzkoppen. The identity of the bordereau's author was finally discovered by Georges Picquart, but the forger Colonel Henry committed suicide and Major Esterhazy escaped to England unpunished. FTP, name this scandal in the French military over the innocence of the namesake Jewish captain, made famous by Emile Zola's J'accuse.;;(the) Dreyfus (affair)
Literature;;One character in this play was a "chantoosie" who was taken from the Blue Dragon after she sang "That Old Black Magic". In act two, a drunken college professor reenacts the balcony scene from Romeo and Juliet with a waitress named Elma who, Grace points out, is too bright for boys her age. Other characters include Virgil Blessing, who has served as guardian to a cowboy from Montana for eleven years, and Sheriff Will Masters, who is suspicious of Dr. Lyman. In the end, Cherie agrees to go to Montana with Bo Decker and Carl drives the title vehicle away to Wichita. FTP, name this play set in a restaurant thirty miles west of Kansas City; a work by William Inge.;;Bus Stop
Economics;;Grossman and Hart have suggested that failure of some corporate takeovers may be due to this behavior that, according to Ronald Coase, can be reduced by lowering transaction costs to near zero. In a 1968 essay, Garrett Hardin discounted the possibility of natural altruism and argued that, in the context of positive externalities, laissez faire policies inevitably lead to it. The tit-for-tat approach may be appropriate for one analog, the iterated prisoner's dilemma, but the concept of a public good leads to a tragedy of the commons in a more general situation. FTP, name this economic problem in which actors avoid paying for goods that cannot be taken away.;;free rider (problem)|free riding
Noncomputational Math;;Operator algebras on objects of this type are known as W-star or von Neumann algebras and it was von Neumann who named these structures in a 1929 paper in Mathematische Annalen. Grover's algorithm requires two angles between three members of one of these corresponding to the state space of a quantum computer. Every one of these is also a Banach space, but the converse does not hold. They are inner product spaces such that the resulting norm makes them complete metric spaces. FTP, name these algebraic structures named for a mathematician who delivered a famous 1900 address to the Paris International Congress of Mathematics.;;Hilbert (spaces)
Literature;;In the sequel to the work in which this character appears, his grandson, Michael, is tried for bribery. In that work, his son, Isaac, is at odds with Michael over the same issue with which he was at odds with Issac. In the original work in which he appeart, the arrival of Mr. Brown and Reverend Smith has caused the proverbial titular action, against which he retaliates by burning a church. His retaliation is precipitated by his displeasure over Isaac's conversion, which is exacerbated by the desecration of a sacred mask. Previously exiled when his gun accidentally discharged and killed a man, he hangs himself when he is unsuccessful in leading his people into war against their white colonizers. FTP, name this protagonist of No Longer at Ease and Things Fall Apart by Chinua Achebe.;;Okonkwo
Literature;;"A mirror of man in his fallen state" is how Hazard Adams describes the meaning of this work, in which the poet considers a furnace, a hammer, a chain, and an anvil as possible tools used in creating the title entity. An allusion to Genesis is included in the penultimate stanza, "When the stars threw down their spears, / And watered heaven with their tears, / Did he smile his work to see"? Before that, the author wondered, "what art / Could twist the sinews" of a heart and "What the hand dare seize the fire"? that burnt in an eye. FTP, name this lyric from Songs of Experience in which the "fearful symmetry" of the titular animal is marveled at by William Blake.;;(The) Tyger
United States History;;Early in his career, he was an ally of a faction founded by Gulian Verplanck and was nicknamed "King Coody" as a result. As a lawyer, he defended the abolitionist Jacob Gruber and succeeded William Wirt as attorney general of his state. After replacing William Duane, he ordered the end of federal deposits into the Second Bank of the United States as Secretary of the Treasury, but Jackson's bid to replace Gabriel Duvall with this man was a failure. In his most famous role, this man dealt with the power of state courts in Ableman v. Booth, the sanctity of state contracts in the Charles River Bridge case and with habeas corpus in ex parte Merryman. FTP, identify this fifth Chief Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court who presided over the Dred Scott case.;;(Roger) (Brooke) Taney
Biology;;A very likely key regulator of this process is ALG-2, a calcium-binding protein. Reactive oxygen species may cause Bcl-2 to activate Bax, which leads to activation of various caspases. Its indicators include exposure of surface phospholipids to phosphatidylserine and the secretion of TGF-beta by cytokines. In plants, it is accomplished by proteases that cleave at asparagine residues, which cause collapse of the central vacuole. It is involved in such events as formation of synapses and the sloughing-off of the endometrial lining. FTP, identify this process by which normal development of multicellular organisms is genetically controlled, and which is different from necrosis.;;apoptosis|programmed cell death
Literature;;In one of this man's poems, Strephon discovers that his beloved Celia "shits" after entering the title locale, a "Lady's Dressing Room". He uses the analogy of the Trojan horse "pregnant with Greeks" to describe Tories and Whigs huddled under a shed in "Description of a City Shower," which is often paired with the urban georgic "A Description of the Morning". He wrote a series of polemics against the monopoly on copper coinage granted to William Wood in Drapier's Letters and his correspondence with Esther Johnson was collected in the Journal to Stella, although he is better known for a satire about Peter, Martin, and Jack and a novel whose hero was first a surgeon, then a captain of many ships. FTP, name this author of A Tale of a Tub and Gulliver's Travels.;;(Jonathan) Swift
Physics;;The factor of one-half resulting from this effect cancels with the factor of two error in the naive gyromagnetic ratio, so that a semi-classical calculation of spin-orbit coupling coincidentally yields the same results as the full relativistic one. It occurs in general because, over an accelerating path, the orientation of the velocity varies harmonically relative to that in an inertial frame. Because Lorentz boosts do not commute with rotations, there exists a time dilation between the frame of an orbiting charge and that of a nucleus, so the electron undergoes this motion as it orbits. FTP, name this type of purely relativistic precession most notably undergone by atomic electrons and named for an English physicist.;;Thomas (precession)
Art;;It was first exhibited under the title The Defeated One and was also titled The Awakening of Humanity at one point. The plaster version of this sculpture was displayed at the Cercle Artistique in Brussels and this version is recognized because of valuable photographs by Marconi and Druet. Its strangeness attracted the attention of L'Etoile Belge, who thought it represented a man on the verge of committing suicide. Its model was a twenty-two-year-old Belgian soldier, Auguste Neyt, and in order to discredit its creator, his contemporaries claimed the sculpture was cast from life. The better-recognized bronze version of it was commissioned by Edmund Turquet, the director of the Beaux-Arts, in 1900. FTP, name this Rodin sculpture of a nude man touching his head with one hand.;;(The) Age of Bronze|(L')Age d'Airain
Biology;;Examples of these include tetrahydrofolic acid, which transfers single carbon groups, and FMN, which aids in the oxidation of L-amino acids. Biotin functions as one in a particular carboxylation and lipoamide and thiamine pyrophosphate both work as these in the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex. Categorized as either catalytic or stoichiometric, crucial ones include FAD and NAD-plus and the "Q" variety is used in the electron transport chain. Also including the acetylated "A" variety that reacts with oxaloacetate in the Krebs cycle, these are, FTP, what organic molecules required for enzyme activation?;;coenzyme(s)
Music;;A ballet based upon this work was produced by Sir Robert Helpmann. The aria "Red as the rose in Maytime" expresses Camille de Rousillon's desire to find a suitable wife, which leads to his many social flirtations. This work takes place in and around Maxim's, which is sung about in the famous song "Vilia". Baron Zeta is concerned for the economic welfare of Pontevedro and thus tries to convince his wife, Valencienne, to hook the Count Danilo Danilovitsch up with the title character, whose former husband has left her a fortune. FTP, name this operetta about Anna Glawari and her messing-around with foreign guys; a work of Franz Lehár.;;(Die) lustige Witwe (,) (opretta)|(The) Merry Widow(,) (operetta)
World History;;He escaped from a life sentence by disguising himself as a stonemason and walking away from the fortress of Ham. As an exile in England, he joined Wellington's special forces to suppress the Chartists and, while in Italy, he participated in the 1830 uprising. However, it wasn't until he defeated Ledru-Rollin, Cavaignac and Lamartine that he became the ruler of his home country. He created a Council of State, a powerless Senate and a Legislative Body the members of which were elected by universal male suffrage in corrupt elections. After dissolving the original Legislative Assembly on the forty-sixth anniversary of his uncle's greatest victory, he declared himself emperor in 1852. FTP, who was this man who ruled France until his defeat at Sedan in 1870?;;Napoleon (III|the Third){1}?|Louis-Napoleon (or Louis-Napoleon Bonaparte; do not prompt on "Napoleon")
Literature;;At one point in this novel, a "complete gentleman" says "Do not follow unknown man's beauty" to the eventual wife of the narrator. He and she are married after the narrator finds Death and brings him to the town and a child is born from her thumb. They are then cast out to the wilderness because of the insufferable child, whom they abandon to three men named Drum, Dance, and Song. Among the locales visited by the couple are Wraith-Island, Unreturnable Heaven's Town, and Red-Town; they visit these in search of Deads' Town, where the title character intends to find his former servant and return him to his village. FTP, name this novel in which the narrator attempts to retrieve his tapster from the dead; the best-known work of Amos Tutuola.;;(The) Palm-Wine Drinkard
World History;;Purchased by the Florentine Acciaiuoli in 1390, it had earlier been center of a state whose official language was Catalan. Later, it was conquered by Navarrese mercenaries who had defeated Walter V of Brienne at Halymros. Walter had succeeded the French knightly family of de la Roche, which had held power here for over a hundred years. Its early prestige had greatly been checked by a 529 closure that dispersed intellectuals to distant Harran and Ctesiphon. Though Venice would twice launch attacks on this city, it would pass into Muslim hands in 1456. Finally returned to Christian rule in 1833, this is, FTP, what city, made capital in the same year by King Othon I but perhaps more famous for the Pnyx and the Areopagus and its ancient prowess under such leaders as Themistocles and Pericles?;;Athens|Athinai;;Attica|Duchy of Athens
Music;;The strings in the background of this work represent "the silence of the druids  who know, see, and hear nothing," whereas the trumpet phrase repeated over times over them alternates with contrapuntal woodwinds that accelerate in speed and loudness during the course of the work. Revised in the 1930's, it is often paired with Central Park in the Dark in the Good Old Summer Time in performance, where the titular entity is mocked after what the composer calls "a secret conference" finds that the voice of the flute's "invisible reply" comes to nothing. FTP, name work subtitled "A Contemplation of a Serious Matter," a work of Charles Ives.;;(The) Unanswered Question (I & II)(,) (for trumpet, winds & string orchestra)(,) (S(.) 50) (K(.) 1C25)|(The) (Unanswered Question) (I & II)(,) (for trumpet, winds & string orchestra)(,) S(.) 50 (,)(K(.) 1C25)|(The) (Unanswered Question) (I & II)(,) (for trumpet, winds & string orchestra)(,) (S(.) 50) (,) K(.) 1C25
Literature;;Bonaventura Cavalieri is referenced in the last note to this short story, in which the narrator recalls two axioms. The narrator considers the sequence d-h-c-m-r-l-c-h-t-d-j, which does not mean anything terrible in any secret language, and is concerned that you understand his language. The narrator first attempts to describe the titular structure and notes that the "satisfaction of fecal necessities" is permitted before eventually offering a seven-word definition for it: "ubiquitous and everlasting system of hexagonal galleries". FTP, what collection of works that includes such titles as The Combed Thunderclap and The Plaster Cramp names this Borges story about an infinite compilation of books?;;(The) Library of Babel|(La) Biblioteca de Babel
Noncomputaional Math;;For stiff types of these, Richardsonian extrapolation algorithms far outperform the other general type. Methods for conquering them can be implicit, such as Adams-Moulton, or explicit, such as Adams-Bashforth. Some non-iterative solvers for these add a middle step called a modifier, however, these predictor-corrector methods are not self-starting and must be initiated, for example using Runge-Kutta algorithms. They can be handled analytically using either D operators or integral transforms, both of which generally transform them into sets algebraic equations. FTP, identify this type of equation involving derivatives in only one dependent variable.;;o(rdinary) d(ifferential) e(quation(s));;d(ifferential) e(quation(s))
Art;;The signature of the artist in this work is an etching off of the background which is decorated with a technique also used for the Palais Stoclet friezes in Brussels. Housed in the Upper Belvedere, it shows a woman's hand sliding beneath the cloak of a man's before emerging to grasp the man's right hand. The St. Apollinare in Classe near Ravenna is the inspiration for the field of flowers on which the woman kneels with the edge of her feet standing next to nothingness. Black and white rectangles decorate the man's cloak while circles of flowers surrounded by gold tesserae cover the woman's dress and hair. FTP, name this Gustav Klimt painting of an act of love.;;(The) Kiss
Chemistry;;This procedure was introduced by its namesake, along with Foster and Towle, in the Journal of the American Chemical Society 1949. No anti- selectivity has been found for it and, when multiple products are possible, there is little preference except when one product involves a double bond conjugated to an aromatic ring. This reaction is spontaneous between one hundred and one hundred fifty degrees Celsius and, unlike the Hofmann elimination, its mechanism involves a cyclic flow of six electrons. FTP, identify this elimination reaction in which an amine oxide decomposes into a dialkylhydroxylamine and an amine.;;Cope (elimination)
Literature;;The events of this volume are set into motion when "Cass" and his two uncles visit a neighbor. During their visit, the uncles engage in a poker game that results in a marriage and the subsequent birth of the protagonist. The protagonist is referred to as "uncle to half a county and father to no one" and, in 1940, learns that the relative to whom he relinquished his inheritance has incestuously fathered a mulatto child. In the work's namesake final section, we are introduced to Gavin Stevens, who appears in the author's Intruder in the Dust and attempts to arrange for the burial of Sam Beauchamp following his execution. FTP name this book including the sections "Was," "Delta Autumn," and "The Bea;," a McCaslin-clan-centered Faulkner work that takes its name from a Negro spiritual.;;Go Down(,) Moses
Physics;;This framework's predictions match measurements of heat capacity in vanadium, which increases exponentially with the low-temperature band gap, three times the critical kinetic temperature; this corresponds to microwaves. Unlike Bose-Einstein condensation, it considers both sign-change and lack-of-sign-change label exchanges involving both bosonic and fermionic particles. It assumes that, in the absence of lattice vibrations, the critical temperature would be zero; a result derived from the isotope effect. FTP, name this theory postulating a band gap below which Cooper pairs can form to mediate a state of reduced resistivity; a theory of superconductivity named for the initials of three physicists.;;B(ardeen)-C(ooper)-S(chrieffer) (theory) (of superconductivity)
Philosophy;;This writer critiqued Plato in Dissemination and wrote an autobiography titled Circumfession. Believing that the meaning of a word is "deferred" to the meanings of words it contrasts with, a critical position of this thinker's posits that neither speech nor writing is primary to the other. His Glas is a two-columned book containing Hegelian philosophy on one side and discussions of Jean Genet on the other. An analyst of conceptual distinctions, he wrote Margins of Philosophy, Writing and Difference, and Speech and Phenomena. FTP, name this Jewish-French anti-philosopher; the author of Of Grammatology and founder of deconstructionism.;;(Jacques) Derrida
United States History;;The 2005 Supreme Court case Sherrill, New York  v. Oneida Nation of New York involved interpretation of the 1790 Act that shares its name with this better-known one, which the San Pedro was accused of violating in an 1817 Supreme Court case. Sections 3 and 4 of that Act set the date at which it went into effect as May 20, while Section 2 gave the penalty for violating it as a fine of between one hundred and ten thousand dollars and a jail sentence of between one month and one year. The second of three Acts passed in response to the Berlin and Milan decrees and the Orders of Council, it was designed to alleviate economic problems caused by the passage of the Embargo Act. FTP, identify this law succeeded by Macon's Bill No. 2; an 1809 act that restricted trade with Britain and France.;;Non-Intercourse (Act)
Miscellaneous;;He perpetrated the "Great James Robbery" when he enticed Juan Tizol away from Harry James and taking along Willie Smith and Louis Bellson; the latter performed the drum solos in his "Skin Deep". Three of his stars left in 1950 to join his former band member Johnny Hodges, but he continued to reinvent himself with works like Drum Is a Woman and Far East Suite. He was back in the spotlight after a solo by tenor saxophonist Paul Gonsalves in "Diminuendo & Crescendo in Blue" for the Newport Festival. FTP name this jazz composer who collaborated with Billy Strayhorn on "Take the A' Train" and who earned his rank at the Cotton Club with works like "It Don't Mean a Thing" and "Mood Indigo".;;(Edward) (Kennedy) (Duke) Ellington
Religion/Mythology;;One woman by this name gave birth on Mount Cithairon after being dragged back from Sicyon by her uncle Lycus. Tormented by Dirce, she was the mother-in-law of Niobe and her sons by Zeus, Amphion and Zethus, built the walls of Thebes. The second woman by this name is sometimes called by the feminized version of her son's name or sometimes said to be the sister of a woman with that name. She was abducted while bringing presents on board a stranger's ship, prompting her followers to wage war with Athens. FTP, give the shared name of these mythological women, the second of whom, possibly identical with Hippolyta, was an Amazon queen and wife of Theseus.;;Antiope
Biology;;The RACE type of this process is a special case of the anchored type, which utilizes a universal linker. The hot-start version separates the components before the first step and the touch-down version decreases hybridization temperatures over time. The ARMS system utilizes the allele-specific type, which relies on single nucleotide distinctions near the three-prime end. Its product usually has an adenosine three-prime overhang and enzymes from Pyrococcus furiosus have been used in it thanks to their three prime to five prime exonuclease proofreading, but VENT and taq pol are also common. FTP, name this technique taking about thirty cycles; a DNA amplification method invented by Kary Mullis.;;p(olymerase) c(hain) r(eaction)
Biology;;The anterior pillars located on either side of this species' nose seem to relate it to species discovered by Gert Terblanche. An earlier fraud initially led the scientific community to ignore the first of four examples, which was found in a lime quarry near Kimberley. The original specimen was a child with a cranial capacity of four hundred five cubic centimeters, but it wasn't until Robert Broom's discovery of a four hundred eighty-five-cubic-centimeter adult skull that the existence of this species was widely accepted. Phylogenic models suggest that it may be the ancestor of P. Robustus, though the OH62 artifact may indicate it to be the direct ancestor of the Homo genus, rather than the afarensis species of its own genus. FTP, name this hominid species named by Raymond Dart with a name meaning "southern ape of Africa".;;A(ustralopithecus) africanus;;austrolopithecus
World History;;Among those involved in his assassination was the chamberlain Aspamithres. After his death, the throne passed over his son Hytapses and his successor executed the primary assassin, Artabanus. In an inscription from his reign, he claims to have destroyed the den of the daivas, leading some to believe that this man was religiously intolerant. Earlier, he had gained notoriety for taking a statue of Bel from the temple in Babylon, but he is most famous for a grand expedition that set out from Sardis and included among its preparations the digging of a canal through the Chalcidice. FTP, name this man victorious at Artemisium and Thermopylae before a resounding naval defeat at Salamis; a Persian king whose reign saw the latter stages of the Persian Wars started by his father, Darius I.;;(Xerxes|Khshayarsha(n)|Ahasuerus|Achashverosh){1}? (I|the First)
Literature;;In the work the Hidden God, literary critic Cleanth Brooks cites William Faulkner and this author as examples of how reading the works of heathens can provide a profound experience for Christians. He was a member of the Order of the Golden Dawn and, during his honeymoon, his wife Georgie Hyde-Lee demonstrated her gift for automatic writing, the result of which was the work A Vision. It was during that same period that he wrote a poem to commemorate a gift given him by Harry Clifton which featured the "ancient, glittering eyes" of "Three Chinese men". His mystic beliefs are more prevalent in another work that demonstrates his Nietzschean belief in the rough beast who "Slouches towards Bethlehem to be born". FTP, name this Irish poet of "Lapis Lazuli" and "The Second Coming".;;(William) (Butler) Yeats
Miscellaneous;;Cameos in this film include Marina Sirtis's Persian matriarch and Tony Danza's actor, who suggests that a character's dialogue should be dumbed-down. Other minor characters include health care worker Shaniqua Johnson; Peter Waters, a devotee of St. Christopher; and Maria, a Hispanic servant and best friend to an uptight white woman. Tommy Hanson shoots Peter when he mistakes Peter's a figurine for a gun. The film's most emotional scene involves a traffic stop of the Thayers, an affluent Hollywood couple, by racist cop Jack Ryan, who later saves Mrs. Thayer's life. FTP, name this drama about race-relations in the police, featuring Terrence Howard, Don Cheadle, and Matt Dillon.;;Crash
Literature;;Joyce Carol Oates wrote a controversial article about the "magnanimity" of this novel. The narrator has a dream in which he is forced to attend a sermon delivered by the Reverend James Branderham, who accuses him of committing the "first of the seventy-first" sin. That narrator's landlord is initially hated by his family as a child due to the crushing of a fiddle and the loss of a riding crop, gifts brought for his adopted siblings from Liverpool. The protagonist is then abused physically by Hindley, whose sister he desperately loves, and, after a three-year absence, returns to Thrushcross Grange and the title estate to reclaim his love and exact revenge. FTP, name this novel about Catherine Earnshaw and Heathcliff Heathcliff by Emily Bronte.;;Wuthering Heights
Astronomy;;Apparent supraluminal motion in this object was recently resolved by radiation hydrodynamical considerations, in light of the thirty-three-microsecond source at its center. It was determined in 1973 to be six thousand, three hundred light-years away, which gives it an apparent magnitude of negative three point two. About ten light-years in diameter, it was misclassified in 1919 and William Herschel originally thought it was a stellar system that could be resolved with larger telescopes. The inner part of this body appears bluish and emits synchrotron radiation. It also contains NP0532, a pulsar, and an x-ray source, Taurus X-1. FTP, identify this body independently discovered by Bevis and Messier; the nebula resulting from the 1054 supernova, designated M1.;;Crab (nebula)
Art;;In the upper left, one can see some buildings in the distance fading into some hazy hills at the edge of a harbor. Several ships sail in the harbor though only one, with a bellying mainsail, features prominently on the right side. A singing shepherd tends to his sheep near the center and a man appears to be fishing in the lower right corner. In the lower left, the most visible scene shows a horse pulling a plow in front of a colorfully dressed farmer. All of these scenes, however, distract the viewer from the titular event in the lower right, depicted as a cascade of feathers and a pair of legs sticking out of the water. FTP, name this Peter Bruegel painting pitting the son of Daedalus against an Italian coastal setting.;;(Landscape with) (the) Fall of Icarus
Religion/Mythology;;This person's name is used to designate the Earth in the Skáldskaparmál, the compiler of which also called this character "the Sybil". Her mishaps are used to taunt her lover in the Lokasenna. Her chief rival was Jarnsaxa, whose son is stronger than her husband. That husband is not the father of her son Ullr, but did sire Lorrid and a daughter was promised to Alvis, Thurd. This goddess had her most distinctive feature replaced by the sons of Ivaldi or Dvalin after Loki shaved her head in the night. FTP, name this second-most-beautiful of the gods after Freyja, the mother of Modi and wife of Thor.;;Sif
Miscellaneous;;One psychologist quantified this faculty with the exponential of the negative ratio of time and capacity strength and Henri Bergson theorized ordinary and pure variants. George Miller suggested seven plus or minus two as a magic number limit of it and Marvin Minsky discounted the possibility of the eidetic type. In literature, the taste of a petite madeline dipped in linden-flower tisane triggered experiences of it which would not be possible for suffers of Korsakoff's syndrome. FTP, name this cognitive faculty famously studied by Hermann Ebbinghaus, the nuances of which Marcel Proust explored in the work In Search of Lost Time, and which is of great utility in quizbowl.;;memory
Art;;His early career was spent painting, producing poorly preserved works in the Casa Prinetti and Casa Fontana. After becoming court architect for Lodovico Sforza, he designed the choir and transept of the Santa Maria della Grazie and the Canonica of San Ambrogio. One of his last projects was the extension of the Vatican Belvedere as two long, parallel structures. The influence of Leonardo can be seen in the radial design, including a cylindrical cella surrounded by a circular peristyle, of a shrine on the site where St. Peter was crucified. His most monumental design employed a Greek cross with four equal arms and a large hemishpheric dome. FTP, name this favorite architect of Julius II; the creator of the Tempietto and the original designer of St. Peter's Basilica.;;(Donato) Bramante
United States History;;He had an affair with Louis XV's daughter, the Countess La Vendahl, and, late in life, he commanded an expedition against the Turks at Liman, but the jealousy of Count Nassau-Siegen caused his dismissal. He obtained a reputation for cruelty after flogging the carpenter Mungo Maxwell and running-through the leader of a mutiny, causing him to change his name after fleeing Tobago in 1773. Other antics include his attempted rape of a ten-year-old during his time in the Russian navy, but he is best known for an action involving the British ship Countess of Scarborough. FTP, name this Scottish-born captain best known for shouting "I have not yet begun to fight" and his service in the American Navy on the Bonhomme Richard.;;(John) (Paul) Jones
Philosophy;;Mohr discussed "The Gold Analogy in" this work, which was notably commented on by William of Conches. Beginning with the narrator asking the title character where the fourth of yesterday's interlocutors is, this work has only one line for Hermocrates, who prompts the recitation of the story of King Amasis by Critias. The construction of a scale is outlined and the title character posits a form of the principle of sufficient reason by claiming that God, being good, manipulated the anake so that more good might come about. Connecting quintessence to the icosahedron, this is, FTP, what Platonic dialogue, dealing with the creation of the universe?;;Timaeus
World History;;This war included the naval victory of Anson at Finisterre Cape and saw the defeat of the king of Sardinia at Madonna del Olmo. In the successive battles of Rottofreno, Piacenza, and Colle dell'Assietta, the French were frustrated by the Savoyards but managed to capture Bergen op Zoom during peace negotiations. The Prussians were victorious at the Battle of Chotusitz and defeated Marshal Neipperg again at Mollwitz, but the best-known battles are Maurice de Saxe's victory at Fontenoy and the last battle involving an English king, Dettingen. Beginning with the invasion of Silesia, this is, FTP, what war that included the War of Jenkins' Ear and King George's War, a conflict in the 1740's over the throne of Maria Teresa, concluded by the Treaty of Aix-la-Chappelle?;;(the) (War of the) Austrian Succession
Literature;;This novel's minor character Brunswick takes over a shoe-repair business as a result of the violation of the "law of the first night" by one member of the central family. Their story is relayed by the messenger Barnabas, who was offered as a servant to atone for his sister Amelia's refusal of Sortini. The protagonist arrives claiming to be a land surveyor and immediately beds Frieda, who is said to be the mistress of Klamm, the official with whom he seeks counsel. Compiled after its author's death by Max Brod, the work ends with Frieda dumping the protagonist in favor of Jeremiah. FTP, what is this novel of Franz Kafka, which centers on the attempt of K. to infiltrate Count Westwest's titular fortress?;;(The) Castle|(Das) Schloß
Geography;;From its headwaters, this river flows through the Pantanal wetlands and east of a disputed triangle of land in the extreme southeast of the Santa Cruz department. It crosses the Tropic of Capricorn along the portion of its middle course that forms the eastern border of a department named for President Rutherford Hayes. Hayes was the arbitrator who helped its nation retain the majority of the area between the Río Verde and the main branch of Río Pilcomayo, the prominent portion of the region commonly known as the Gran Chaco. Forming part of the boundary between Bolivia and Brazil, this is, FTP, what South American tributary of the Pirana that passes by its namesake nation's capital, Asuncion?;;Paraguay (River)|(Rio) Paraguay
World History;;The battle of Alcacer Ceguer and the defeat of the Moors at Ceuta bookended his brief military career and he organized the assault on Sala-ben-Sala's forces at Tangier. He was assisted in his most important tasks by the Jew Jehuda Cresques, who lived with him at his estate of Sagres. Zurara is the best source for relations between this man and men such as Gil Eanes, Goncalves Zarco, Dinis Dias, and Nuño Tristao, who sighted the Gambia River. The son of Juan I and Philippa of Lancaster, he sponsored the development of the caravel and quadrant and the exploration of Porto Santo and Madeira. FTP, name this prince of Portugal who, despite never having commanded a ship, was nicknamed "The Navigator".;;(Prince) Henry (the Navigator)|(Duke of) Viseu|(Lord of) Covilha
Astronomy;;The first direct observation of one of these bodies, one in 47 Tucanae, was made on October 29, 1997 using the FOS. The collision and slow coalescence models seek to explain their formation; both are supported by the fact that these are more numerous in regions of high density, like the cores of globular clusters. These stars, exemplified by those in NGC 6397 and BSS 19, seem to contradict most theories of stellar evolution; they fall along the main sequence despite being beyond turnoff points. FTP, what is this class of stars, which are significantly hotter than neighboring cluster stars with the same luminosity and, as a consequence, display a characteristic color?;;blue straggler(s)
Music;;Two operas by this composer, based on Oedipus and The Tempest, were never completed. Early works like Musica ricercata and Apparitions were published much later than their composition due to government censorship in his country but, upon fleeing to Germany, he wrote Volumina, the electronic piece Artikulation, and a work with a title borrowed from a Karl Popper phrase, Clocks and Clouds. His Poeme symphonique is a work for a hundred "preferably pyramid-shaped" metronomes, while his only completed opera was based on a Michel de Ghelderode play and is titled Le Grande Macabre, but he is better known for Atmospheres and two other works that appeared in a 1968 Kubrick film. FTP, identify this Hungarian composer whose Lux Aeterna and Requiem can be found in the score for 2001: A Space Odyssey.;;(Gyorgy) Ligeti
Chemistry;;This process can by begun by addition of Collins reagent or its namesake's reagent; both contain the hexavalent metal central to it. That metal can be activated in the presence of pyridinium hydrochloride under anhydrous conditions, but a sulfuric acid medium is generally used to increase the rate. Discovered by Bowden, not its namesake, in 1946, this reaction requires care as it is highly exothermic and leaves an extremely toxic residue. The steric bulk of tertiary alcohols precludes their participation in this reaction, and it is usually carried out in acetone. FTP, name this organic reaction in which primary alcohols are transformed into carboxylic acids and secondary alcohols to ketones under catalysis by chromium oxide.;;Jones oxidation
Literature;;In this novel's opening chapter, a fight is precipitated by a king-high straight flush beating a full house. In the last chapter, a storekeeper blames himself for "sins of omission," which include allowing the suicides of the father and son Tetley. The central action of the novel is precipitated by the disappearance of Kincaid, after which his friend, a former confederate officer, joins a group of twenty-eight who seek out Donald Martin and his two ranch hands. Beginning with the arrival of Gil Carter and Art Croft to Bridger's Wells, this is, FTP, what Walter Van Tilburg Clark novel about the hanging of three innocent men in the titular valley?;;(The) Ox-Bow Incident
Noncomputational Math;;Hausdorff's generalization of this statement relates it directly to the inaccessible cardinals axiom, which was used by Solovay to solve the related Lebesgue measurability problem. Freiling's axiom of symmetry or Woodin's omega-logical axiom imply its inconsistency with the common framework in which it arises. Cohen's 1966 work on Set Theory and this introduced the method of forcing to show that no contradiction is introduced by including its negation with the ZF axioms and the axiom of choice, thus showing its truth to be undecidable by normal Zermelo-Frankel set theory. FTP, name this subtle axiom of set theory that states that the power of the reals is aleph-one.;;continuum hypothesis
Miscellaneous;;Based on the short story "The Greatest Gift," this work was labeled subversive by the FBI, which claimed that a major plot device "was a common trick used by the communists". In one scene, Carl Switzer plays Freddie, a jealous teenager who, during a high school dance, opens up the dance floor, revealing a pool underneath. Better known characters include Violet Bick, who borrows money from the protagonist to start her life over in New York; Sam Wainwright, who habitually says "hee-haw" and wires twenty-five thousand dollars to the protagonist; and Mary Hatch, the protagonist's wife. FTP, identify this film in which a nightmare trip through Pottersville convinces George Bailey that life has meaning, shown habitually every Christmas.;;It's a Wonderful Life
Physics;;Three varieties of the diagnostic tool based on this phenomenon are ultraviolet resonance, near-infrared dispersive, and surface enhanced spectroscopy. It has been used in vivo to detect cervical and skin cancers by examining intensity changes and wavenumber shifts of the distinctly narrow peaks it creates. Because it is a fairly weak effect, sensitive detectors and laser sources must be used, and the much stronger fluorescence spectrum must be subtracted from the result. It occurs when a molecule enters a virtual excited state, then returns to a higher or lower vibrational state, emitting an altered photon. FTP, name this type of inelastic scattering that has both Stokes and anti-Stokes varieties and is named for an Indian physicist.;;Raman (effect|scattering)
Literature;;His fascination with poetry began with a translation of the collection Paroles; the day Paris was liberated, he found a poem on a tablecloth written by Jacques Prevert, the poet who would most influence his style. He had moderate success with his first collection, Pictures of a Gone World, the first in the pocketbook series. In his most famous collection, this poet seeks to explore the characteristics of "suffering humanity" caught by the "imagination of disaster". The author who "sees the people of the world" "in Goya's greatest scenes" this is, FTP, what American beat poet, proprietor of City Lights Bookstore, and author of A Coney Island of the Mind?;;(Lawrence) Ferlinghetti
World History;;The Mehrauli Iron Pillar in Delhi indicates that he led a successful campaign against chiefs of Venga. The pilgrim Fa Hsien described the kingdom under this man's reign, noting that there was no death penalty, poll-tax, or land tax, but that the caste system was firmly embedded and that most people did not eat meat, wine, or onions. He is better known today for his victories over the Saka Satraps and the marriage of his daughter to the king of the Vakataka dynasty, effectively uniting the two kingdoms during his time. At court, he kept a circle of poets known as the "Nine Gems," including Kalidasa, and the fourth day after Diwali, Padwa, coincides with his coronation. FTP, name this Indian king, the second so-named of his dynasty, who shares his name with the founder of the Mauryan empire.;;Chandragupta ((II|the Second) Virkramaditya|(II|the Second){1}? (Virkramaditya)){1}?
Literature;;In the second act of this drama, we learn that the central family's former maid paid a carpenter to marry her after she became pregnant. In the third act, the carpenter bribes a pastor to found a home for sailors. Some of the action is precipitated by the return from Paris of the protagonist's son, who tries to seduce Regina, the daughter of his family's former maid and his half-sister. The protagonist's actions are spurred by an attempt to launder the legacy of her philandering syphilitic husband through philanthropy; in the end, her attempts fail as her son will die and the orphanage has burned. FTP, name this drama that takes its names from the relics of the past which Helen Alving wishes to eradicate; a work by Henrik Ibsen.;;Ghosts|Gengangere
Biology;;Brodsky and Berman determined this chemical's structure, which includes a sheath of stabilizing ordered water molecules. Due its dearth of cysteine residues, cross-linking of occurs near the N- and C-termini between lysine and histidine residues with the aid of lysyl oxidase. Ascorbate is dietarily necessary because it is needed by the enzyme prolyl hydroxylase, which forms one of this molecule's prevalent residues. Consisting of over thirty distinct chains assembled into at least nineteen different varieties, the most common residue sequence is glycine-proline-hydroxyproline. FTP, name this triple-helical protein, the most abundant in vertebrates, that provides tensile strength in tissues like tendon, teeth, and bone.;;collagen
Religion/Mythology;;This belief took greatest hold in Soghdiana and was the state practice of the Uighurs. This creed's founder, known as the Apostle of Light, was revered for his painting for centuries after his death, and claimed especially to be the paraclete. Diocletian had mixed success in condemning its organizers and leaders "to the fire". It held that all matter is corrupt and contains evil particles, so its initiated ate only fruit picked for them by those seeking initiation; a practice Augustine notes in the Confessions while discussing his flirtation with this religion. FTP, this syncretic, quasi-Christian dualistic religion founded by Manes.;;Manichaeism
Literature;;The most recent output of this writer, whose earliest poems were collected in Advantages of Wind-Fowl and Rail Triangle, deals with the sinking of a refugee ship in 1945. In 1972, he released From the Diary of a Snail, to which he appended a speech analyzing Dührer's Melencolia I. A work from 1977 centers on nine cooks from various eras with whom the first-person narrator spends time. The impact of a neutron bomb causes the death of his one of his characters, aged sixty, in 1982's the Rat, though that character is better remembered for the titular gift of another novel that he requested for his third birthday. FTP, who is this author of Crabwalk and the Flounder and the creator of Oskar Matzerath from The Tin Drum.;;(G(ü|u){1}?nter) Grass
Physics;;Cowling proved that a fluid, self-sustaining one of these cannot have an axis of symmetry, though Braginsky's isothermal solution to the 3-D problem of this name is nearly symmetric. Steenbeck's alpha effect is the production of a time-averaged field of this type by disordered MHD convection. Parker proposed that rising flows in the Sun's atmosphere could give rise to a field of this type, but this model does not account for the properties of sunspots. The Gramme electromagnetic variety of this uses a ring armature to increase consistency while Pixii built the first electric one based on Faraday's law of induction. FTP, identify the shared name of the most prevalent model of planetary magnetism and an electrical generator that converts rotation to alternating current.;;dynam(o(s)|ic){1}?
World History;;Before his career in politics, this man was a manager of the Polar Bear brewery. Arrested for embezzlement from the post office following a study trip sponsored by the Minister of Colonies, he founded the MNC, his country's first nationwide political party, and a university in Russia that Carlos the Jackal attended was named for him. Sidney Gottlieb claims that he was instructed to poison this man's toothbrush by the CIA, but the assassination attempt failed. With his aides Mpolo and Okito, he was murdered by Tshombe's men in Katanga after fleeing from the repressive government of president Joseph Kasavubu. FTP, identify this man who opposed Mobutu Sese Seko and the rule of the Belgians; a Marxist who was the first elected prime minister of Zaire.;;(Patrice) Lumumba
Religion/Mythology;;Schopenhauer invokes this work's fable of Meshian and Meshiane as emblematic of the source of the pessimistic element of Christian religion. The story of a man to whom is given a "golden seal and a dagger inlaid with gold," Yima, is included in the second fragment of the third part, the name of which translates as "Against the Demons" and is Videvdat. Its oldest section, 72 chapters of "oblations," includes the original writing of this work's compiler; chapters 28 through 53 of this section, part of the Yasna, are gathas in honor of Zarathustra. FTP, name this sacred text of Zoroastrianism which is often paired with commentaries known as Zend.;;(the) (Zend-)Avesta(s)
World History;;His mother, Mandane, was a princess and a famous inscription of his notes that his great-grandfather was Teipses and his father was a king of Anshan. He defeated rulers, such as Amasis II of Egypt, Nabonidus and Croesus of Lydia, but he died while fighting against the Massagetae. He defeated his grandfather, Astyages, and built his capital, Pasargadae at the site of that battle and he later attacked his father-in-law and captured Ecbatana. Believed to be the ideal king by Xenophon, his Stele tells how he captured Babylon without a battle and, according to the Bible, Daniel presented him with an ancient scroll of Isaiah on his entrance into Babylon. FTP, identify this son of Cambyses I and first king of the Medo-Persian empire.;;Cyrus (II|the Second|(the) Great){1}?
Astronomy;;An early theory of the origin of these involved the breakup of relativistic "beebees" while Meszaros and Rees proposed the relativistic fireball shock model to explain their non-thermal broken power law spectrum. Woosely and Paczynski proposed that they are explicable by the collapsar model for Wolf-Rayet stars, which form black holes that feed an electron-positron-baryon jet. First detected by Vela military satellites, their afterglow was first observed by the BeppoSAX satellite using an x-ray detector and data from NASA's Compton Observatory showed they originate from far outside the Milky Way. FTP, identify these astronomical phenomena classified either as long- or short-duration depending if they last over two seconds and named for their intense output of high-energy photons.;;g(amma) r(ay) b(urster)
Miscellaneous;;Henri Hubert outlined a general theory of this practice of which fifteen different varieties were identified among the Trobriand Islanders by Bronislaw Malinowski. Edward Evans-Pritchard cited as an example the falling of an Azande roof and their inability to establish a causal relationship to termites. In The Golden Bough, James Frazer conjectured that civilizations are characterized by a stage during which this is prominent before moving to religion and then science. Believed by Lucien Lévy-Bruhl to be characteristic of pre-logical thought and considered for Coral Gardens by Malinowski, this is, FTP, what is practice of invoking the supernatural?;;magic
Religion/Mythology;;Aphrodite saved Butes from this group, the offspring of either Achelous or Phorcys. Ovid explains that they were playmates of Persephone punished for failing to protect her. There are but two of them mentioned in their most famous appearance, one of whom is named Himeropa; later instances list up to five and say that their feathers were plucked to form crowns after they lost a singing contest with the Muses. Some accounts claim they killed themselves after being outdone by Orpheus on behalf of Jason or after their cloying was defeated using beeswax by Odysseus' men. FTP, identify this group of mythological creatures who drew sailors to their death with beautiful singing.;;siren(s)
Biology;;First characterized in 1963, this hormone consists of a sesquiterpenoid partially produced through the mevalonic acid pathway. Its active form is produced by oxidation of a product of violaxanthin breakdown, ABA aldehyde. Its production is stimulated by stresses and its transport occurs in a non-polar manner through both xylem and phloem with translocation through parenchymal cells. Major effects include inhibiting shoot growth with a minimal effect on root growth, inducing seeds to synthesize storage proteins, and inducing gene transcription for proteinase inhibitors in response to wounding. FTP, name this plant hormone once known as dormin for its induction and maintenance of dormancy and best known for its role in the dehiscence of fruits and the falling of leaves.;;abscisic acid|abscissin
Literature;;A stain on an ordinary glazed white cylindrical bowl, the discussion of which thinly masks the growing love of two characters for either other, provides the title to this novella's fourth chapter, "Her Mother's Lipstick". The work begins when the female protagonist and her mother arrive uninvited to a gathering after which the mother, twenty years the male protagonist's senior, seduces him on their way home. The work's climax occurs after the ordinary bowl is placed next to an ornamental one belonging to his father. That father was a philanderer and his mistresses included not only her mother but also the conniving Chikako, who now wishes to keep Fumiko and Mitani apart. FTP, what is this work centering on the Japanese Tea Ceremony by Yasunari Kawabata that takes its name from Yukiko's avian kerchief pattern?;;Thousand Cranes|Sembazuru
Physics;;For a small body moving in an otherwise quiescent fluid, the inclination of the boundary between the zones of silence and action is the arcsine of one over this property of the flow. This parameter arises in the boundary layer equation from the natural scaling of the dependent variable and a necessary condition for potential flow is that this parameter be much smaller than unity. Since this dimensionless parameter is the ratio of the effects of inertial and elastic forces, flows are incompressible when it is small. FTP, identify the dimensionless number that is the ratio of the speed of an object in a fluid medium to the speed of sound in that medium.;;Ma(ch) (number)
Literature;;The antagonist tells the story of a black dog with a constant erection that used to frequently attack him at the beginning of this play, which the Provincetown players premiered with Beckett's Krapp's Last Tape. The antagonist continues with stories about the death of his father and aunt on his graduation day, his affair with a fifteen-year-old Greek boy, and the fact that only the capital letters work on his Western Union typewriter. These stories are addressed to Peter, a reluctant conversation partner, while sitting on a Central Park bench. FTP, name this work culminating with the self-impalement of Jerry; an Edward Albee play set near an animal park.;;Zoo Story
United States History;;The precursor to this legislation, Resolution 44, employed John Carmody and Edwin Smith, who also served in the later incarnation of the organization that this Act created. It was called unconstitutional by the American Liberty League and, in a Supreme Court case, Jones and Laughlin Steel claimed that it was not consistent with the commerce clause, but Chief Justice Hughes sided with the government. Passed after the failure of the NRA, it applied to all employers except those in agriculture, airlines, railroads, and government, but many of its powers were nullified by the Landrum-Griffin and Taft-Hartley Acts. FTP name this legislation sponsored by a senator from New York; a 1935 Act that established workers' right to collective bargaining and created a namesake board of labor.;;(the) Wagner (Act)|(the) N(ational) L(abor) R(elations) (Act)
Literature;;The Canadian rock band by this name has released such albums as Take A Deep Breath, Young Wild and Free, and Love Machine and had a 1986 Top Ten single with "Can't Wait For the Night". The song by this name is the first track on Queen's Sheer Heart Attack. The novel by this name concerns Fred Hale, who returns to town to hand out cards for a newspaper competition and is murdered by the teenage gang member Pinkie Brown, who abuses the title substance. The novel was adapted into a 1947 film starring Richard Attenborough; this was released in the US as Young Scarface. FTP, identify the shared name of, most notably, a novel by Graham Greene.;;Brighton Rock
Chemistry;;In order to explain this mechanism's normal result, Winstein has proposed that the presence of ion pairs hinders complete racemization from it. Strong leaving groups like tosylates increase the rate of reactions of this type, but nucleophile concentration changes have no effect on it. Proceeding in two steps, it works best with tertiary alkyl halides and proceeds more rapidly in aprotic solutions. Its rate determined by the dissociation of the substrate, which results in the formation of a carbocation and is unimolecular. FTP, identify this reaction mechanism; a first-order nucleophilic substitution.;;SN1
World History;;Mounier offered the initial opinion on it; this was seconded by Target and Barnave. Only one delegate refused to sign it, asserting that the representatives and people held political authority. After assembling at the Menus Plaisirs to discuss reforms proposed by the finance minister, the group, led by Abbe Sieyes and Mirabeau, withdrew and formed the National Assembly. Announced by Jean Bailly, it was signed by 577 members of the Third Estate after they were locked out of their meeting hall in the Palace of Versailles. FTP, identify this 1789 document whose signing at the namesake sporting venue marked the beginning of the French revolution.;;Tennis Court (Oath)
Music;;Due to its extensive fugato, Francois Habaneck initially attacked this orchestral work for being too academic. Its first movement was described as "a fat bristly animal" by its composer and is reminiscent of Beethoven's Ninth, with which it shares a D-minor key. Wagner's Parsifal samples from that first movement during which strings, flutes and bassoons weave a liturgical mood and which culminates in the "Dresden Amen". During the fourth and final movement, a flute solo introduces and a clarinet chorus recalls a melody from a namesake Bach cantata, the hymn "A Mighty Fortress is Our God". FTP, name this symphony composed for the three hundredth anniversary of the Augsburg Confession; the 5th by Mendelssohn, nicknamed for the Protestant movement of the sixteenth century.;;(Symphony) (No(.) 5) (in D major/D minor) Reformation(,) (Op(.) 107)|(Symphony) (No(.) 5) (in D major/D minor) (Reformation)(,) Op(.) 107|Reformation Symphony
Miscellaneous;;This institution's current incarnation contains the Mullard Radio Astronomy Observatory, which houses the Ryle Telescope and one receiver from the MERLIN array. Its original site housed the Medical Research Council Unit where Perutz worked on the structure of DNA, and Josephson junctions were developed here. Its research included Thompson's cathode ray experiments and Bragg's work with x-rays; its first professor was Maxwell, who was soon joined by Rayleigh. FTP, identify this prestigious physics laboratory at Cambridge named for the British scientist who discovered hydrogen and made an early measurement of the Earth's mass.;;Cavendish (Laboratory)
Literature;;At the end of this work, a silver fox farm is established at the central location. The work features a fortune teller who reads the soles of feet and is often associated with Madame Sosostris, who appears in the work from which this novels takes its title. Jock Grant-Menzies is a friend of the central character and speaks of the protagonist's love for his home, whose bedrooms were named from Arthurian legend. The turning point in the novel is the death of the protagonist's son, after which his wife Brenda leaves him and he takes an ill-fated trip to the Amazon. Featuring the crazy Mr. Todd, who forces the protagonist to read Dickens for the remainder of his days, this is, FTP, what novel centering on Hetton Abbey and the protagonist Tony Last; a work by Evelyn Waugh?;;(A) Handful of Dust
Art;;It was possibly inspired by a dream documented in the Tibetan text Life of Milarepa. Its subtitle is "Which, when enlarged, will fill the sky" and its design is influenced by the artist's earlier Sleeping Child and the Maïastra series. The first piece of this name was mounted on a conical support while, in later versions, an irregular stem was used. When Edward Steichen tried to bring one through U.S. Customs, the officer classified it as a propeller blade and charged a $600 duty. The work eliminates any superficial likeness and lengthens the body swell of the titular animals, reducing to an oval plane its head and beak. FTP, name this sculpture series depicting the essence of flight by Constantin Brancusi.;;Bird(s) in Space
Literature;;In the essay "Just This Side of Byzantium," this author acknowledges that Greentown and the protagonist Douglas Spaulding are recreations of his childhood. In another of his works, he explored chaos theory in the story of a man who travels to hunt dinosaurs and accidentally stomps a butterfly, then returns to the present to find his society changed. His best-known work centers on a group that uses a salamander as its symbol. The protagonist of that work is influenced by Clarisse McClellan and the professor Faber and eventually begins to secretly read a Bible. After killing Captain Beatty and eluding the Mechanical Hound, Guy Montag is able to escape his past. FTP, name this author of "The Sound of Thunder," Dandelion Wine, and Fahrenheit 451.;;(Ray) Bradbury
Religion/Mythology;;While praying at the chapel of St. Damian's below his hometown, this man was instructed to repair that chapel, but his fundraising methods led the priest there to refuse his aid.  Shortly after, while praying at Porziuncola, he was visited by Christ, from whom he requested a plenary indulgence for all that visited his chapel there.  While in the company of Brother Leo in La Verna, he had a vision of the seraph followed shortly by reception of the stigmata.  According to his biographer Thomas of Celano, he composed his "Canticle of the Sun" in a reed hut near his hometown shortly before traveling to Palestine, the protection of which is still charged to his order.  FTP name this leader of the Minor Friars and friend to the animals, especially those in and around his hometown of Assisi.;;(St(.)|Saint) Francis (of Assisi)
Miscellaneous;;At its end, a frightened girl's rendition of "The Faithful Hussar" leads the group to hum along, reinforcing the common humanity of the girl and her captors. The director's future wife Christine Harlan, performing that scene, demonstrates some of the best acting of the film, counterbalancing the over-the-top histrionics of Adolphe Menjou as a harried general. Ralph Meeker gives a competent performance illustrating the injustice about to be done to three soldiers, and George Macready intimates that a promotion will be given to the commander who can accomplish an impossible military objective. Banned for 18 years in France for its negative portrayal of its army during World War I, it was the first collaboration of Kirk Douglas and Stanley Kubrick. For 10 points, name this film which takes its title from "Elegy Written in a Country Church Yard," which informs us that the title entities "lead but to the grave".;;Paths of Glory
Noncomputational Math;;It is built from 46 definitions of recursive functions, the last labeled "bew," short for beweisbar.  Atomic elements are represented as odd integers, and the first n prime numbers are raised to the appropriate power to encode statements.  The "bew" function, however, returns 1 if the input is a theorem consistent with Principia Mathematica or loops forever if it isn't.  It gives, however, a negative result to Hilbert's tenth problem by affirming that the system of Whitehead and Russell -- or any comparable logical system -- is inconsistent. Stating that a system powerful enough to describe arithmetic cannot be both consistent and complete, for ten points, identify this theorem, proven in 1934 by an Austrian logician.;;G(ö|o){1}?del('s) Incompleteness (Theorem)|G(ö|o){1}?dels Unvollständigkeitssatz;;G(ö|o)del('s)
Literature;;The death of Grischa, who never appears onstage, catalyzes the events of this play.  One of the characters turns down a lucrative position at a bank in favor of a life spent munching candy and contemplating imaginary billiards shots.  Another, the protagonist's neighbor, is constantly in debt and sells his land to clay miners. The servant Dunyasha hopes to marry Yasha but is threatened with betrothal to Simple Simon.  The tutor Trofimov is in love with the daughter of the central character, whose governess Charlotte does magic tricks at the ball in Act 3.  That ball is eventually crashed by Lopakhin, who announces he has bought the title estate at auction from Madame Ranevskaya.  FTP name this play by Anton Chekhov, whose title entity is eventually cut down.;;(The) Cherry Orchard|Vishnyovy sad
United States History;;Most of John Tyler's cabinet resigned because of Tyler's opposition to Henry Clay's plan for reorganizing this.  It was stabilized when William Jones was replaced by Langton Cleves, after the corruption of James Buchanan and the embezzler James McCulloch had jeopardized it. After dissolving, it became a private corporation chartered in Pennsylvania, but went insolvent five years later. Its evisceration in 1836 was symbolic of the anti-centralization ideologies and partly due to personal emnity for Nicholas Biddle. For 10 points, name this institution destroyed by Andrew Jackson.;;(The) (Second|2nd){1}? Bank of the U((.)nited) S((.)tates);;Bank of the U((.)nited) S((.)tates)
Religion/Mythology;;This god was responsible for turning both the Teumessian vixen and the hound Laelaps to stone.  In the Homeric Hymn to this figure, he is said to have fathered the Horae on Themis.  He humbled Aphrodite by causing her to fall in love with Anchises, and adjudicated the dispute between Aphrodite and Persephone over Adonis.  The old couple Baucis and Philemon showed hospitality to this god and one of his sons, who served as the messenger of the gods and carried the caduceus.  FTP, name this Greek god who slept with Maia to produce Hermes, one of many extramarital affairs that angered his wife, Hera.;;Zeus
World History;;When he met the Holy Roman Emperor at Sutri, he gave his stirrup for the emperor to hold but instead received a kiss on the foot that he chose not to reciprocate. with the perhaps apocryphal explanation that "I do this for Peter, not for you". Later, that same would-be stirrup holder entered Rome through Porta Viridaria for a Saturday coronation on June 18, 1155. Even after he crowned Frederick Barbarossa, his excommunication of William the Bad of Sicily led to bad blood that turned into a conflict between Barbarossa and this man's successor, Alexander III. FTP, whose 1154 to 1159 reign made him the only Pope to hail from England?;;Adrian IV|(Nicholas) Breakspear
Miscellaneous;;In 1996, Andre Lalande's class notes from this man's philosophy course at the Lycee de Sens were recovered and used to reconstruct the lectures. John Cuddihy states that there are forty-five references to the Pentatuch in his first major work, completed in 1893. In comparing the Pentateuch to the Twelve Tables, he argues that as a society gets more advanced, the individual is more pronounced and society less homogenous. That argument appears in his Division of Labor in Society, and in 1897, he divided another phenomenon into four types: egoistic, altruistic, anomic, and fatalistic. FTP, name this French sociologist and author of Suicide.;;(David) (Emile) Durkheim
Literature;;The prose preface to this work quotes ten lines from "The Picture," which end with a passage about some "fragments dim of lovely forms" which come "trembling back, unite, and now once more / The pool becomes a mirror".  The poem itself mentions "dancing rocks" which are "vaulted like rebounding hail" or "chaffy grain beneath the thresher's flail," which emerge from a "mighty fountain" forced from a chasm.  In a less tumultuous section, it refers to some "gardens bright with sinuous rills" where "many an incense-bearing tree" are blossoming.  Later, we learn of a song of Mount Abora which is chanted by a "damsel with a dulcimer," and the speaker claims that if he could revive her song within him he would "build that dome in air".  FTP, name this poem which features a sacred river named Alph and a "stately pleasure-dome" decreed in Xanadu by the titular Mongol ruler, a work by Samuel Taylor Coleridge.;;Kubla Khan
Earth Science;;Its use was especially prevalent in the kingdom of Cush, who made Meroe a cente of its production, while Roman sources report that the Gauls were also extraordinarly skilled in techniques for its use. It was apparently well-known in Rome itself from the beginning of the city, as their most ancient priest, the flamen dialis, was forbidden even to touch it, probably due to its association with bloodshed. It was first extensively employed by the Hittites, who found a way to make it more shatter-resistant by the art of tempering or quenching. For 10 points name this material whose greater strength and penetrating power soon led to weapons made of it supplanting those of bronze.;;iron
Biology;;Abnormal sensitivity to it is found in sufferers of Williams' syndrome.  One major precursor of it is 7-dehydrocholesterol, which is converted to its most active form by two different hydroxylases in the liver and kidney.  It functions in concert with parathyroid hormone to regulate plasma levels of phosphorus and a cation found in insoluble form in the body as hydroxyapatite.  Osteomalacia and rickets result from a deficiency in, FTP, this vitamin important in regulating calcium levels that can be synthesized in the skin or taken in from foods such as fish oil and fortified milk.;;(vitamin) D| calciferol
Astronomy;;VV Cephei systems and cataclysmic variables are examples of these systems with an M-type member.  Formation of accretion disks and explosions of type Ia supernova are associated with mass transfer in the semidetached subtype, in which one member fills an equipotential surface known as the Roche lobe.  Examples in which only one component is visible, and that component exhibits oscillatory behavior, are termed astrometric, while examples which exhibit periodic Doppler shifts are termed spectroscopic.  The majority of stars are found in, FTP what sort of system which can be eclipsing, containing two stars?;;binary ((star) systems|stars)
Literature;;In one of this man's works, a young musician boards the boat of an elderly helmsman only to become the helmsman himself.  That story, "Flute Dream," is one of this man's many fairy tales, which include "The Dwarf" and "Dream of the Gods".  His actual short stories include one about the Chinese poet Han Fook and another concerning Friedrich the rationalist and his friend Erwin, "Within and Without". Longer works include a novel about a student artist's relationship with an intellectual Monk and another about Emil Sinclair's relationship with the title character, Max Demian.  Better known are a novel about Joseph Knecht's transformation into Magister Ludi, master of the title competition, and another about the misadventures of Harry Haller.  FTP, name this German author of The Glass Bead Game and Steppenwolf.;;(Hermann) Hesse
Philosophy;;Book Seven of this work begins with a discussion of a quote from Homer in which Praim says of Hector that he seemed not to be thie child of a mortal man, which leads to the claim that men are rarely brutish.  That book concludes with a discussion of three views which are hostile to pleasure, while the following book considers the reciprocity and casuistry of friendship.  This work opens with a passage about the aims of various activities and argues that the discussion shuold not try to be clearer than the subject-matter allows, and suggests that young men are not well-suited to listen to lectures on the subject of the work.  The "good for man" and "moral virtue" are among the topics discussed in its ten books.  FTP, name this work which discusses the nature of eudaimonia or happiness, a book by Aristotle which is named for his son, its first editor.;;(the) Nicomachean Ethics
United States History;;He was ten when his father drowned in the Potomac in a sailing accident, leaving him in possession of a large plantation on which he built and designed his mansion, Gunston Hall. Along with Edmund Randolph and Elbridge Gerry, he was one of three delegates to the Constitutional Convention who refused to sign the final document,  because it did not explicitly guarantee individual rights. He continued campaigning, however, and was vindicated on December 15, 1791. FTP, name this Virginian, known as the Father of the Bill of Rights, and the namesake of a Fairfax County university in Northern Virginia.;;(George) Mason
Art;;In the background of this painting one can see the cart that made the two apparent ruts on the right, which is lying abandoned on its side.  The most prominent house in this work was built in Cushing overlooking the Georges river by the Hathorne family, which later became the Olson family.  The painter left the horizon devoid of pine trees and changed the slope of the hill, on which a woman in a pink dress can be seen crawling through the grass. FTP, name this 1948 work painted by Andrew Wyeth.;;Christina(')s World
Chemistry;;It was first produced in 1863 by Joseph Wilbrand.  This compound melts at 82 degrees Celsius and is formed by heating its two nominal reagents in a bath of concentrated sulfuric acid to successive temperatures of 82, 117, and 145 degrees Celsius, which allows for the stepwise attachment of functional groups to its central benzene ring.  It can be safely melted in steam-heated vessels and poured into casings for military use, which then will eventually necessitate its heating past 240 degrees Celsius.  FTP, name this highly explosive chemical compound, commonly abbreviated TNT.;;(2(,)4(,)6)-trinitrotoluene|2(,)4(,)6-trinitromethylbenzene;;T(.)N(.)T(.)
Literature;;The second group of these writings includes a piece on "Manners" which concludes with a quotation from Silenus claiming that manking is neither good nor bad but only "ridiculous little creatures".  That second group also includes a short consideration of "Gifts" as well as pieces on "Politics" and on the "Nominalist" and "Realist," and ends with a lecture given at Amory Hall.  The better-known first group begins with a piece that asserts "There is one mind common to all individual men," and after "History" features writings on "Spiritual Laws," "Circles," "Compensation," and "The Over-Soul".  FTP, name this collection of pieces published in two series in 1841 and 1844, which also includes a famous discussion of "Self-Reliance" and which was written by Ralph Waldo Emerson.;;(the) Essays (of Emerson)
World History;;Its tenth ruler ordered that solar temples and houses for acllas be built in Tumi Pampa, Hatun Colla, and Charcas. Originating in the village of Pagari-tampu, it extended its influence under Yupanqui, and the earliest date that can be assigned to its timeline is 1438, when Pachacuti Yupanqui usurped the throne from his brother Urcon. Under its eighth ruler, Viracocha, it first instituted its policy of establishing permanent garrisons among the conquered, which included such peoples as the Chacanas, the Chimu, and the Quechua. The death of Huayna Capac resulted in civil war between Huascar and his brother, and this empire collapsed when its last emperor was captured at Cajamarca. FTP, name this South American empire whose last ruler was Atahualpa and which was destroyed by Francisco Pizarro.;;Inca (empire)|Tiwantinsuya
Music;;In 1993, Jean-Claude Malgoire produced a completed reconstruction of this man's lost opera about Montezuma.  The bulk of his work is only known through the library of the Durazzo family, whose existence was revealed to Dr. Alberto Gentili in 1926.  His other operas include Arsilda, Queen of Pontus, Bajazet and an oft-performed adaptation of Orlando Furioso.  Juditha Triumphans is his only surviving oratorio, but he is better known for his 73 sonatas and over 500 concertos, four of which he accompanied with his own poetry.  FTP name this baroque composer, nicknamed "The Red Priest," best known for a work composed of Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter sections.;;(Antonio) Vivaldi
Literature;;After the protagonist of this work realizes that his son is sleeping with his mistress, he arranges to have the boy marry the daughter of a grain merchant.  Just after the wedding, the protagonist's wife dies of a stomach ailment, and the protagonist decides to apprentice his next son to the merchant and betrothes his youngest daughter to the merchant's son.  After the protagonist takes care of those sons, Nung En and Nung Wen, his uncle's family moves in with him and causes him trouble, since his uncle turns out to be a member of the gang of thiefs.  Also featuring a slave named Pear Blossom and a concubine named Lotus Blossom, FTP, name this 1931 novel about the peasant couple O-Lan and Wang Lung, a work set in China and written by Pearl Buck.;;(The) Good Earth
Music;;On the episode of Gilmore Girls entitled "Ted Koppel's Big Night Out,"' Richard, emboldened by a fun flask, begins singing one of this man's songs, embarrassing Lorelai.  A member of the Wiffenpoofs while at Yale, he "at football games may long for a strong undergraddy,'' and after a brief stint at Harvard Law he took up residence in Paris where he met Linda Thomas.  Hollywood started using his songs in The Battle of Paris, and he himself was the subject of the mostly fictionalized film Night and Day.  His output decreased dramatically after his leg was amputated in 1958, a consequence of a 1937 riding accident, and his only major work in his later years was the musical Kiss Me, Kate.  FTP, name this author of the song "Begin the Beguine," who created the musical Anything Goes.;;(Cole) Porter
Chemistry;;The Soave equation modifies it with the addition of an acentric factor, which is also included in another modification, the Peng-Robinson equation. Another modification was proposed by the scientist who proposed an explanation for the critical point as well as stating the law of corresponding states.  At higher densities, corrections to it are given by the virial expansion. Another correction is the Redlich-Kwong equation, which includes a term proportional to the inverse one half power of the temperature. High temperature, low pressure situations give the best agreements with the predictions of this equation, which implicitly contains Avogadro's law.  Derived from Charles' law and Boyle's law, FTP name this simple equation of state, typically given as PV equals RT.;;(the) Ideal Gas Law
Geography;;Article 69 of its constitution states that treaties already in effect "shall remain valid in the regional spheres for which they were intended" and the constitution was ratified by plebiscite on February 21, 1958.  It ended on the morning of September 28, 1961 when the "Supreme Arab Revolutionary Command of the Armed Forces" seized the radio station and charged Mahmun Kuzabari with forming a government.  Although Jordan, Turkey, the Soviet Union, and the U.S. quickly recognized the new nation, the movement was denounced as a coup by a leader who tried to maintain his nation's sovereignty and resist Syrian independence.  FTP, identify this short-lived nation that from 1958 to 1961 was a union of Syria and Egypt.;;U(nited) A(rab) R(epublic)
Geography;;Much of this island is dominated by a central ridge which bisects it and includes its highest peak, Monte Cinto, as well as a protected wildlife preserve which shelters the mouflon and a type of red deer endemic to the island. It is officially a "collective territory" but is a de facto région of France and, like the island to the south of it from which it is separated by the Strait of Bonifacio, its flag features a Moor's head. For 10 points name this third-largest Mediterranean island, behind Sicily and Sardinia, whose admninistrative capital, Ajaccio, was the birthplace of Napoleon.;;Corsica
Music;;Herman Scherchen and Wolfgang Graeser both arranged this work for orchestra, since the composer did not specify on what instrument it was to be performed. Its first published version included a chorale attached by the composer's son, entitled "Here Before Thy Throne I Stand". The last of its four canons is augmented in retrograde motion, while the second is written for two voices separated by an octave. These canons connect the main movements, the sixth of which is "in the French style," and the last of which was left unfinished at the composer's death, ending on a motif that spells out his name. FTP, name this composition which consists of fourteen Contrapuncti, written by J.S. Bach.;;(The) Art of (the) Fugue|(Die) Kunst der Fuge
Physics;;This relation's namesake constant must generally be computed for each streamline because it is derived by line-integrating the momentum equation along a streamline with the proper assumptions, the most restrictive of which is the absence of friction. Dividing through by the acceleration of gravity reformulates this equation in terms of head, which is how it's commonly used in civil engineering, and it can be used to derive the Venturi principle. It can be quickly obtained by dividing the energy equation for an ideal fluid element by its volume. FTP, name the equation that states that the sum of static and dynamic pressures and specific gravitational potential is constant and is named after a Swiss physicist.;;Bernoulli('s) (equation)
Religion/Mythology;;The last chapter of this book contains greetings to Andronicus and Junias, the author's relatives, and a greeting from Tertius, who transcribed it. Chapter eleven compares the audience to broken shoots being grafted onto a tree. Although chapter two is cited to support salvation by virtue, verses such as 10:13, "Whoever will call on the name of the Lord will be saved," seem to support salvation by faith alone. Its most popular verses include 3:23, "For all have sinned and fall short of the glory of God;" and 6:23, "For the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life". FTP, name this book of the New Testament, the longest of Paul's epistles, which he addressed to a church in Italy.;;(Epistle) (of Paul) (to the) Romans
World History;;This man was captured by a knight named William de Cahagnes after his battle-axe and sword shattered on the battlefield, but was released after his brother Henry successfully defended Winchester. He fell out of favor with Pope Innocent II after alienating Roger, bishop of Salisbury and entering into an unpopular treaty with Geoffrey of Anjou. After this man's son Eustace died, the issue of succession was decided by the Treaty of Wallingford, which made Henry of Anjou heir. FTP name this English King who fought the battle of Lincoln against the forces of Robert of Gloucester and his own cousin Matilda, the only British King from the house of Blois.;;Stephen (I|the First) (of Blois)
Biology;;Type one of this disease causes hyperactivation of Ras molecules due to inhibition of its namesake GTPase activating protein. Ninety percent of patients exhibit Lisch nodules in their irises, while twenty percent have vision disturbances due to optical gliomas. Type two is characterized by tumors of the acoustic nerve and is caused by a mutation on chromosome twenty-two, while type one is caused by a mutation on chromosome seventeen that most commonly manifests with "café-au-lait" spots and benign subcutaneous tumors. FTP name this neurological disorder commonly abbreviated "NF".;;neurofibromatosis
Literature;;In an early version of this play, the protagonist tries to teach another character to say the word "Jimminy," without success. The play opens in Johnny "the Priest's" bar, whose denizens include two nameless longshoremen and Marthy Owen, who courts the title character's father. In Act III, two central characters coincidentally sign up for the same steamer to Cape Town, the Londonberry, but confront each other aboard the Simeon Winthrop before departing. At the play's end, the title character agrees to leave behind her life as a prostitute in Minnesota and marry the stoker Mat Burke. FTP, name this Pulitzer Prize-winning play about the daughter of Chris Christopherson, written by Eugene O'Neill.;;Anna Christie
Philosophy;;Davidson's translations of this man's greatest work states that the path "that Being is not, and Non-Being must be" is "all-incredible" because "one thing are Thinking and Being". Citing Tartarus as a muse, he is featured in Kingsley's In the Dark Places of Wisdom, which describes a conspiracy to cover-up his writings. He believed that doxa is fundamentally mistaken, and that reality is a united and indestructible single alethia, hence his vehement opposition to Heraclitus. In the Platonic dialogue named for him, he proposes the "third man argument," which undermines the theory of forms, and his disciple Zeno attacks the notions of plurality and motion. FTP, name this pre-Socratic philosopher, author of the poem On Nature and the founder of the Eleatic school.;;Parmenides (of Elea)
Miscellaneous;;In high school home games in 1992, he was announced as "the nation's number one player on the nation's number one team". As a minor leaguer in 1993, he was in a commercial with George Brett. He led the American League in 2000 in runs scored and steals, but was traded west the next year. A widespread rumor claiming that he'd failed a steroids test in 2005 was found to be false, though he did play for Oakland after being traded from Kansas City. He helped defeat the team he recently joined by hitting a grand slam in Game Seven of the 2004 ALCS while the Red Sox center fielder and leadoff man. FTP, name this former leader of "The Idiots" nicknamed "Captain Caveman," who joined the Yankees in 2005.;;(Johnny) (David) Damon
Religion/Mythology;;This person was identified with Hittite Aqhat, who refused to yield his bow to Anatha. Conceived when the bee-keeper Hyreius made water on the hide of a bull and buried it in his wife's grave, he was compelled to carry Cedalion to the edge of the Earth in penance for raping Oenopion's daughter Merope, for only then would Helios restore his sight. Some myths claim that Aesclepius was struck dead while trying to revive this man. Apollo fooled Artemis into believing this man had seduced Opos as Candaon, so she had his struck down while he was swimming near Ortygia; later ruing this decision, she flung her assassin into the sky along with this man and his dog. FTP, name this hunter who is constantly being pursued by a scorpion and who had a dog named Sirius.;;Orion
Literature;;A set of handmade quilts sent by the mother of one of the central characters are a symbol of lower class in this novel, whose events are preceded by the death of the narrator's mother. Tension is created after one of the novel's characters risks his life to rescue a mentally handicapped child who wandered in front of a train. That character's wife, Robbie, left him in Memphis but follows him when he departs for the title event, which takes place at Shellmound. The central family includes Shelley, who wants to be a nun; Aunt Ellen; and Uncle Battle, who dreads the departure of his daughter Dabney. FTP, what is this novel narrated by Laura McRaven and centering on a gathering of the Fairchild family by Eudora Welty?;;Delta Wedding
Miscellaneous;;Chapter five of this work begins with a discussion of the work of Richard Baxter and the notion of Anschauung, or "outlook," and goes on to discuss the controversy in Britain over the Book of Sport. In Chapter two, the author criticizes economic rationalism as a response to economic traditionalism, focusing on Benjamin Franklin's claim that "time is money". In Part II, the author moves on to critique the vocational rigidity of several ascetic groups. The work's central claim is that the "vocational calling," combined with moral self-discipline, fueled and ossified the modern economic state, forming a "steel-hard casing" from which we cannot escape. FTP, name this seminal work of sociology in which Calvinism was linked to free enterprise by Max Weber.;;(The) Protestant Ethic (and the Spirit of Capitalism )
Geography;;On December fifth, a six point three earthquake centered at this geographic location struck a location near the area that the Bantu-speaking Fipa people inhabit. It is fed by the Malagarasi and Ruzizi rivers and is home to a namesake species of sardine. Stanley Falls is located to its northwest near the convergence of its only outlet, the Lukuga, into the headstreams of the Congo. FTP, what is this world's second-largest lake by volume and largest lake of the Great Rift Valley, which borders Burundi, Zambia, the Congo, and Tanzania?;;(Lake) Tanganyika
Literature;;The thirtieth stanza of this work describes a "Pilgrim of Eternity, whose fame / Over his living head like Heaven is bent," while the next three stanzas are an extended description of the author, whose "branded and ensanguined brow" was "like Cain's or Christ's". The poet instructs a "noteless blot" to "Live though, whose infamy is not thy fame!" referencing a critic whom he blames for the death of the title character, whose soul "like a star, / Beacons from the abode where the Eternal are". The poet repeatedly exhorts the reader to "weep for" the title character "for he is dead" and declares that "his fate and fame shall be / An echo and a light unto Eternity". FTP, what is this elegy on the death of John Keats by Percy Bysshe Shelley?;;Adonais
Astronomy;;One of this location's features, Gipul Catena, is an almost six hundred twenty-kilometer-long straight line of craters, and its magnetic field is generated by rapid circulation of a large electrolyte flow beneath its surface, making it strong enough to be detectable even in the larger fields of nearby bodies. As it has almost no geological activity, it has the oldest and most cratered surface in the solar system. Many of its features are named after Norse mythology, as exemplified by the impact craters Valhalla and Asgard. It is the third-largest moon in the solar system and is farther away from Jupiter than the other Galilean moons. FTP, name this moon named after a nymph Zeus loved who was transformed into a bear.;;Callisto
United States History;;Combatants established blockhouses at the mouth of the Fish River and Soldier Pond, where one of its chroniclers, Jean Michaud, was taken prisoner. It was preceded by the declaration of the Republic of Madawaska by Sophie Rice and John Baker, whose arrest led to a failed arbitration by the King of the Netherlands. Governor Edward Kent set up a garrison of ten thousand men at Hancock Barracks, but they never left the compound due to the intervention of General Winfield Scott. FTP name this conflict over lumber rights, a boundary dispute between the United States and Canada that was ended by the Webster-Ashburton Treaty, named for the river in Maine near which it occurred.;;Aroostook (War)
Literature;;One character in this work tells the story of "The Snake and the Fox," which an aside notes is not included in Nicholas Bataille's production. One of the main characters notes that Dr. Mackenzie-King had his own liver operated on before performing a similar procedure on Parker, to which her husband responds "All doctors are quacks, only the Royal Navy is honest in England". Toward the end, Francois Coppee and Sully Prudhomme are called "silly gobble gobblers," after which Mrs. Smith yells "Krishnamurti!" three times and imitates a train.  The only real event in the play is the arrival of the fire chief who, on his way out, mentions the title character, a woman who "always wears her hair in the same style". FTP, name this absurdist play by Eugene Ionesco.;;(The) Bald Soprano|(La) Cantatrice chauve
Chemistry;;Arly thiophenes can be produced by the Volhard-Erdmann reaction of this type, and heavy metal catalysis is often effective for the Nazarov reaction, which is one of these for vinyl compounds. Moore and Myers recently discovered similar exothermic reactions of this class, and the Borsche-Drechsel reaction of this type synthesizes carbazole by arranging a bridge of the namesake type at the bridgehead carbons of two homocyclic rings. FTP, name this class of chemical reactions including the Dieckmann reaction; reactions that produce closed ring compounds.;;cyclization(s)
Literature;;J.D. Hainsworth authored an article comparing Don Quixote and Hamlet to the protagonist of this work, a shortened version of which was published ten years earlier as the title character's "Dream". That character is tutored as a child by his German neighbor, whose son becomes his only friend. After being evicted in favor of his landlord's relative he is befriended by Tarantyev, who schemes to entrap him by making him marry his fat landlady. He becomes a government clerk for three years only to resign due to ill health, leaving him at home with his valet Zakhar. He is later invited to Paris, but elects to stay with Olga, who leaves him due to his indolence; a trait that for which literature remembers him. FTP, what is this Ivan Goncharov novel?;;Oblomov
World History;;The primary source of information for this battle is the writings of Tjaneni in the Hall of Annals of the victor. After the aggressing army assembled at Sile, it set out for the city of Yehem, from which it launched an attack on the under-defended city of Aruna. The opposing army, strengthened by forces from Mitanni, was concentrated largely to the north at Zefti and the south at Tanaach in the Jezreel valley, and had to scramble back to the river Qinah to face the aggressors. The defending forces were routed, but the King of Qadesh escaped, leading to a seven-month siege. FTP, name this battle won by Thutmose III in the fifteenth century BCE, the oldest known battle in history.;;Megiddo
Music;;Notable pieces in this opera include the duet "Il core vi dono," in which a character gives away a locket containing a portrait of her husband, and the aria "Come scoglio," in which the same character expresses her constancy. The opera's title comes from a line spoken by Basilio in a trio which appears in an earlier opera by the same composer. At the end of Act I, a doctor uses a large magnet to cure a poisoning, but turns out to be the maid Despina in disguise. She later presides over the final marriage scene in which Ferrando and Guglielmo, dressed as Albanians, swap their wives, Dorabella and Fiordiligi, thus fulfilling a challenge issued by Don Alfonso. FTP, name this Mozart opera whose title translates as "So do they all".;;Cosi fan tutte|All Women Do the Same|They're All Like That
World History;;Two years after its conclusion, forces of Father Kostadin Buvski and Leonid Vulgaris met at Gremen to decry it as ineffective. Romania was forced to exchange South Bessarabia to Russia for Dobruja, and the newly created Greater Bulgaria was further divided into North Bulgaria, Eastern Rumelia, and Macedonia. Its eventual mediator offered himself as an "honest broker" between nations represented by Alexander Karatheodori and Alexander Gorchakov, although all of the signers of the 1856 Treaty of Paris were present. FTP, name this meeting convened to rethink the Treaty of San Stefano, an 1878 conference chaired by Otto von Bismarck in the German capital.;;(Congress of) Berlin
Art;;Late in life, this artist created a number of pastel self-portraits such as his Self-portrait with Spectacles and Self-portrait at Easel. His figure paintings began as single domestic scenes like Woman Sealing a Letter, Woman Drawing Water from a Cistern, and Soap Bubbles, but evolved into more complex works like House of Cards and Saying Grace. His first commission was for two sets of decorative works entitled Attributes of the Arts and Attributes of Exploration for the Paris house of Konrad von Rothenburg, although he was better known for later works such as Jar of Olives and Kitchen Table. FTP, name this great eighteenth century French painter of still-lifes.;;(Jean-Baptiste)-(Siméon) Chardin
Biology;;This chemical is transported bound to SHBG like estradiol. A noted teratogen, it can be excessively produced when tumors are present in the Leydig cells. It stimulates the secretion of inhibin from Sertoli cells, acts as the feedback inhibitor for LH and GnRH secretion, and causes the embryonic Wolffian ducts to become seminiferous tubules. FTP, name this hormone produced in the testicles that prompts vocal deepening, growth of facial hair, and development of sex organs in males.;;testosterone|17-hydroxy-10,13-dimethyl-1,2,6,7,8,9,11,12,14,15,16,17-dodecahydrocyclopenta[a]phenanthren-3-one
United States History;;Dice v. Akron held that it must be preserved when a state enforces a "federally created right," an exception to the Minneapolis v. Bombolis decision which found that no such right exists in state-level civil actions. Strauder v. West Virginia applied the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to this right's providence in ruling that race may not be a factor in its execution. Salinger v. Loisel addressed the requirement that the central body be locally drawn and numerous cases clarified their impartiality, a requirement typically addressed via voir dire testimony. FTP, name this right protected by the Sixth and Seventh Amendments which entitles a defendant to receive a verdict from a group of ordinary citizens.;;(right to) (trial by) jur(y|ies){1}?
Miscellaneous;;According to the Old Testament, this name meaning "waterless hill" was used by the pre-Hebrew inhabitants of Jerusalem for the city. Its namesake tribe was the last conquered by Israel in Canaan and may have been the origin of such figures as Nathan and Zadok. More recently, someone by this name failed to respond to entreaties on a shortwave radio and the person behind that attempt declared non-belief in this entity when forced into missionary work to escape from a debt to the PBS pledge drive. FTP, name this botched pronunciation of the name of a major religious figure prayed to by Homer Simpson.;;Jebus
Geography;;The Heart Mountain Detachment is a rare example of one of these caused entirely by gravity. Material above its plane is known as the hanging wall while that below is the footwall. A change in their size can form breccia, gouge, or slickensides and, when two of the normal kind approach each other, a graben or horst may be created in between them. Types include thrust, transform dip-slip, oblique-slip, and strike-slip. FTP, plate boundaries are a common place to find what fractures in the crust, such as the New Madrid and San Andreas, where earthquakes usually occur?;;fault(line)(s)
Music;;The piano is instructed to play "blue-orange chords" in the second movement while the third movement is a clarinet solo depicting an "abyss". Among its eight total movements are "dance of fury, for the seven trumpets," despite the lack of any trumpets in the score. It begins with a depiction of birds waking up at three in the morning in the "liturgy of crystal" and includes "praises" to the "immortality" and "eternity" of Jesus. Originally performed by Henri Akoka on clarinet, Étienne Pasquier on cello, and Jean Le Boulaire on violin along with the composer on piano, it is based on an announcement by an angel in chapter ten of Revelation. FTP, name this piece written at the Görlitz concentration camp by Olivier Messiaen.;;Quatuor pour la fin du temps(, for violin, cello, clarinet & piano)(,) (I/22)|Quartet for the End of Time|(Quatuor pour la fin du temps) (, for violin, cello, clarinet & piano)(,) I/22
World History;;He entered politics through the connections of his wife, the countess Eleonore Kaunitz. In his first ministerial position, he forged a friendship with Friedrich von Gentz and he replaced Count Stadion in his most famous post. Following his nation's defeat at the Battle of Wagram, he was forced to relinquish control of Fiume, Istria, and Trieste in the Treaty of Schönbrunn. The first victim of the 1848 revolution in Austria and staunch exponent of a European balance of power, he advocated the continental system at a meeting hosted in his nation following the Napoleonic Wars. FTP, name this Austrian diplomat known for his role at the Congress of Vienna.;;(Klemens) (Wenzel) (Nepomuk) (Lothar)(,) (Fürst) (Von) Metternich
Art;;The site that this building currently occupies was once the office of Sun Yat-Sen's Young China newspaper. Its exterior color is due to a coat of cast quartz applied to the building. Conceived by John R. Beckett after viewing trees in a public park, it was designed by the William Pereira firm which wanted to make it taller but were not allowed to break the line of sight between Nob Hill and the nearby bay. From the twenty-ninth floor to the top, elevators and a smoke tower are supported by the prominent "wings" and, until the construction of the Aon Center, it was the tallest building west of the Mississippi. FTP, name this building found in the Montgomery Financial District of San Francisco; the oddly shaped former headquarters of an American financial concern.;;(the) Transamerica (Pyramid|Tower){1}?
Literature;;This novel's central couple begins to grow apart when the protagonist removes a set of stakes left by Irishmen. The family lives near Spring Creek, their children attend Henry Solum's school and, during an invasion of locusts, the main character's wife hides in a trunk. Precipitated by the arrival of a minister into town, the final descent into madness of Beret is accompanied by the belief that her son Peder Victorious will be her family's savior. Ironically, it is on a trip to bring that minister to the deathbed of his friend that the protagonist dies in a blizzard. FTP, name this novel that takes its name from the underground trolls perceived by the wife of Per Hansa; an examination of Norwegian pioneers in the Dakota Territory by Ole Rölvaag.;;Giants in the Earth(:) (A Saga of the Prairie)|I de dage
Religion/Mythology;;In Rome, he was worshipped at Egeria and was believed to have ruled as a king in Italy under the name Virbius after Asclepius resurrected him. This husband of Aricia received locks of hair from new brides at Troezen, where Pittheus raised him. His fatal decision may have resulted from devotional chastity to Artemis or from a general misogyny. After a sea monster terrified his horses, he was dragged to death behind his chariot; that monster was sent because his father invoked a curse from Poseidon following a false accusation of making unwanted advances on his stepmother, Phaedra. FTP, name this son of Theseus.;;Hippolytus
United States History;;Near the end of his life, he defended himself in a confrontation with Samuel Untermeyer at the Pujo committee hearings and he had earlier been lambasted for allegedly supplying defective guns to Union troops in the Hall Carbine Affair. His successful mediation of the rate war between the New York Central and Pennsylvania railroads convinced the Southern, Erie, and Northern Pacific railroads to let him reorganize those companies. That action, along with his arranging the transfer of sixty-two million dollars in gold to the U.S. Treasury, allowed him to calm the Panic of 1893. FTP, name this consolidator of International Harvester, General Electric, and U.S. Steel; the leading financier at the turn of the twentieth century.;;(J(.)(ohn)) (P(.)(ierpont)) Morgan
Art;;In one of his works, a female on the left floats in the air dripping blood out of the object in her hands onto a prominent flower sticking straight up in the foreground. That work, The Climax, was done shortly before he was fired and went to work with Arthur Symons at The Savoy, where he contributed to a translation commissioned by the "decadent" publisher Leonard Smithers, The Rape of the Lock. He took classes at the urging of Edward Burne-Jones, was soon commissioned to work on a new edition of Le Morte D'arthur, and quickly gained fame working under Lane and Harland at The Yellow Book. FTP, name this artist who courted controversy with his erotic drawings for Lysistrata and for Oscar Wilde's Salomé.;;(Aubrey) (Vincent) Beardsley
World History;;One dynasty which ruled in this kingdom used the "bone-rank" system to select "true-bone" men for the Council of Nobles. Another dynasty here was founded at Songak, encouraged immigration from the defunct state of Parhae, and fought several wars with Khitan. The government here protested relations with the U.S. by burning the General Sherman and, later, some groups here fought for democracy in the Tonghak Uprising and sought independence under the banner of the March First Movement. Earlier, the Hall of Worthies established by Sejong had finished constructing the hangul alphabet. FTP, name this former kingdom in which the Silla; Goryo; and Yi, or Choson, dynasties ruled, presently split into two countries.;;Korea
Literature;;When the daughter of Inachus appears in this play, the protagonist informs her that she will visit the land of the Gorgons and eventually find the source of the Nile. The chorus is composed of the daughters of Oceanus who decry the imposition of force over custom. The play begins with the journey of Kratos, Bia, and Hephaestos into Scythia and it culminates with a visit from Hermes to the titular son of Themis, whose refusal to reveal the usurper of Zeus' throne leads to his smiting by thunderbolt and descent into the underworld. FTP, name this Aeschylus play set at the rock to which the title character is chained for giving fire to mortals.;;Prometheus Bound|Prometheus desmotes
Physics;;This man's namesake differential transform can sometimes reduce the one-space unsteady heat conduction PDE to an ODE, but is generally degenerate. Decoupling the spatial dependence of the diffusion equation yields this man's namesake PDE, of which the Laplace equation is a homogeneous special case. His namesake theorem states that all properties of a vector field can be derived from its divergence and curl. The change in his namesake function for a process is the amount of reversible work by that process; that function is the thermodynamic potential in a closed system. FTP, name the German physicist for whom the internal energy minus the product of entropy and temperature is his namesake free energy.;;(Hermann) (Ludwig) (Ferdinand) (von) Helmholtz
Literature;;In this poem's final section, the poet invokes the Lord's Prayer in a manner one critic refers to as "decaying anaphora". In its second section, the author suggests a "rat's coat, crowskin, cross staves" as "deliberate disguises" to hide from "eyes I dare not meet in dreams". In the fourth section, the eyes "reappear as the perpetual star multifoliate rose of death's twilight kingdom" while the fifth begins with a children's rhyme, "Here we go round the prickly pear". FTP, name this poem hypothesized to have taken its title from Julius Caesar which concludes"the world ends / Not with a bang but with a whimper;" a work of T.S. Eliot.;;(The) Hollow Men
World History;;It was resolved here to move one force towards Rabaul while another army moved from India to Burma, and its operational plans were clarified four months later in the Trident conference. At this meeting, the delegates also decided whether Henri Giraud or Charles de Gaulle should be recognized as leader of the Free French, planned the intensive bombing of Germany, and determined to invade Sicily instead of landing in the West. Some have suggested that a proclamation at its end discouraged attempts to overthrow Hitler by demanding the "unconditional surrender" of Axis powers. It took place in January, 1943, and Stalin declined to participate, so, FTP, only Roosevelt and Churchill met at what World War II summit in North Africa?;;(the) Casablanca (conference)
Literature;;One of his novels is set in a nameless Arctic city in which Lloyd Seawright and Ward Bennett discover their incompatibility. He reported on-location on both the Boer and Spanish-American wars and outlined his literary beliefs in The Responsibility of the Novelist. He rewrote one of his more prominent novels to exclude a pants-wetting sequence at a theater and his fascination with disgusting characters led him to write of a man who dies in Death Valley after killing his wife and abandoning his dental practice. While he wrote enough of Vandover and the Brute to enable posthumous publication, he died before finishing Wolf, the third part of the Epic of the Wheat. FTP, name this naturalist author of A Man's Woman, The Pit, McTeague, and The Octopus.;;(Benjamin) (Franklin) (Frank) Norris
Philosophy;;This doctrine preaches that only the first man received a soul from the divine and all other souls are physically inherited from parents during conception. It believes that reality can be distinguished from the error of the senses by the strength of the impression produced and, from a strict materialism, it deduces that the human soul, human body, fire, God, and the logos are all identical. It preaches apathea to the external world and its formal school was led by Cleanthes and Chrysippus. Calling for the suppression of all passions and individual desires, this philosophy found later proponents in Epictetus and Marcus Aurelius. FTP, name this school of philosophy founded by Zeno of Citium and antithetical to Epicureanism.;;Stoic(ism|s)
World History;;It first occurred after the Praeneste campaign at the urging of Valerius Flaccus and was announced in the Temple of Bellona. A later example was carried out by Quintus Pedius and Plutarch writes of it happening to the gentleman Quintus Aurelius. Descendants of anyone subjected to this procedure were barred from public office for two generations and Catiline became notorious for killing his brother-in-law in the one that happened in 82 BCE. Formulated during a Senate discussion between Gaius Metellus and Sulla, this activity returned during the Second Triumvirate, when Cicero fell victim to it. FTP, name this practice in which a Roman ruler posted lists of opponents to be stripped of property and killed.;;proscriptio(n(s)|nes)
Physics;;The linear variation of this quantity with applied electric field is known as the Pockels effect and evanescence occurs when the magnitude of this physical quantity is dominated by the extinction coefficient. The path integral of this quantity is classically stationary according to Fermat's principle; a fact which may be used to derive the law of Snellius, which governs this property's namesake phenomenon at the interface of two media with different values for it. FTP, identify this physical property that is commonly defined as the ratio of the speed light in a medium to that in a vacuum.;;index of refraction
Religion/Mythology;;While its name is an alternative name for Hag Shavout, this Christian holiday itself has an alternative Anglican name referring to the color of the garments used for Baptism, but the liturgical calendar actually calls for red rather than white vestments. It is the anniversary of the "inauguration of the new age" and "fulfillment of the law" described in Acts. Occurring one week before the Feast of the Holy Trinity, it commemorates the appearance of the Holy Ghost to the disciples on the Sunday fifty days after Easter. FTP, name this Christian holiday which thus takes its name from the Greek for "fifty days" and plays a central role in the theology of a snake-handling, tongue-speaking namesake sect.;;Pentecost
Geography;;The "chickee" house was engineered for use in this area, which is the home of the Miccosukee and borders the national parks of Fort Jefferson, Biscayne and Dry Tortugas. Areas of slightly higher elevation here are receptive to the growth of tropical trees such as cocoplum and mahogany, which mix with temperate vegetation in an arrangement found nowhere else in the United States. Among its endangered species are the wood stork, Atlantic leatherback turtle, and American crocodile; it is the only place where crocodiles co-exist with alligators. FTP, name this four thousand, three hundred square mile region bordering Big Cypress Swamp and Lake Okechobee; a grassy marshland that comprises a protected national park in Florida.;;(the) Everglades