Literature;;Apollinaire included a letter from this group to a sovereign in his La Chanson du Mal-Aimé, and a member of this group kills a princess and two of her sons out of love for Helena in Sienkiewicz’s With Fire and Sword. Another literary member of this group hides under bricks to see his son before that son is executed, and one named Petlyura is rumored to be in charge of an advancing army in Bulgakov’s The White Guard. In a poem by Byron, a title character belonging to this group is exiled out of love for Theresa, and Olyenin’s life among these titular people was recounted in a novel by Tolstoy.  FTP, identify these people living in the Don region, who were written about by Sholokhov and examples of which include Gogol’s Taras Bulba and Byron’s Mazeppa.;;Cossack(s)|Kazakhi
Economics;;For a small tax, it is equal to negative one half times the tax times the change in quantity demanded, so if demand is perfectly elastic or supply perfectly inelastic it will be equal to zero. In a monopoly situation, part of the consumer surplus is transferred to the monopolistic firm, while this part remains. Tariffs and import quotas will also create this quantity, as both consumer surplus and producer surplus are reduced, and Jared Waldfogel has famously proposed that Christmas represents one. FTP, name this distortion from fair market equilibrium which causes a non-Pareto-optimal system to have the namesake potential economic gains that are never actually transferred to anyone.;;deadweight loss
Noncomputational Math;;One implementation of this device relies on dual-slope integration, which eliminates the need for a precision capacitor, but is slow. Another technique for implementing one of these is successive-approximation, in which the output is fed back into a comparator to determine whether it needs to be increased, decreased, or is accurate. For signals with Laplacian distributions, a logarithmic one is often used. All of them suffer from the quantization error, which lies between zero and half of one least-significant-byte, and their sampling rate is determined by the Shannon-Nyquist theorem. For ten points, identify this electronic component, used to translate continuous signals into discrete ones.;;A (/) D converter|analog(-) to(-) digital converter
World History;;A Tunisian legend holds that this man converted to Islam and gave his name to the village of Sidi Bou Said. Taking to heart his mother’s words, "I would rather see you dead at my feet than guilty of a mortal sin," he founded the Quinze-Vingt for 300 blind men and purchased the Crown of Thorns and a fragment of the True Cross from Baldwin II. His military exploits included leading an army that captured Damietta, though his brother Robert of Artois was killed and he was taken prisoner after the Battle of al-Mansurah, as recounted by this man’s biographer Joinville. A leader of the Seventh Crusade who died on the Eighth Crusade in 1270, FTP, name this long-reigning French monarch, the only one to be canonized.;;Louis (IX|the (9th|Ninth){1}?){1}? (of France)|Saint Louis
Religion/Mythology;;In one tale, he obtains fire by challenging its guardian, his grandfather, to a tossing game; when his opponent is in the air, he causes him to fall on his head, thus defeating him.  In another story he immures all of the winds save the west wind.  After his mother Hina complains that her bark cloth is unable to dry in the short days, he lassoes the sun and wins from it an agremeent to make the summer days longer.  Credited with inventing barbed fish-hooks and with using an ancestor’s jawbone to pull up the Hawaiian Islands, FTP, who is this Polynesian trickster god?;;Maui (Potiki)|Tikitiki
United States History;;Legend has it that his strict adherence to regulations once caused him to have a written dispute with himself in his dual roles of company commander and post quartermaster. Zachary Taylor ordered him to "double-shot your guns and give them hell" at Buena Vista, as his artillery battery held off Santa Anna’s charge. At Shiloh, he commanded the II Corps and he replaced P. G. T. Beauregard in June 1862. Foiled in his invasion of Kentucky by Buell at Perryville, he fought a bloody but indecisive battle at Murfreesboro.  He defeated Rosecrans at Chickamauga, but failed to follow up and was later defeated at Chattanooga. FTP name this Confederate general, namesake of a North Carolina army base.;;(Braxton) Bragg
Geography;;It is separated from Maria Island to the southeast by the Mercury Passage, and its notable peaks include Cradle Mountain and the highest, Mount Ossa. In the southwest is Lake Pedder, now an artificial lake that comes within the area of South-West National Park. The south is also home to Bruny Island, which is within Storm Bay, the outlet of the Derwent River estuary. Its major cities include Clarence, Launceston, and Devonport, and to the northwest is Christmas Island. Situated on the south side of the Bass Strait, FTP, name this island with capital at Hobart formerly known as Van Diemen’s Land.;;Tasmania
Literature;;A French translation of one of their epithets is the title of a novel purporting to be the memoirs of SS officer Maximilian Aue, written by Jonathan Littell.  One of them assumes the guise of the priestess Chalybe and plunges a torch into the breast of the sleeping Turnus in the Aeneid.  The Divine Comedy locates them at the gates of the city of Dis and describes them as girdled with green hydras, bloodstained, and wearing crowns of vipers.  They are the titular creatures of Jean-Paul Sartre’s The Flies, and one of their euphemistic Greek names is the title of the last play of Aeschylus’s Oresteia.  Megaera, Alecto, and Tisiphone are, FTP, which divine personifications of vengeance?;;Eumenides|Eryines|Furies|Kindly Ones;;(Les) Bienveillantes
Philosophy;;This man writes that "personal identity depends upon the identity of the body" in his essay "The Concept of a Person". Another of his works contains a chapter on "The Self and the Common World" and ends with some "Solutions of Outstanding Philosophical Disputes". He opens Probability and Evidence with a telling chapter on "The Elimination of Metaphysics". He looks at the shortcomings of skepticism in The Problem of Knowledge, but it is his discussion of the verification principle in analyzing the meaning of sentences that best characterizes the logical empiricism of his landmark work Language, Truth, and Logic. FTP, name this British philosopher of the later 20th century.;;(Sir) (Alfred) (Jules) Ayer
World History;;This polity originally comprised twelve tinkurus that were subjugated in the Kouroukan Fouga, which also established the Great Assembly, or Gbara.  The empire also had three allied states, including Mema, which was ruled by a fama, and Wagadou.  Wali Keita’s rule followed that of the empire’s founder, a magician whose rise to power and victory at the battle of Kirina over Sumanguru is traced in its Epic of Sundiata.  The latter’s grandson, a patron of Sankore University, had to take out a loan to return from his hajj since he gave away so much gold on the way. FTP, name this empire whose rulers, or Mansas, included Musa.;;Mali (Empire)
Religion/Mythology;;In 1577, Christopher Rasperger wrote a book with more than 200 potential interpretations of this concept. Both the Unitas Fratrum and the Taborites denied it, and a major English opponent of it was John Tillotson. Its scriptural justification is drawn from John 6 and 1 Corinthians 11, and Ignatius of Antioch defended it in a letter to the Smyrnaeans. Rejected in the Thirty-Nine Articles of 1563, its most recent confirmation was published by Pope Paul VI in his 1965 encyclical Mysterium fidei, 750 years after its formal exposition in 1215 at the Fourth Lateran Council. For ten points, what is this Catholic doctrine that the Eucharist sees the transformation of bread and wine into the body and blood of Christ?;;transubstantiation
Noncomputational Math;;Although M. L. Frankenheim was the first to attempt to enumerate them, he miscounted and came up with one too many of them, a problem corrected by their namesake. They are translation subsets of Fedorov groups and each one is given a Pearson symbol. The primitive one has ten Wyckoff points belonging to two separate tetrahedrally coordinated sets. Of the cubic-derived ones, one is triclinic, two are monoclinic, and four are orthorhombic including the simple, base-centered, body-centered, and face-centered. In all totaling 14 basic unit cells in three dimensions, FTP, identify this set of crystal lattices named after a Frenchman.;;Bravais (lattices)
World History;;The first commanding officer at this battle was Captain Richard Knox, and it was set in motion after the dispatch of Admiral Watson. It launched the career of Sir Eyre Coote, who advocated a strong attack here, and three years later Coote was victorious at the Battle of Wandiwash. The key action was the work of William Watts, as well as an attack mounted across the marshes by Major Kilpatrick. This came after a raid on Fort William and the Battle of Arcot, and after Mir Jafar was convinced to defect in order to become the next Nawab. The major victory of Robert Clive, FTP, name this masterpiece of British imperialism, a 1757 battle fought in India.;;(Battle of) Plassey
Literature;;She tells Mardian, "I take no pleasure/ In aught an eunuch has" and is surprised to learn that he has "affections" although he "can do nothing/ But what indeed is honest to be done".  This exchange, from Act I, scene 5 of the play in which she appears, establishes her own preoccupation with "the demi-Atlas of this earth," for whom, she says, "I feed myself with most delicious poison".  The scene ends with her recalling "My salad days,/ When I was green in judgment: cold in blood".  Preceded in death by her attendants Iras and Charmian, FTP name this half of a titular Shakespearean couple who commits suicide by asp bite, the lover of Antony.;;Cleopatra
Music;;In the second act, the villains of this opera swear an oath of vengeance in "Der Rache Werk" just before the heroine appears and sings "Euch Lüften, die mein Klagen" at the beginning of the Balcony Scene.  That heroine’s first act soliloquy "Einsam in trüben Tagen" describes her dream of the title character, who is forced to leave after Ortrud goads the heroine into asking the title character his name.  A mechanical error during a performance led Leo Slezak to quip, "What time does the next swan leave"?  The Bridal Chorus plays during Elsa’s marriage in, FTP, this Wagner opera centering on the titular son of Parsifal.;;Lohengrin
Biology;;The protein gelsolin acts on these structures to condense the protein nebulin at their boundary-defining disks, but does not affect the largest known protein, titin.  They are surrounded by lattices of desmin filaments, and their anisotropic regions are bisected by H zones.  The sliding filament model describes the action of these structures.  This action occurs when calcium ions bind to troponin C, causing them to contract and pull their terminal Z-lines together.  Action and myosin filaments in myofibrils are organized into, FTP, these functional units of striated muscle.;;sarcomere(s)
Miscellaneous;;The common-law conception of this legal term is analogous to the French delict or quasi-delict. Dignitary and economic ones include alienation of affections, conspiracy, and abuse of process; property ones include detinue, replevin, trover, and conversion. Defenses to intentional ones include consent and necessity; they may also be crimes as in the case of assault, battery, wrongful death, and fraud, while libel and slander used to be crimes but are now only these. Responsible for the brunt of civil litigation, FTP, name this legal concept, an intentional or accidental wrong or wrongful act by which injury occurs to another, from the Latin for twisted.;;tort(s)
Literature;;This story is set at a time when "it was not unusual for the love of science to rival the love of woman".  The protagonist’s "slender figure, and pale, intellectual face" are contrasted with the "smoky aspect, and … indescribable earthiness" of his assistant, Aminadab.  The protagonist’s wife she agrees to risk anything rather than be "the object of [her husband’s] horror and disgust".  According to Georgiana, the title feature "has been … often called a charm," though Aylmer cannot stand its resemblance to a crimson hand or its mere presence.  FTP name this Hawthorne short story in which Georgiana dies after an operation to remove the titular blemish from her face.;;(The) Birth(-) mark
Physics;;Gliner and Zeldovich are credited with the modern interpretation, in which it contributes its value times the metric tensor divided by 8 pi times the gravitational constant to the energy-momentum tensor.  In the Friedmann equation, it appears on the right-hand side divided by three, and measurements from WMAP have suggested that its energy density is approximately 0.7 times the critical density.  Its equation of state parameter w is -1, giving a negative effective pressure that tends to accelerate the expansion of the Universe.  FTP name this simple form of dark energy, rejected by Einstein as his "greatest mistake".;;cosmological constant|lambda
United States History;;Signed by President Hoover on his last day in office, one disgruntled Congressman called it "a long march in the direction of Moscow". The Supreme Court case Duplex Printing Press v. Deering thwarted an earlier attempt to accomplish the same goal, the 1914 Clayton Act. The Senate Report on the bill stated "A man must work in order to live. If he can express no control over his conditions of employment, he is subject to involuntary servitude" in justifying the bill’s prohibition of "yellow-dog" contracts. For ten points, what was this 1932 act which prohibited federal courts from issuing injunctions against nonviolent strikers?;;Norris(-) LaGuardia (Act) (accept Anti-Injunction Act before last sentence)
Art;;In the singular, one of these gives its name to a 1914 bronze sculpture by Raymond Duchamp-Villon, considered to be his masterpiece. They were a favorite subject of Theodore Gericault, who painted a pair of fightings ones as well as one of them frightened by lightning while Leonardo da Vinci cast a gigantic bronze statue of one for Francesco Sforza. George Stubbs painted numerous depictions of these creatures, including a 1766 Anatomy of one and a 1762 painting of one attacked by a Lion, and Johan Fuseli painted one of these poking its head through parted curtains in The Nightmare. Famously painted at a namesake "Fair" by Rosa Bonheur, for ten points, identify these quadrupeds which are being ridden by the hunters in Rubens’ Lion Hunt.;;horse(s)
World History;;This ruler's reign was preserved early on by the Treaty of Alton, and he took Adela of Louvain as his second wife.  He supposedly pushed Conan Pilatus off the Tower of Rouen, leading to its designation as Conan’s Leap.  After being victorious at the Battle of Tinchebrai, he introduced pipe rolls and the office of the justiciar, first manned by Roger Salisbury.  He aimed to relieve oppression by "unjust exaction" in issuing the Charter of Liberties.  Tragedy struck when his only legitimate son died on the White Ship and, despite the marriage of his daughter Matilda, he was succeeded by Stephen of Blois.  Known as the "Lion of Justice," FTP, name this king of England from 1100-1135 CE succeeding William II.;;Henry (I|the (1st|First){1}?){1}?
Physics;;For a classical charged particle interacting with an electromagnetic field, this behavior can be derived from the Bargmann-Michel-Telegdi equation. Relativistic time dilation as a correction to spin-orbit coupling is the known as the Thomas variety, while the third Milankovitch cycle is a manifestation of this behavior on Earth. NMR is made possible by the Larmor variety, which concerns the behavior of dipoles in an applied magnetic field, and perturbations in this type of motion cause an up-and-down bobbing motion called nutation.  FTP name this phenomenon, the change in direction of the axis of a rotating object.;;Precession
Economics;;Richard Lipsey developed it in a broader context, clarifying the adjustment function. Robert Solow and Paul Samuelson found that it also held in the United States and made it relevant to policymakers by introducing mark-up pricing. Edmund Phelps and Milton Friedman questioned its stability in the long run, arguing that the government could not maintain a permanent tradeoff between the two quantities in question, disagreeing with the findings made in the article "Analytics of Anti-Inflation Policy" with their view of the natural-rate hypothesis.  FTP, name this relationship depicting the inverse relation between the rate of unemployment and the rate of change of money wages in a certain curve.;;Phillips (curve)
United States History;;Felix Frankfurter’s concurrence concluded with the line "that is their business, not ours", but Justice Frank Murphy’s dissent cited House Report no. 2124. Justice Roberts also dissented, noting that the petitioner had been faced with contradictory orders, while Hugo Black’s majority opinion cited Blockburger v. US in support of treating the refusal to obey the orders in question, including Order no. 34, as separate offences.However, Black justified the decision on the basis of "pressing public necessity" and military prudence, rather than racism. Arising from Executive Order no. 9066, for ten points, identify this 1944 Supreme Court decision that upheld the constitutionality of Japanese internment during World War II.;;(Fred) Korematsu (v(.)|versus) (U(.)(nited) S(.)(tates))
Literature;;The end of this play includes a Nazi Marching Song sung by the Fahrenkopf family as they approach the central setting.  One character claims that he is made of "Indian rubber," but his "ninety-seven year young" body slips on the ground.  That character, Nonno, finally finishes his poem and recites it to his granddaughter Hannah Jelkes.  This play’s protagonist is dismissed from Blake Tours, allowing him to stay at the Costa Verde hotel run by Maxine.  FTP, name this play by Tennessee Williams whose third act sees Reverend T. Lawrence Shannon release the title lizard.;;(The) Night of the Iguana
Chemistry;;Dr. Octopus once tried to use a mixture of poisonous ink and a derivative of this to kill the readership of the Daily Bugle. Stanley Jacob discovered that it could be used to carry biological compounds deep into tissue, and it is often used as a topical analgesic. In the first step of the Swern oxidation, one molecule of it reacts with a molecule of oxalyl chloride, forming an intermediate that decomposes and is attacked by an alcohol. The deuterated variety is a common solvent in proton NMR. It can be added to a PCR reaction mixture to pry apart G-C rich templates more easily, and is an excellent solvent for the Williamson ether synthesis and SN2 reactions in general. With chemical formula C2H6SO, FTP name this polar aprotic solvent that easily seeps through skin, whose abbreviation stands for dimethyl sulfoxide.;;DMSO
World History;;In 2003, Isabella Ginor published an analysis of documents suggesting that this conflict was instigated by the Soviet Union, and in 1995, Areyh Yitzakhi accused one party in this conflict of killing 1000 prisoners of war.  The conflict began with a preemptive air strike dubbed Operation Focus, and it officially ended with UN Resolution 242, although the victor still hasn’t fulfilled the resolution’s directive to give up the Golan Heights.  FTP, name this 1967 conflict between Israel and an alliance of Syria, Iraq, Jordan, and Egypt that saw the seizure of the Gaza Strip and West Bank in just under a week.;;(The) ((Six(-) Day|June|(Third|3rd){1}? Arab(-) Israeli){1}? War){1}?
Noncomputational Math;;These structures are used in solving the cycle detection problem because the solving algorithm halts on the second detection of the smallest value of a sequence. A slotted channel is used in an algorithm employing these structures in collision resolution, and they are also used in LRU page-management. They are used in a method of memory allocation contrasted with heap-based allocation, and to implement reverse Polish notation calculators. The SP and SS registers on the Intel x86 architecture are used to implement this data structure first proposed by Friedrich Bauer. Containing two basic operations for adding and removing data, push and pop, FTP, identify these last-in-first-out data structures.;;Stack
Miscellaneous;;During the 2004 Presidential election, he was seen as the most likely pick for John Kerry’s National Security Advisor. One of his early works, a collaboration with Robert Keohane, championed the idea that international relations cannot be analyzed on a state to state basis, an idea called complex interdependence.  In later works, he argues that the US must maintain its hegemony not by military might or economic incentives as in the neorealist view, but by diplomacy and noncoercive means, or "soft power".  The author of Power and Interdependence and The Paradox of American Power¸ FTP, name this current Kennedy School of Government professor, the founder of the IR theory of neoliberalism.;;(Joseph) (S(.)) Nye()(Jr(.))
Literature;;The features of this character’s face are all cut as those on a Greek medallion, barring his chin that resembles that of Reverend Dr. Titus Oates. Thick black blood oozes from his face of pallid complexion upon his death, leading his superior to exclaim that his body "is the divine judgment on Ananias!" He states that "a mantrap may be under the ruddy-tipped daisies" when informing his superior about the conspiracy of the "Handsome Sailor," but a confrontation with the foretopman earns himself a fatal blow to the forehead. A death sentence for the title character comes with the death of, for ten points, which master-at-arms of the Bellipotent in Herman Melville’s "Billy Budd"?;;(John) Claggart
Miscellaneous;;Arkady Rossovich was infused with a cheaper variant of it by the Soviet Union, and others who use it include the assassin Yuriko Oyama.  The formula is a top-secret government recipe, and one use of it was jointly developed by Lord Dark Wind and Dr. Abraham Cornelius, and later used on Laura Kinney during her childhood in captivity.  This same excruciatingly painful process was used on James Howlett during a secret Department H initiative, and he bears both the scars and positive effects to this day. Quite malleable when liquid but indestructible when cooled, FTP, name this fictional metal of the Marvel Comics universe bonded to the skeleton of Wolverine.;;Adamantium|(The) Blood (of) Chuck Norris
Music;;In this work’s long first movement, the first of the three opening orchestral chords oddly lacks a B flat note, and each chord is followed by a short cadenza.  Its second movement, in B major, ends with a long pedal point beginning with the French horns that sees a semitone drop from B major to B flat on the bassoon lead directly into the third movement, which is back in E flat major.  Its Vienna premier featured the composer’s student Carl Czerny as the soloist, due to the composer’s deafness.  FTP name this work for solo keyboard instrument and orchestra, the last such work written by Ludwig van Beethoven.;;Emperor Concerto|Beethoven('s) Piano Concerto (No(.)) 5
Philosophy;;Early in life, he composed a poem entitled "The Feelings of One in Despair," but soon set about his career with such works as an exhaustive tome recently translated as Universal Right. He begins one work with a "frontspiece" entitled "The Idea of the Work," and spends book one "Establishing Principles". That book by this author of The Art of Rhetoric was translated by Jules Michelet and contains a "Discovery of the True Homer" as well as a distinction between poetic and philosophical wisdom, which transitions into his thesis that all nations pass through ages of gods, heroes, and men. FTP, name this Italian philosopher and historian, author of The New Science.;;(Giambattista|Giovanni (Battista)) Vico
Biology;;Electron dense spheres known as Woronin bodies sometimes block pores in the dividing walls of these structures.  They grow by extension of the terminal cell, which involves dissolution of the old and formation of a new wall, or septum.  They can specialize to form reproductive structures known as conidiophores, or aggregate to locate resources beyond a zone of depletion, forming rhizomorphs.  They can also invaginate plant cells in the form of haustoria, transferring organic carbon to the rest of the thallus.  FTP name these tubular structures that form a network known as the mycelium in many fungi.;;hypha(e)
Religion/Mythology;;He created a new star while carrying Aurvandil the Brave on his back when he broke off Aurvandil’s frozen toe and threw it into the heavens, and he created two more stars from the eyes of Alvaldi’s son.  He suffers whenever a hone is thrown across the floor, as he still has a hone stuck in his forehead from his duel against Mist Calf and Hrungnir.  He killed Geirrod with the help of Grid, who loaned him a staff, iron gloves and a belt of strength.  Residing in the hall Bilskirnir with his wife Sif, FTP name this Norse god who wields the short-handled hammer Mjöllnir.;;Thor
Noncomputational Math;;This man proposed the axiom of foundations and introduced the idea of a proper class to resolve Russell’s Paradox. His work on Hilbert’s Sixth Problem led him to axiomatize quantum mechanics by viewing physical quantities as operators in a Hilbert space, and with Bernays and Godel he gives his name to a set theory equivalent to Zermelo-Frankel. He proved the minimax theorem characterizing zero-sum games with perfect information, and the equivalence of cellular automata and Turing machines.  In a report on the EDVAC, he introduced a namesake computer architecture. Responsible for introducing backwards induction in Theory of Games and Economic Behavior, FTP identify this Hungarian-born mathematician.;;(John) von Neumann (Margittai)|Neumann (János) (Lajos)
Literature;;Four strangers tell their life stories while waiting for rescue in a hayloft in this author’s story "The Deluge at Noderney, and the widow Anne-Marie Kiil dies after mowing an entire field of rye in one day to free her son in this author’s story "Sorrow-Acre".  She published her earliest fiction in a newspaper under the pen name "Osceola" and took the pseudonym Pierre Andrezel for her only full-length novel, The Angelic Avengers.  She adopted another pseudonym for other works, including one set primarily at the foot of the Ngong Hills that depicts her life as the owner of a coffee plantation in Kenya.  FTP, name this Danish author of Seven Gothic Tales and Out of Africa.;;(Karen) Blixen|(Isak) Dinesen
Literature;;At one point in this work, the title character reveals his hope of spending his life alone, passing time drinking good coffee and reading the works of Homer.  The protagonist works for a young prince after failing to enter the army.  This occurs after he resigns the position secured for him by Wilhelm.  After returning to Walheim, Albert's wife asks the protagonist to read Ossian to her.  In a section entitled "The Editor to the Reader," a neighbor reports the flash of two pistols brought to the protagonist by his servant.  Ending with the title character's suicide due to his obsession with Charlotte, FTP name this Goethe novel.;;(The) Sorrows of Young Werther
United States History;;An unrelated Indian group with this name was founded in 1881 by John Slocum, who believed that he had visited heaven in a coma.  This group had its origins in the work of Jane and James Wardley, and Richard McNemar wrote the earliest defense of this group’s ideals, the 1807 Kentucky Revival.  Some of their characteristics may have been adopted from the Camisards.  Joseph Meachem and Lucy Wright instituted their rules of social organization, including communal living and celibacy. One of their communities is located in Sabbathday Lake Village, Maine.  One member wrote "by turning, turning we come round right," in the poem "Simple Gifts". FTP name this Quaker sect founded by Mother Ann Lee.;;(The) Shakers|United Society of Believers in Christ's Second Coming
Art;;Animals that can be seen in this painting include a black dog on the far right and a white bird at the feet of a woman in the lower left corner. Currently residing in the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston, it was called its creator’s "testament" as he planned to commit suicide upon its completion. This painting features three women with a child on the right, a youth taking fruit from a tree and two women talking about destiny in the middle, and a blue statue on the left background while an old woman approaches death. Its artist believed this work, one of his works done in Tahiti, should be read from right to left to symbolize the progression from birth to death. FTP, identify this painting by Paul Gauguin whose title consists of three questions.;;Where Do We Come From? What Are We? Where Are We Going?|D'où venons nous? Que sommes nous? Où allons nous?|WDWCF? WAW? WAWG?
Economics;;They may cease to exist in a Markowitz model, although rational actors can introduce them in more complicated scenarios. When they are injected into the Slutsky Equation, the result is a uniquely negative semidefinite symmetry. Alfred Marshall devoted approximately ten lines of his Principles of Economics to them originally, and Uriel Spingel argued that public transportation was one. They clearly differ from the Veblen type, which factor in conspicuous consumption, and two Harvard economists have made the case for rice and noodles being ones in parts of China. FTP, name these theoretical inferior goods most famously exemplified by potatoes during the Irish potato famine.;;Giffen good(s)
United States History;;Much of this battle was fought for control of a brick house, and in its aftermath John Coffin’s cavalry was unable to pursue the retreating attackers. Isaac Allen’s New Jersey volunteers and John Cruger’s battalion of DeLancey’s Brigade faded in the initial attack. When the attackers paused to loot the camp, they were picked off by Henry Sheridan’s New York volunteers and routed by a battalion led by John Marjoribanks. Following the loss of Fort Ninety-Six, Alexander Stewart had stopped his army to gather provisions, at which point they were attacked on September 8th, 1781, by a force under Nathanael Greene.  Technically a loss for Continental forces, FTP name this battle of the American Revolution which took place outside of Charleston, South Carolina.;;(Battle of) Eutaw Springs
Religion/Mythology;;She lived for a time in Alba with her companions, whose chanting caused every beast and cow within earshot to give two-thirds more milk.  A man sent to protect her and her three companions was forced by an oath to attend several ale feasts, and a man sent to spy on her lost an eye to a thrown fidchell piece.  The sight of a raven sipping blood in the snow prefigured her affair with a son of Usnach [OOS-nach].  Fergus took up service with Ailill [AL-il] and Medb [MAYV] after Eogan treacherously killed her lover Noisiu [NOY-shu].  FTP, name this character in the Ulster cycle whose incredible beauty brought many sorrows.;;Deirdre|Derdriu (of the Sorrows)
Noncomputational Math;;Together with Copeland, this man gives his name to a normal number obtained by concatenating the primes, while the Diophantine equation "sum from j equals one to m minus one of j to the n equals m to the n" is named for him and Moser. He named and derived a lower bound for the happy end problem, and with Selberg he demonstrated a number-theoretic proof of the prime number theorem. In 1958, he linked graph theory with Ramsey theory and combinatorics. He referred to beautiful theorems as coming "straight from the Book". FTP, identify this prolific Hungarian-born mathematician, whose namesake number gives the collaborative "distance" from another mathematician to him.;;(Pa(u)l) Erd(ö|o){1}?s
Literature;;In one of this man’s poems, Abram refuses to "Offer the Ram of Pride," instead slaying "his son, / And half the seed of Europe, one by one".  Another of his poems opens with the line, "I, too, saw God through mud," and a third poem pairs hall and Hell in his characteristic double consonance or pararhyme.  In addition to "The Parable of the Old Man and the Young," "Apologia Pro Poemate Meo" and "Strange Meeting," he wrote a poem which states of the title characters, "Only the stuttering rifles’ rapid rattle / Can patter out their hasty orisons".  FTP, name this man whose poems were collected and published posthumously by Sassoon, including "Anthem for Doomed Youth" and "Dulce Et Decorum Est".;;(Wilfred) Owen
World History;;This campaign was initially proposed at the Council of Ferentino and then renewed at San Germano. The army set sail in the midst of a malaria epidemic, and the Langrave of Thuringia fell ill soon after departure from Brindisi. It resulted in the signing of a flimsy ten year truce with Melek el-Kamel in return for aid against al-Nasir, after the marriage of the main participant to Yolande, the daughter of John of Brienne. This chain of events was quickly repudiated by Pope Gregory IX, a long time enemy of this campaign’s leader who declared himself regent King of Jerusalem. FTP, name this crusade officially begun in 1228 CE after many years of delay by Frederick II.;;(the) (6th|Sixth){1}? Crusade
Music;;A stretch of bars in 7/4 ("seven four") time in this work’s Finale was its composer’s first use of metrical irregularity, and the composer noted his delight with its natural-harmonic string glissando in Expositions and Developments. The Sinfonietta on Russian Themes by the teacher of its composer informs the oboe melody in this work’s Khorovod section, representing a round dance of thirteen princesses.  A solo bassoon represents the title creature luring a castle full of monsters to sleep in the Berceuse, after forcing them to exhaust themselves in the Infernal Dance of King Kastchei.  FTP, name this Stravinsky ballet in which the magical title creature gives Ivan one of its feathers.;;(The) Firebird|(L’)Oiseau de Feu|Zhar(-) ptitsa
Philosophy;;This thinker discusses artistic portraits, Stendhal, and a "Psychology of the Interesting Man" in his On Love: Aspects of a Single Theme, and he authored the collection The Mission of the University.  A book by David Muga reconsiders this man’s hypothesis holding that "experimental science has progressed thanks in large part to the work of men astoundingly mediocre". That formulation was put forth in a book with chapters entitled "The Primitive and the Technical," "The Height of the Times," and "The Barbarism of Specialization". The author of The Dehumanization of Art, FTP, name this 20th century philosopher who wrote Invertebrate Spain and The Revolt of the Masses.;;(Jos(é|e){1}?) Ortega y Gasset
Physics;;The partial linear polarization of the cosmic microwave background radiation is the result of this physical process. In deriving this non-relativistic process, the magnetic component of the Lorentz force is neglected, and the relevant particles are modeled as being in a damped harmonic oscillator. Its total cross section is independent of the frequency of radiation and scales as the square of the particle’s Compton radius. For ten points, identify this scattering of electromagnetic radiation from a charged particle, named after the discoverer of the electron.;;Thomson (scattering)
Art;;His last work was completed by his pupil Alessandro Allori.  In his youth, he was forced to Certosa by an outbreak of the plague in his hometown.  He was used as the figure of a child in his teacher Pontormo's Joseph in Egypt.  He worked for the Duke of Urbino for a time, and painted a portrait of Andrea Doria as Neptune.  He decorated the chapel of Eleanora of Toledo, the wife of his patron Cosimo di Medici.  One of the premier portraitists among the Mannerists, for 10 points, name this Florentine, best known for Venus, Cupid, Folly, and Time.;;(Agnolo) Bronzino|(Agnolo) (di) Cosimo
Geography;;Cities in the central region of this country include Vanch and Jirgatol, and its northwest contains the Zarafshon River. Its capital sits at the foot of the Hissar Mountains and contains the suburb Varzab, once a major recreational center. The highest point is Ismail Samani Peak and its extreme northern peninsula contains the city of Khujand and begins to stretch into the Fergana Valley. Most of the mountainous Pamirs range is contained in this country, whose capital was for a time renamed Stalinabad. FTP, name this smallest country in central Asia, north of Afghanistan and east of Uzbekistan, with its capital at Dushanbe.;;Tajikistan
Literature;;The final chapter of the work in which he appears sees his return from the inauguration of a new gallery at the Metropolitan Museum of Art and an amazingly clear telephone call from his son. He resents Julius Beaufort, whose daughter Fanny later marries his son Dallas. His best friend Ned Winsett and Theodore Roosevelt, convince him to go into politics, and he never keeps his promise to visit the niece of Medora Manson. Unable in the end to visit Ellen Olenska after discovering that his love for her was known to his wife May Welland, for ten points, identify this protagonist of Edith Wharton’s The Age of Innocence.;;(Newland) Archer|Newland
United States History;;One concurring justice in this case draws on Rochin v. United States and his previous dissent in Adamson v. California, while the majority opinion often cites the cases of Boyd v. United States and Weeks v. United States as historical precedents on the central constitutional issue. Dissenters included Justices Whittaker and Frankfurter who joined with Harlan in lambasting the court for forgetting its sense of judicial restraint in overruling Wolf v. Colorado.  The wake of this decision produced a doctrine known as the "fruit of the poisonous tree". FTP, name this 1961 Supreme Court decision in which seizure of lascivious material in a Cleveland woman’s apartment was deemed unconstitutional.;;Mapp (v(.)|versus) (Ohio)
Biology;;Haptoglobin-related protein in a certain HDL is thought to account for the natural resistance of humans to a pathogen similar to the one responsible for this disease.  New therapies may be inspired by a recent proteomic analysis of the flagellum of the responsible agent, a kinetoplastid parasite.  The pathogen promotes its own growth by triggering secretion of interferon-gamma and produces multiple waves of fever by generating clones covered by different variable surface glycoproteins.  After breaking down the host’s defenses, the parasites cross the blood-brain barrier, producing slurred speech and mobility issues.  FTP, name this disease caused by trypanosomes and carried by the tsetse fly associated with odd slumber habits.;;(African) Sleeping Sickness
Religion/Mythology;;Pierre de Castelnau was killed by Raymond VI of Tolouse after ordering one of these, and in 1961, Michael Gonzi issued one to all supporters of the Malta Labor Party. One of these was experienced in Venice in 1606 due to the refusal to hand over a convicted murder and was protested by Paolo Sarpi. An automatic one is issued for such offenses as celebrating Mass or hearing confession while a deacon or layperson, and those still in force by virtue of the Constitution Apostolica Sedis are considered censures.  Most famously used against England during reign of King John by Innocent III, this is, for 10 points, what Catholic punishment which bans the sacraments and public worship in the area of effect?;;(ban of) interdict(ion)
Literature;;One character in this story sends out two thousand bogus double-eagle coins stamped with the likeness of his opponent three days before a election.  At one point in this story a crowd breaks into a tune from The Mikado with altered lyrics, concluding with the line "But the Symbols are here, you bet!" supplied by Jack Halliday.  These Symbols are 18 of the 19 heads of the best families in town, the sole exception being Edward Richards.  They are publicly humiliated as part of an intricate plan for revenge hatched by the title character.  FTP name this story set in a town that changes its motto to "Lead Us Into Temptation" after suffering the title humiliation in a Mark Twain story.;;(The) Man That Corrupted Hadleyburg
United States History;;This legislation was enacted partly on the recommendations of the McClellan commission, and its section 504 was invalidated in U.S. v. Brown as a bill of attainder. Its section 211 was added by the Employee Retirement Income Security Act in 1974.  People covered by this legislation included those covered by the Railway Labor Act and the Wagner Act. The portions of this legislation requiring free election of officials were authored by then-Senator John F. Kennedy, and its section 602 provided for a $10,000 fine for extortionary picketing. Prompted in part by corruption investigations of the Teamsters and the Laundry Workers’ Union, FTP, identify this doubly-eponymous 1959 labor bill which banned Communists from holding union offices.;;Landrum(-) Griffin (Act)|Labor(-) Management Reporting and Disclosure (Act)
Literature;;One of the title character’s sons declares that he wants to become a Viking.  That child shares his name with the title character’s father-in-law, who is nicknamed "Badger".  Mrs. Busk fires the title character’s daughter from her teaching job, and the ship-owner Vik fires Captain Horster near the end of this play.  The title character’s father-in-law, who owns a tannery in Molledal, buys shares in the central business, which was created in part by the title character’s brother Peter, the mayor.  The discovery of infusoria in the water leads the title character to call for the closing of the public baths in, FTP, this Ibsen play in which Dr. Thomas Stockmann earns the title designation by opposing the townsfolk.;;(An) Enemy of the People|En folkefiende
Art;;This student of Jean-Leon Gerome at the Ecole des Beaux Arts was one of the subjects of Mumford’s The Brown Decades. His students included Henry Ossawa Tanner and Thomas Anschutz, and he painted Mending the Net and Arcadia after learning of Muybridge's work. He painted a portrait of his friend Walt Whitman, rumored to be Whitman's favorite, and painted himself in a small boat behind the title figure in Max Schmitt in a Single Scull. A man lectures to the students of Jefferson Medical College in, FTP, this American realist's monumental painting of a surgery in progress, The Gross Clinic.;;(Thomas) (Cowperthwaite) Eakins
Astronomy;;The thickness of Titan’s atmosphere was measured from Titan’s X-ray shadow during a rare transit of Titan in front of this object.  The strong linear polarization of its white glow confirmed Shklovskii’s prediction that its nonthermal emission is dominated by synchrotron radiation.  Proper motion analysis of its knotty filaments shows that its expansion has accelerated in the past 950 years.  The central object is spinning down from a rotation rate of 30 cycles per second as it transfers rotational energy to the surrounding gas via magnetic dipole radiation.  Located in Taurus, FTP name this remnant of the 1054 supernova which is powered by a central pulsar and inspired Messier to begin his catalog.;;Crab (Nebula)|NGC 1952
Literature;;One of his later works featured a haberdasher recounting ancient Japanese stories, that were, in actuality, criticisms of English policy.  That work, The History and Adventures of an Atom, appeared three years after his travelogue, Travels Through France and Italy, and Laurence Sterne parodied him as "Smelfungus" in his own travel literature.  He also translated Don Quixote into English and wrote A Complete History of England and its continuation, sales of which he boosted by placing fliers for it in church pews.  Additionally, he wrote the play The Regicide and the poem "The Tears of Scotland," but is best known for his novels.  For 10 points, name this ship’s surgeon and author of such picaresque novels and The Life and Adventures of Sir Launcelot Greaves and The Expedition of Humphrey Clinker.;;(Tobias) (George) Smollett
World History;;This agreement was mediated by Lord Paget, who was acting as a foreign ambassador. Venice acquired most of Dalmatia and, in addition, took control of the Morea, though it was forced to give it back 20 years later by the Treaty of Passarowitz. The losers were additionally forced to cede Transylvania, Slavonia, and Hungary, leading one historian to pair it with the Peace of Ryswick signed two years earlier, referring to those treaties as the "pacts that shook the world". Resulting in huge territorial gains for Austria, FTP, name this 1699 treaty often cited as the beginning of decline for the Ottoman Empire, named for a Serbian village.;;(Treaty of) Karlowitz
Literature;;One character in this work tries to discuss a pamphlet from Paul Alexevitch refuting a point made by another character 7 years ago.  At the end of this work, a man nicknamed "Waffles" plays guitar while one character delivers a Utopian vision of the future ending with the sentence "We shall find peace" repeated three times.  The character who gives that speech is in love with a doctor obsessed with restoring the forests, but Astrov only has eyes for Helen, the young wife of retired professor Alexander Serebryakov.  FTP, name this play set on a country estate worked by Sonya and her title relative, a work by Chekhov.;;Uncle Vanya
Religion/Mythology;;This man's parents were peasants of the tribe of Dan at Zorah, and he was compared to Zimri on account of his lust. He was said to be lame in both feet, and his first marriage ended in disaster when he accused all thirty of his groomsmen of "plowing [his] heifer". After another failed attempt at marriage in Timnah, he destroyed the vineyards of his enemies by setting loose flaming foxes. Though he authored a riddle about a beehive in a lion's carcass, he's better known for feats like killing a thousand men with an ass's jawbone. FTP, name this judge of Israel who was captured by the Philistines after having his hair cut by Delilah.;;Samson
World History;;His family name and given name were Ying Zheng, and it is rumored that his real father was Lü Buwei since his mother had been Lü’s concubine before marrying his father Zichu.  Born in Handan in the State of Zhao where his father was a hostage, he survived an assassination attempt by Jing Ke.  From his capital at Xianyang (pron. approx.: Hsyienyang), he conquered the state of Qi, as well as the area corresponding to modern Guangdong province in the south.  Assisted by his Chancellor Li Si, he implemented a Legalist program, eliminating feudalism and dividing his domain into commanderies ruled by centrally-appointed governors.  Buried in a tomb near Xi’an (pron. approx.: Hsyee-an) with an army of life-size terracotta warriors, FTP, name this first emperor of a unified China.;;(Qin) (Shi) huang(di)
Biology;;The murine gene nm23 is a prototype for suppressors of this process.  Krukenberg's disease is an example of this phenomenon, and it may be studied with microcell-mediated chromosomal transfer.  Stromelysin and other matrix metalloproteases promote this process by destroying collagen and other components of the extracellular matrix, allowing cells to proceed through steps like intravasation and extravasation that permit their travel through the bloodstream.  FTP, identify this process by which cancerous cells migrate from a primary tumor to other sites in the body.;;metastasis
Music;;In the second act of this opera, one character sings a tune from Grétry’s Richard the Lion-Hearted after a masque featuring Daphnis, Chloe, and Plutus is presented at a masked ball.  After that Faithful Shepherdess intermezzo, the main character hides in a bedroom, revealing himself after the occupant sings a French song from her youth, "Je crains de lui parler la nuit".  The main character then sings the pleading refrain "Yesli, kogda-nibud znali," but the Countess is unmoved.  Prince Yeletski has his revenge when the main character fails to get the ace he expects in, FTP, this 1890 opera about a gambler named Herman, based on a story by Pushkin and composed by Tchaikovsky.;;(The) Queen of Spades|Pique Dame|Pikovaya Dama
World History;;Producer of the Ram tank based on the American M3 tank, during World War II, its commanders included Andrew McNaughten and Henry Crerar, while its most notable commander during World War I was Arthur Currie.  During that war, its forces were regarded as an elite force and left alone by the Germans after the Battle of Vimy Ridge, and ships in its navy included the Athabaskan, Nootka, Micmac, and Haida, which is preserved at Hamilton. Its 3rd Infantry Division was the primary landing force at Juno Beach during Normandy landings, and in 1945, it possessed the world’s third-largest navy.  FTP, name this Commonwealth country.;;Canada
Literature;;His first work concerned a doctor who discovers that his niece was impregnated not by her husband, Red, but by Robert, her brother. Shortly before being committed to an insane asylum, he penned a work about Mr. Bellmont, who has the embarrassing tic of trying to lick his own ear, which he developed after being ruined by his son, the most famous soccer referee in Peru. The unfaithfulness of this man's wife, a stripper, seems to have caused his irrational hatred of Argentines. This character's creator based him on Raul Salmon, a Bolivian coworker. FTP name this coworker of Mario Varguitas whose given name was Pedro Camacho, and who appears in the title of a Vargas Llosa novel along with Aunt Julia.;;(the) Scriptwriter
Religion/Mythology;;He was identified with the crocodile god Khenty-Khety, fought the crocodile Maga, and regained his severed hands after the fish-trap was invented by the crocodile god Sobek.  He won a battle when his semen cried out in victory from his opponent’s belly.  One of his sons was androgynous and was associated with dying of a broken heart, while his son Ihy was known as the "bull of confusion".  Four of his sons, known as the Amerti, protected the canopic jars.  His left eye was associated with the moon, and it was injured during his battle with his father's killer, Set.  FTP, name this falcon-headed Egyptian god, the son of Osiris and Isis.;;Horus
Physics;;It can be derived by treating Jacobians as fractions and reducing them by one fewer variable, and in symplectic geometry it can be written by saying that the d-form of the structure has zero Lie derivative. Its quantum analogue is given by either the Lindblad or the Ehrenfest equations, and its generalization to collisional systems yield the Boltzmann equation. It also shares its name with a theorem from complex analysis which states that every bounded entire function must be constant. For ten points, identify this theorem of classical mechanics, which states that the volume of phase space does not change for a system with a time-independent Hamiltonian.;;Liouville('s) (theorem)
Philosophy;;In 1970, this man published a paper which postulated that incorrigiblity was the mark of the mental. This philosopher's fourth volume of papers, Philosophy as Cultural Politics, has just been released, while his other late works include Essays on Heidegger and Others: Philosophical Papers and Truth and Progress: Philosophical Papers. He argues against conventional conceptions of perception, truth, and reality and asserts that most philosophical problems are actually semantic pseudo-problems in Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature. In other works he responds to the radical leftism of poststructuralist thinkers like Foucault with an impassioned defense of pragmatic liberalism. FTP name this philosopher who authored Philosophy and Social Hope and Achieving Our Country.;;(Richard) Rorty
Miscellaneous;;This adjective appears in the title of a song about a "man in the moon" who "taps at the window"; that song by Yo la Tengo refers to a "sarong" of this hue.  Another song mentioning this adjective in its title begins "unsealed on a porch a letter sat" and ends with the repeated line "I don’t want to stay".  A less cryptic song of this name was the second single off a 2000 album, and features the singer’s claim that he "drew a line for you" and repeated requests to "look at the stars" and "how they shine for you".  FTP, name this adjective which describes a "ledbetter" in a Pearl Jam song and which names a sappy hit by Coldplay.;;Yellow
Chemistry;;Ficarro developed a "methyl-" version of this reaction for tagging peptides, and Schlater and Ziemnik's microwave catalysis was developed to accelerate the rate of this reaction. The use of KSF or a Dean-Stark apparatus may speed this reaction by eliminating water, driving the final step towards the products. In its final step, an oxonium atom loses water to produce the namesake product. Benzocain is a notable product of this reaction, in which a carboxylic acid and an alcohol are refluxed in the presence of an acid catalyst. FTP, name this esterification reaction named for a German chemist.;;Fischer (Esterification)
Literature;;He wrote about a place in which "Fat caterpillars drift around / And Paradisal grubs are found" in a poem which imagines what Heaven must seem like to fish.  "And Henry, a stockbroker, doing well" is the last line of a poem he wrote about a married couple, "Sonnet Reversed," though he is better known for a sequence of more conventional sonnets, the first of which concludes that "the worst friend and enemy is but Death".  Those five sonnets appeared in New Numbers in 1915 and include one that claims that a corner of a foreign field is forever England.  FTP, name this British poet who died before 1914 and Other Poems, which includes "The Soldier," could be published.;;(Rupert) Brooke
Geography;;A battleship named for this state was the only completed sister of the World War I battleship Baden. Most of the Lech River lies within it, and was the historic border between it and Swabia. The Main River rises within this state, and the Inn River flows into its parent in it.  Its flag is a checkered light-blue and white flag, and cities within it include Inglostadt, Fürth, Passau and Regensburg. The modern state includes Ansbach, the Upper Palatinate and much of Franconia, including the city of Würzburg. Larger cities include Augsburg and Nürnberg, and this strongly Catholic state has been controlled by the Christian Democrat party since 1946. FTP, name this southern German lander with capital at Munich.;;Bavaria|Bayern
Economics;;This man discusses the rise of the special interest group and political privilege in the essay "The Clash of Group Interests," and includes a chapter on the "evolution of fiduciary media" in his first book which comes with an introduction by Lionel Robbins. That book, The Theory of Money and Credit, was first published in 1912 but later appended collectively with other works like Planned Chaos. He defined the titular idea as "purposeful behavior" in discussing the self-evident axioms of praxeology in his magnum opus Human Action. Also well-known for The Anti-Capitalist Mentality and his study Socialism, FTP, name this mentor of Friedrich von Hayek, an Austrian School laissez-faire economist.;;(Ludwig) (Elder) (von) Mises
Literature;;The titular event of this work is performed by Loren Passerine, as the protagonist learns from Genghis Cohen.  The protagonist reads the Peregrinations of Diocletian Blobb, a text shown her by Emory Bortz, which may or may not be one of the final clues to a mystery.  Earlier, she fails to use the Nefastis Machine properly, meets Mike Fallopian at the Scope, and attends a performance of Richard Wharfinger’s The Courier’s Tragedy, at which she first hears the word "Tristero".  At the start of it all, she learns that she has been made an executor of the will of her late boyfriend, Pierce Inverarity.  FTP, name this novel about Oedipa Mass, a work of Thomas Pynchon.;;(The) Crying of Lot 49
Biology;;The Kyte-Doolittle scale is useful in predicting one kind of them, while the Davydov-Scott model examines the propagations of solitons along one type of them.  The antifreeze family contains the cold-resistant beta variety, while fumarase C and lipoxygenase contain the pi variety.  Turns of 120 degrees and i-i+3 ("i to i plus three") bonding define the more common 310 ("3 10") variety.  The most common variety can form coiled coils, leucine zippers, and other protein structures.  FTP, name this structure, whose alpha variety is a basic structural component of proteins.;;heli(ces|x){1}?
Art;;The title figure holds an accordion in her lap while rainbows descend from the stormy sky in the background in this artist's The Blind Girl. He created a depiction of the last days of Atahualpa, Pizarro Seizing the Inca of Peru. He depicted a British soldier handing the titular notification to the wife of a wounded Scotsman in The Order of Release, while the title character sits with another child listening to the story of a sailor in 1870's The Boyhood of Raleigh. The creator of a controversially realistic depiction of the Holy Family, Christ in the House of His Parents, FTP, identify this pre-Raphaelite painter who depicted a deceased Shakespearean character in his Ophelia.;;(John) (Everett) Millais
World History;;It was under the operational command of the 559th Transportation group, and it became more important after the naval interdiction efforts of Operation Market Time began to tell.  It was the target of Operations Steel Tiger and Barrell Roll, as well as the Popeye project, which aimed to reduce its effectiveness by extending the monsoon season through cloud-seeding.  From 1968 to 1970 Operation Igloo White, run out of Nakhon Phanom in Thailan, bombed it round-the-clock by B-52’s.  Throughout its operation, both sides ignored theoretical Laotian neutrality, and it was instrumental in preparations for the Tet Offensive.  Known in Vietnamese as the Truong Son Strategic Supply Route, FTP name this corridor that funneled supplies from North Vietnam to the Viet Cong in the south.;;Ho Chi Minh (Trail)
Literature;;The friendship between Polly O'Keefe and Max Horne forms the basis of Madeleine L'Engle's novel about one of these that is like a lotus. Tien Pao is adopted by a bomber squadron in a novel about the one "of sixty fathers" by Meindert de Jong, while a novel about the Malavoglia family by Giovanni Verga is known in English as the one "by the medlar tree".  A relationship with Elizabeth Siddal inspired Dante Rosetti's collection about the one "of life," and a "green" one is erected by Don Anselmo in a novel by Vargas Llosa.  For ten points, identify this kind of structure, which has seven gables in a Hawthorne novel and is the location of mirth in a work by Edith Wharton.;;house
United States History;;One of this man's appointees was demoted to serve under this man's assistant Charles Dan after the successful capture of Belle Boyd.  This man was appointed to handle California land-title claims by Jeremiah Black, whom he would later succeed as Attorney General. In his most famous position, this man fought with the U.S. Sanitary Commission and delivered a stern rebuke following a surrender at Bennett Place. The appointment of Simon Cameron as Minister to Russia created an opening that led to his taking the vacated position, one that he refused to relinquish despite attempts to replace him by Lorenzo Thomas and U.S. Grant, who as President would appoint him to serve on the Supreme Court.  FTP identify this Secretary of War who claimed that his dismissal by Johnson violated the Tenure of Office Act.;;(Edwin) (McMasters) Stanton
Biology;;Carbonic anhydrase mediates its theta activity in hippocampal CA1 cells.  One unusual site of this molecule's action is on adrenal chromaffin cells, where it may stimulate adrenaline release.  Bicuculline and baclofen specifically act on two classes of its receptors.  Binding of this molecule to its B receptors results in the opening of potassium channels; a similar effect results from activation of a chloride ion channel that can bind it or benzodiazepines at a different site, causing the cell's resting potential to become more negative.  Synthesized from the decarboxylation of glutamate in the central nervous system, FTP identify this inhibitory neurotransmitter.;;g(amma)(-) a(mino) b(utyric) a(cid)|gamma-aminobutyrate|4-aminobutyrate
World History;;Some later leaders of this group included Jacob of Arkel and Rudolf Schoppe. They emerged victorious at the Battle of Sirguna and shortly afterwards absorbed the Dobriners. This occurred after they were called upon by Conrad of Masovia and granted authority by the Golden Bull of Rimini. This group, which also absorbed a band known as the Swordbrothers, had earlier been badly defeated at the Battle of Lake Peipus. They were later forced to sign the first Peace of Thorn after their crippling defeat at Grunewald in a clash better known as the Battle of Tannenberg. FTP, name this medieval order with a name betraying its Germanic ancestry.;;Teutonic (Knights|Order)
Literature;;A fraudulent edition of this work, the so-called "Reading Edition," was published in 1847 by T.J. Wise.  In the sixth poem, the speaker tells the subject, "Go from me," and the first poem in this series refers to an "antique tongue" and the "sweet years" that Theocritus had sung.  The title of the series may have been inspired by its author’s early poem "Catarina to Camöens".  In the penultimate poem in this series, the speaker lists "freely, as men strive for Right" and "to the depth and breadth and height my soul can reach," in answer to her question, "How do I love thee? Let me count the ways".  FTP, identify this series of poems originally addressed to Robert Browning and written by Elizabeth Barrett Browning.;;Sonnets from the Portuguese
Religion/Mythology;;King Mvemba a Nzinga of the Kingdom of Kongo credited his 1509 victory over his rebellious brother Mpanzu a Kitima to the intercession of this figure, and in gratitude declared a national holiday on July 25. Together with his brother, he is described as being a "son of thunder" by Mark 3:17, and his question about the signs of the end times prompts Jesus' discussion of eschatology in Mark 13. According to tradition, he ordained as first bishop of Braga a man whose namesake spring is believed to cure sterility, St. Peter of Rates, while another tradition states that he appeared at the Battle of Clavijo on horseback, leading to the nickname Matamoros, Slayer of Moors. For ten points, name this patron saint of Spain, an apostle whose symbol is the scallop shell, and whose shrine is at Compostela.;;(St(.)|Saint) James the Great(er)|(St(.)|Saint) James
Religion/Mythology;;In Japanese myth, Ninigi’s wife Ko-no-Hana is their princess.  In Chinese myth, Han Xian Zi once read a prophetic poem on some of these.  In Aztec myth they were associated with the twin deities Xochipilli and Xochiquetzal, and in Welsh myth Gwydion and Math used some of these as the raw material for creating Blodeuedd.  Ovid tells of an Oceanid named Clytië who turned into one of these so she could follow Helios each day, and in Indian myth, Kama’s five arrows of desire were tipped with them.  People who produced some of these upon dying include a youth beloved by Apollo and Zephyrus, and a youth beloved by Echo and himself.  FTP, name this type of plant life associated with Hyacinthus and Narcissus.;;flower(s)|blossom(s)
United States History;;Its cause was advanced when a vote was taken the day after several of its members marched in Edward Eslick's funeral procession.  It was supported by such notables as Evelyn McLean and General Glassford, who provided food and money, and a second group of this name was met by Louis Howe one year after the first group of this name made its appearance. Led by Walter Waters, this group was incited by word of a Congressional vote on a bill proposed by Wright Patman, which eventually passed in 1936 over Roosevelt's veto, and they camped out on Anacostia Flats until driven out with artillery and tear gas by Douglas MacArthur. For ten points, name this group of impoverished veterans who proved problematic for President Hoover when they traveled to Washington to demand payment of their compensation certificates.;;Bonus (Army|Expeditionary Force){1}?
Chemistry;;The Curtin-Hammett principle describes conditions under which this quantity becomes relevant for a multiple-pathway situation. For a given system, this quantity may be calculated from the slope of an F-plot or more straightforwardly from a Scatchard plot. It is proportional to the negative exponential of the ratio of the Gibbs free energy divided by the absolute temperature, and its standard definition was given using a reaction between acetic acid and ethyl alcohol by Waage and Guldberg. FTP, identify this thermodynamic quantity whose expression is given by the law of mass action as the ratio of the activity or concentration of products to that of reactants, a certain constant denoted K.;;equilibrium constant
Music;;He wrote his own libretti for his first operas, Irmelin and The Magic Fountain, and his other early works include the tone poems Over the Hills and Far Away and Hiawatha.  One of his works contains a melody taken from the folk song "In Osa Valley" and another theme in which the title creature is evoked by an oboe and divided strings.  Another work features an orchestral "Walk to the Paradise Garden" and is based on a Gottfried Keller work.  His friend Thomas Beecham premiered this composer’s Nietzschean A Mass of Life. In addition to writing On Hearing the First Cuckoo in Spring, he also wrote a set of variations on the folk song "Brigg Fair" and the Florida Suite. For 10 points, identify this English composer who also wrote the opera A Village Romeo and Juliet.;;(Frederick) Delius
Literature;;One character in this novel, Hippolite, is a consumptive who writes an "Essential Statement" on life and mortality. At one point, the main character falls ill after breaking a priceless vase at a dinner party, and earlier he befriends Ganya, a secretary who wishes to marry Aglaya, the daughter of a general. The main character’s wishes to marry are foiled by his friend Rogozhin, who ends up murdering Natasya. This title character first comes to the Epanchin house after leaving a sanatorium in Switzerland, where he was being treated for epilepsy, and it is the Epanchins who give him the nickname that titles the book. For ten points, identify this novel by Fyodor Dostoyevsky, which centers on Prince Myshkin.;;(The) Idiot
Miscellaneous;;An important influence on this group was the functional analysis propounded by Karl Bühler. One man associated with it wrote a book called Aesthetic Function, Norm, and Value published in 1979 and another wrote Theory of Literature after emigrating to the US. In addition to Jan Mukarovsky and René Wellek, this group, which introduced the idea of "foregrounding," also included Vilem Mathesius and Nikolai Trubetzkoy, as well as a man who propounded distinctive feature analysis. Aimed at furthering the development of Saussure-style structuralism, FTP, name this group which also included Roman Jakobson, a school of linguists centered in a Czechoslovakian city.;;Prague (School|(Linguistic) Circle){1}?
Philosophy;;This philosopher’s doctoral thesis, Aristotle’s Conception of Place, was referred to in a footnote of Heidegger’s Being and Time to support the claim that his theories were never far from the Greeks. Some of his more idiosyncratic works include one on the "Philosophy of Poetry" subtitled the "genius of Lucretius" and an "essay on the meaning of the comic" entitled Laughter. He examined aphasia in Matter and Memory, and Whitehead acknowledged him as an influence on his process metaphysics. Among his major tomes is Time and Free Will, but he remains most associated with an idea put forth in Creative Evolution. FTP, name this 20th century French philosopher who introduced the concept of élan vital.;;(Henri)(-) (Louis) Bergson
Geography;;Highly anoxic, this body of water's lower levels are almost completely lifeless due to the high concentration of hydrogen sulfide, and its water circulates through the Rim Current. The Karkinit Bay sits on its north, and islands in this body of water include Berezan and Fidonisi, while cities on its shores include Sochi and Constanta. Sitting on the Skifsky Platform, it is probably a residual basin of the Tethys Sea, while the two straits that connect it to other bodies of water are the Kerch Strait and the Bosporus, which connects it to the Sea of Marmara. Known to the ancient Greeks as "Axenos," or "Inhospitable," for ten points, idenitfy this body of water that borders, among others, Ukraine and Russia, and contains the Crimean Peninsula.;;Black (Sea)
Literature;;The hymn "Blessed Be the Tie That Binds" is sung once in each act of this play, the first time under the direction of Simon Stimson.  The first act opens just before dawn on May 7, 1901, and the third act opens in the summer of 1913 in a graveyard where the dead watch a burial.  Its setting rates a 6.032 by MacPherson's gauge, and lies on the old Pleistocene granite of the Appalachian range, a fact that the locals are proud of.  People in the audience inquire about culture and awareness of social inequality in the title locale at the prompting of the Stage Manager.  FTP, name this work that closes with George Gibb prostrate before the grave of Emily Webb, a Thornton Wilder play whose title setting is Grover's Corners.;;Our Town
Physics;;The fact that it does not affect the ground state can be derived heuristically from symmetry considerations or explicitly from the Wigner-Eckart theorem. In semiconductor heterostructures, a quantum-confined version of this effect occurs, which results from the enhancement of this effect by excitons. For higher quantum numbers, the energy levels induced by this effect are degenerate, and leading to the commonly observed quadratic form, whose components are proportional to the polarizability tensor. Particularly useful for analyzing molecular rotational spectra, for ten points, identify this effect from atomic physics, which consists of the splitting and shift of a spectral line into several components in the presence of an electric field.;;Stark (effect)
World History;;An inscription above the First Cataract describes a seven-year famine during this man's reign and a dream in which he was promised an end to the famine in return for rebuilding the temple of Khnum at Elephantine.  This subject of the oldest life-sized statue ever found was briefly succeeded by Sekhemkhet.  His name was discovered on the burial seal at the tomb of his predecessor, Khasekhemwy, who built a mysterious rectangular wall near one of this man's constructions found on the Saqqara plateau set atop a maze-like necropolis.  FTP, name this founder of the third dynasty whose architect Imhotep built him a stepped structure recognized as the world’s first pyramid.;;(Dj|Z){1}?oser
Literature;;In this man's most recent work, periodic "choruses" are interspersed between stories concerning a rancher who wants his four sons to be priests, and the rebellious son of the president. A Knight from Don Quixote and the glass found in Olmec tombs serve as repeated metaphors of the title concept in his The Buried Mirror. The myths of his country serve as material for historical analysis in the novel A Change of Skin, and his chief work of literary criticism is The New Hispano-American Novel. Philip II’s construction of the Escorial is one of the settings in his Terra Nostra, while an avatar of the Aztec God of war is the narrator of Where the Air is Clear. For ten points, identify this Mexican novelist of The Old Gringo and The Death of Artemio Cruz.;;(Carlos) Fuentes
Art;;This group's main publication was later supplemented by an addition called Mecano, and its work prompted the formation of the COBRA group. Its building designs include the Café de Unie and a factory in Permerund, and a building containing free-floating walls, painted steel beams, and interior sliding partitions, the Schroder House. Including such people as Gerrit Rietveld and J. J. Oud, and growing out of Neo-Plasticism, FTP, identify this art movement exemplified by such works as Broadway Boogie-Woogie, which was founded Theo van Doesburg and whose main exponent was Piet Mondrian.;;(De) Stijl|(The) Style
Miscellaneous;;A book giving some "new perspectives" on it was published in 1983 by Jerry and Edmund Leach, and a variant of this system was discussed by Reo Fortune. One author described it as a "consecutive narrative" beginning with canoe-building and continuing through the complicated rituals involving the kitoum. Because those who perform it do not use the term "gimwali" to describe it, Marcel Mauss insisted that it is not an example of commodity exchange. Occurring in several islands in the Massim archipelago of Papua New Guinea, shell necklaces and armbands are the usual mediums of exchange. Described in Malinowski’s Argonauts of the Western Pacific, FTP, identify this gift exchange system or ring.;;kulu (exchange|ring)
Biology;;The prokaryotic analog of their monomers, FtsZ (pronounced "fits-zee"), recruits proteins for formation of the Z-ring at the site of the new cell wall in dividing cells.  They nucleate at a ring complex with the aid of gamma-ring proteins, and their stability is modified by proteins such as katanin, colchicine, and taxol.  Proteins that may associate with them include stathmins and CLASPs, which are associated with the kinetochore during mitosis.  Consisting of a polymer of 13 protofilaments and exhibiting dynamic instability, FTP identify these cellular structural elements that nucleate at the centrosome, found in doublets in cilia and made up of alpha/beta dimers of tubulin.;;microtubule(s) (accept "tubulin" until "polymer")
Miscellaneous;;From 1999 to 2004, this man was a representative to the European Parliament from Italy's Green Party.  His writings include Antarctica: Both Heaven and Hell, and a work subtitled Expedition to the Ultimate.  His "unauthorized biography" titled a 1999 album by Ben Folds Five, and he was the subject of a 1984 Werner Herzog film about his tackling of Gashenbrum I and II.  He first came to prominence after losing several toes at Nanga Parbat, but he became the first man to ascend Everest without supplementary oxygen.  FTP, identify this Italian mountain climber who pioneered an Alpine climbing system and was the first man to climb all fourteen peaks taller than 8,000 meters.;;(Reinhold) Messner
Miscellaneous;;This man discusses "essentialism and epochalism" and the "four phases of nationalism" in his somewhat uncharacteristic essay entitled "After the Revolution". His satirically-titled lecture "Anti-Anti-Relativism" paradoxically concludes that provincialism is a greater danger than relativism. More substantial works of his include the rather recent Available Light and a comparative study Islam Observed. He discusses the swidden and sabah procedures in Agricultural Involution, but is most famous for a work with chapters on "The Politics of Meaning" and "Deep Play," in which he presents notes on a Balinese cockfight with "thick description". FTP, name this American anthropologist best known for The Interpretation of Cultures.;;(Clifford) (James) Geertz
Geography;;A constitution named for this region was promulgated in 1848 and renewed by its neighbors in 1860, and the so-called day of this region corresponds to the 1748 Battle of Assietta. In Napoleonic times, it became the site of the Subalpine Republic as well as the annexed Republic of Alba. The region was given to Duke Emmanuel Philibert by the terms of Cateau-Cambresís in 1559, along with Savoy, and he immediately moved the seat of government away from Chambéry. The Congress of Vienna restored the King of Sardinia, and rulers like Victor Emmanuel II took the title of prince of this region. FTP, name this Italian region centered at Turin whose name indicates a position at the foot of a mountain.;;(Sardinia)(-) Piedmont|Piedmont (-) (Sardinia)
Literature;;Dorothy James wrote of the "Interesting Case" of this man's most famous play, and As You Like It and Clemens Brentano's Ponce de Leon inspired one of his plays set in the Kingdom of Popo. In another of his plays, the title character is tempted back into politics by Camille Desmoulins, though he prefers to flirt with the prostitute Marion, and is eventually executed by the orders of the Committee of Public Safety. More famously, he authored the liberal tract The Hessian Messenger and wrote of a man who drowns after killing Marie when he sees her at a fair with a Drum Major. For ten points, identify this playwright of Leonce and Lena and Danton's Death, whose play Woyzeck was made into an opera by Alban Berg.;;(Georg) B(ü|u){1}?chner
Chemistry;;The Miyaura Reaction specifically involves synthesis of compounds with this element, and Suzuki coupling occurs between halides and organic acids of this element. One organic reaction involving this element was partly developed by Herbert Brown and is a two-step reaction which often uses the solvent THF. It proceeds in an anti-Markovnikov fashion in which the compound containing this element adds across the double bond, producing an alcohol after the second step of oxidation. Originally discovered by Humphrey Davy, FTP, name this element which has one electron in its 2p shell, thus making its atomic number 5.;;Boron
World History;;One side in this conflict employed the field fortress design expertise of Belaieff and Ern.  The other side purchased several Vickers 143 aircraft and tanks, but the sweltering heat forced the tanks to operate with all hatches open, rendering them easy targets for grenades.  Kundt had initial command of the army of a nation still smarting from the loss of its Litoral Province in a previous conflict in the 1880s.  That nation saw a coup replace Salamanca with Tejada Sorzano after a string of victories by Estegarribia.  Saavedra Lamas helped secure a 1935 armistice in, FTP, this war fought over a prime piece of real estate ranging from waterless plains to arid thornbrush jungle, contested by Paraguay and Bolivia.;;(Gran) Chaco (War)|(War of the) Gran Chaco
Philosophy;;One work of philosophy titled after this idea begins by discussing the difference between men and animals, saying that an elephant is no smarter than a dog, and has 27 sections in two parts, with an introduction that is also included in its author’s collection, The Fiery Brook. Miguel de Unamuno wrote about the agony of this in a book translated by Anthony Kerrigan. Another work concerning it presents "Dialogues between a Conservative and an Innovator" and ends with an invocation to princes. John Locke wrote about the reasonableness of it and the above-mentioned work is that by Ludwig Feuerbach on the essence of it. FTP, Saint-Simon put forth a new type of this idea, a certain belief system that likes Jesus an awful lot.;;Christianity
Literature;;He noted that "the poet and the priest were united originally in the same person" in his lecture "The Function of the Poet," and referred to the title concept as "the wings of the mind" in "Imagination". This man's memorial poems include ones written for Kossuth and Lamartine, as well as one on William Garrison. Poems about "The Shepherd of King Admetus" and "Hebe" are included in one of his collections, whose title character requests "golden spurs" to search for the Holy Grail, The Vision of Sir Launfal. Phoebus and Daphne appear in his satirical Fable For Critics, and the namesake farmer, Ezequiel, appears in an 1846 publication opposing the Mexican-American War. For ten points, identify this American poet of the Biglow Papers.;;(James) (Russell) Lowell
Religion/Mythology;;He sold the killer of Iphitus into slavery and tried to give Iphitus’s children the money he received for his half-brother from the purchaser, Omphale.  One of his sons was honored with a cenotaph in the hippodrome at Olympia built by Pelops.  After Hyrieus housed this character and his father, he helped Hyrieus create Orion.  His sons include Myrtilus, Eos’s beloved Cephalus, and Anticlea’s father Autolychus.  This psychopomp invented gymnastics, boxing, astronomy, and weights and measures.  FTP, name this son of Maia and Zeus who was given the caduceus in recognition of his role as the messenger of the gods.;;Hermes
World History;;This man set off on a celebrated mission to America with John Dillon, but once he returned was forced to negotiate the so-called "treaty that never was," the Kilmainham Treaty. His stature rose in the wake of the New Departure campaign, and he set out to continue the quest of his predecessor Isaac Butt. Sometimes dubbed the "uncrowned king," he became troubled by the forgery of Richard Piggott, which linked him to the Invincibles and the Pheonix Park murders. He’d earlier encouraged the issuance of the No Rent Manifesto as president of the Land League, but may be better remembered for his career-breaking affair with Kitty O'Shea. FTP, name this 19th century nationalist politician who advocated Irish home rule.;;(Charles) (Stewart) Parnell
Literature;;This man wrote two poems in sets of strophe, antistrophe and epode: "The Bard" and "The Progress of Poesy".  He declined to be "rat catcher to his Majesty," as he termed the poet laureateship, on the death of Colly Cibber.  One of his poems speaks of "antique towers" in the title locale, before concluding of the occupants that "Thought would destroy their paradise".  Another poem opens as "The plowman homeward plods his weary way / And leaves the world to darkness and to me".  FTP, name this poet of an "Ode on a Distant Prospect of Eton College" who noted that "Some mute inglorious Milton here may rest" in his "Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard".;;(Thomas) Gray
Physics;;Mathematically, this role can be played by any smooth, real-valued function on a symplectic manifold, and those quantities whose Poisson bracket with it is zero are conserved over time. In quantum mechanics, when a non-trivial unitary operator commutes with this quantity, degeneracy will occur, and this quantity can also be written as "minus i times h-bar times the partial derivative with respect to time of the wave function". Appearing in the Schrodinger equation for finding eigenstates and obtained by a Legendre transform from the Lagrangian,. for ten points, identify this physical quantity which represents a system's total energy.;;Hamiltonian
Religion/Mythology;;This man is the namesake of an apocryphal epistle, which in the Roman canon is appended as the sixth chapter as the book of Baruch. Baruch is also believed to be the author of the second part of this man's namesake book, who received his prophetic call in the 13th century of King Josiah. His book's 52nd chapter is a historical appendix largely taken from 2nd Kings, while chapters 7 and 26 contain his famous "Temple sermon". This man preached during the reign of King Jehoiakim and King Zedekiah, the last king of Judah and his book also contains a set of his confessions. For ten points, identy this prophet, who saw the destruction of the Temple and the razing of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar, and whose book is followed in the Old Testament by his Lamentations.;;Jeremiah
World History;;This man was dispatched, along with Sentius Saturninus, to attack king Maroboduus of the Marcomanni.  He retained the astrologer Thrasyllus after a correct prediction of good news from the ship that brought word he could return to Rome.  He crowned Tigranes of Armenia, and delayed celebrating his triumph over the Pannonians during the mourning for Varrus’s disaster.  Suetonius states that he had trained young boys nibble between his legs when he went swimming, one of many debaucheries he supposedly indulged in after he retired to Capri, leaving Sejanus in charge.  FTP, name this Julio-Claudian who succeeded Augustus as the second emperor of Rome.;;Tiberius (Caesar Augustus|Claudius Nero)
Biology;;Dominant mutations described by this prefix often involve genes that encode diffusible factors, such as the wild-type lacI+ gene.  Monocistronic mRNAs are produced from polycistronic primary transcripts in trypanosomes by this type of splicing, which combines a short leader exon and any of several independent coding exons.  For most peptides this planar form is about 1000 times more stable than the alternative, unless the second residue is proline, in which case it is only about 4 times more stable.  As a result, in most native proteins the C O and N H groups point in opposite directions, as indicated by, FTP, what configurational prefix contrasted with cis?;;Trans
Miscellaneous;;Linguists famed for their work with this language include Martin Haase, who wrote on its unique tense and aspect, and the recently deceased Larry Trask, who wrote a history of it and was widely regarded as its foremost expert. An ergative-absolutive language, it encompasses six main dialects and its verb agreement system is uniquely polypersonal. It has been connected to the theoretical Dene-Caucasian family as well as the Vasconic languages, but these links are only tentative. FTP, name this language classified in an isolated family of its own and spoken by people of the namesake autonomous community in the Pyrenees and northern Spain.;;Basque|euskara
Art;;This man was the primary target of Jeremy Collier's A Short View of the Immorality and Profaneness of the English Stage, attitudes to which this man contributed with his plays The Relapse and The Provok'd Wife. His first commission in his better-known field was for Lord Carlisle, and he was notable for reviving a style known as the "colossal order". He adopted a simpler style in his design of Kimbolton Castle, and late in life he completed Seton Delaval Hall without the aid of his most famous partner. However, he is best known for a work which followed his Opera House in the Haymarket and which was designed together with Nicholas Hawksmoor to commemorate a famous victory. For ten points, identify this British architect, most famous for his design of John Churchill's Blenheim Palace.;;(John) Vanbrugh
Literature;;Late in this novel, a group distributes leaflets encouraging action against "the enemy," which is identified with the "powers of Imperialism, the multi-nationals, and the powers that be". A war being fought in the background of this work leads to a copper boom in the second section, "The New Domain," and the title character of the third section starts a Madonna cult to honor his mother. The main character has an affair with Yvette and later beats her, before leaving for London to marry Kareisha, the daughter of Nazruddin. With the dictator Mobutu Sese Seko represented in the character of the "Big Man," for ten points, identify this novel about the merchant Salim and the travails of an African town situated in the titular location, written by V. S. Naipaul.;;(A) Bend in the River
United States History;;Roger Storms wrote a definitive 1972 history of this organization entitled Partisan Prophets, and in 1977 it changed its name to the National Statesman Party. Susanna Salter became the first woman mayor in the United States on this party’s ticket in 1887, and it also elected Sidney Catts as Florida governor in 1916. This party nominated Earl Dodge five times for the Presidency, and one of its notable campaigns included renting a train known as their namesake "special" in which John Wooley and Henry Metcalf traveled over 23,000 miles while running on the "canteen" issue. Its greatest success was followed shortly thereafter by the Volstead Act, which authorized the enforcement of a 1919 piece of legislation. For ten points, identify this American third party whose main platform involved forbidding alcohol production.;;Prohibition(ist) (Party)
Noncomputational Math;;One of these named after Dirichlet is obtained by integrating the number theoretic character over a ball, while one named after Poisson is used to find the values of a harmonic function in an open disk. A technique known as this type of polynomial method uses Chebyshev expansions to calculate quantities in condensed-matter physics, and the Green's function is an example of the integral type of this mathematical object, which appears in all integral transforms. In group theory, it is a normal subgroup that comprises the set of all elements mapped to the identity by a group homomorphism. For ten points, identify this mathematical object, which in linear algebra is identical to the null space of a linear transformation.;;Kernel
Literature;;Unable to tolerate life in Zurich, this character's wife returns home, taking their dog Karenin with her, and at the end of the novel in which he appears, he gives up his career to become a window washer. After meeting his future wife, he thinks of her metaphorically as a child floating down a river, and notes that "a single metaphor can give birth to love". That wife also clings to this man compulsively in her sleep, and he formulates a "rule of three" for seeing his mistresses, either seeing them thrice and never again, or once every three weeks. One of his mistresses, Sabina, later becomes a successful artist in America, while this man and his wife Tereza are killed when their truck flies off the road. For ten points, identify this protagonist of Milan Kundera’s The Unbearable Lightness of Being.;;Tomas
Literature;;The final version of this poem addresses a Lady, while previous versions had addressed Edmund, William, and Sara.  Its first stanza mentions the "New-moon winter-bright," an allusion to the epigraph from the "Ballad of Sir Patrick Spence".  Its line "still I gaze—and with how blank an eye!" is characteristic of its author’s concern over his disengagement from his perceptions, a theme prompted by hearing his friend’s Ode: Intimations of Immortality.  The seventh stanza opens with the line "Hence, viper thoughts, that coil around my mind" in, FTP, this Coleridge poem describing "a grief without a pang, void, dark, and drear".;;Dejection(:) An Ode
World History;;Before the introduction of this program, a commission known as Gosplan was created for coordination. Some historians have suggested that it was formulated years earlier than its implementation in an essay entitled "Six Theses on the Immediate Tasks". It created an imbalance in wealth that led to the so-called Scissors Crisis, and it shares its name with an unrelated policy adopted by Malaysia in 1971. Much of the impetus for it came in the Kronstadt Rebellion, which demanded an end to War Communism, but it was itself abandoned after the Grain Crisis of 1928 by Stalin. FTP, name this program launched in 1921 to transform the Soviet economy.;;N(ew) E(conomic) P(olicy)
Noncomputational Math;;Algebraic varieties have this property if they cannot be written as the union of other nonempty algebraic varieties. Individual elements of an integral domain have this property if they are not units, and this property holds when a prime number doesn’t divide the first coefficient of a polynomial but does divide the rest, a condition known as Eisenstein’s criterion. The pth cyclotomic polynomial always has this property for any prime number p, and if this property is not true over the rational numbers, it will not be true over the integers. For polynomials of degree two or three, this property will hold if and only if the polynomial has a zero. FTP, identify this property of polynomials, which states that any time the polynomial can be factored, one of the factors is a unit.;;irreducib(ility|le){1}?
Literature;;Many of the characters in this work have connections to U.C. Berkeley, including Shelley, who has dropped out of Berkeley and has a fight with Ada about who will get to give a bath. This work was based partially on the papers of Mary Hallock Foote, which its author helped to acquire while professor at Stanford. Events in this work include the drowning of Agnes as well as the suicide of Frank Sargent, and the main character spends much of his time perusing the letters from his grandmother, Susan Ward, to her friend Augusta while being confined to a wheelchair after having his leg amputated. For ten points, identify this novel containing the reminiscences of Lyman Ward, written by Wallace Stegner.;;Angle of Repose
Economics;;One of the first recognized implementations of this policy came with an organization founded by Al Whittaker and David Bussau, and according to an article in The Economist, its first beneficiary was Carlos Moreno in 1974. Projects like Zopa’s and Prosper seek to extend this basic idea to private action in developed nations. A summit dedicated to its furtherance was convened in 1997, and a second last November in Halifax. A development that won Muhammad Yunus and Grameen Bank a Nobel Peace Prize in 2006, FTP, give the term used to describe this idea of extending very small loans to particularly the poor and unemployed.;;micro(credit(s)|loan(s)|finance){1}?
Art;;Among this group’s aims was the revival of monumental fresco painting, and one of its main patrons was the Marquis Massimo, whose Casino near the Lateran was the site of one of its major commissions. Among works produced by one its adherents is the tempera fresco Joseph Interpreting Pharaoh’s Dream, while another created The Triumph of Religion in Art. Initially working out of the abandoned monastery of San Isidoro, this group’s main commission was the Casa Bartholdi. They included the designer of the Munich Glyptothek, Peter Cornelius, whose Last Judgement covers the entire east wall in Munich’s Ludwigskirche. Founded as the Brotherhood of St. Luke, FTP, identify this group of religious German painters including Friedrich Overbeck and Friedrich Schadow.;;(the) Nazarene (movement)
Chemistry;;This functional group is the product of the Petasis reaction, which combines a carbonyl compound with one of these to create a more complicated one. The Kabachnik-Fields reaction combines one of these with a carbonyl and a hydro-phosphoryl in a reaction that is often the first step in creating peptidomimetic compounds. The Mannich reaction creates a secondary or tertiary one, while the product of the Strecker synthesis includes one of these and a carboxylic acid.  Often created by the reaction of an imine and sodium cyano-borohydride, this is, FTP, what functional group that consists of three hydrogen or carbon atoms singly bonded to one nitrogen atom?;;amin(e|o){1}? (group)
Geography;;A portion of this river contains some unique paleo-geological formations known as its "pillars," steep cliffs composed of Kimberly limestone which have yielded archaeological finds. It receives the Linde River on the east, but a far more prominent tributary is the Aldan River on the west. Its vast delta of over 150 branches connects to Tiksi Bay, after this river completes its course through the Sakha Republic including the lone major city on its banks, Yakutsk, and then proceeds to empty into the Laptev Sea. Rising in the mountains surrounding Lake Baikal, FTP, name this tenth largest river in the world which flows north through western Russia.;;Lena (River)
Philosophy;;In one work, this thinker concludes that if people like doctors and lawyers are capable of extrapolation, then religious thinkers are "surely able to do even better in that regard". That writing has been recently translated together with an Epistle Dedicatory and labeled as this man’s Decisive Treatise. His other important ideas include the concept of an acquired intellect, which requires communication with active intellect, and his propagation of the idea of the "double truth". He composed some Generalities and Particularities on medical subjects, and wrote a work in response to al-Ghazali, The Incoherence of the Incoherence. FTP, identify this medieval Islamic philosopher who wrote commentaries on Aristotle.;;Averroes|Ibn Rushd
World History;;Soon after its last ruler was assassinated by one of his generals, that general faced an invasion led by the Bactrian King Demetrius I. The Greeks referred to one of its rulers as Amitrochates, and to his father as Sandrocottos. Sandrocottos was a party to the treaty known as the Epigamia and gave 500 elephants, which proved very useful at Ipsus, to Seleucus I. It was followed by the Sunga dynasty and preceded by the Nanda dynasty. Its emperors included the victor at the battle of Kalinga, and his father Bindusara. FTP, name this ancient Indian empire whose rulers included Chandragupta and Ashoka.;;Mauryan (dynasty)
Biology;;Species in this phylum with thin laminae are termed illoricate, and members of this phylum exhibit 9 different morphologies of trophi, small jaws that line the pharynx. Parthenogenesis and the ability to survive desiccation through cryptobiosis characterize class Bdelloidea [dell-OY-dia]. The namesake feature of these pseudocoelomates [soo-doh-SEE-lum-ates] is used for propulsion and for sending food past the trophi by generating a vortex of water. FTP, name this invertebrate phylum characterized by a corona of cilia whose beating led Leeuwenhoek to call them "wheel animalcules".;;rotifer(a|s)
Literature;;In one of this author’s short stories, the title character is killed after taking a boy hostage, after which his body is dumped in an unused mine and stinks up the village. In addition to The Catch, this author has recently completed the trilogy The Flaming Green Tree, a work he claims will be his last. Other works by him include a four-volume collection that contains a story about the boy Eeyore, Teach Us to Outgrow Our Madness, and a novel about children who are taken to a remote village after a plague breaks out. The birth of Bird’s child with a brain hernia parallels this man’s own experiences with his retarded son and is central to his A Personal Matter. FTP, identify this author of Nip the Bud, Shoot the Kids, who also wrote about the brothers Mitsu and Takashi in The Silent Cry.;;(Kenzaburo) Oe
World History;;This ruler, the subject of a biography by Michael Roberts, signed the Treaty of Barwalde that contained an unusual provision placing a five-year moratorium on peace negotiations. Over 20 years into his reign, he developed the Form of Government that helped create the Gymnasia and set out plans to create leagues designated as Corpus Bellicum and Corpus Evangelicorum. He negotiated the Treaty of Knared with Christian IV, surrendering a port as security, and used the name Captain Gars in travel. With aid from his chancellor Axel Oxenstierna, he was victorious at the Battle of Breitenfeld but soon died at the Battle of Lutzen. FTP, name this "Lion of the North," a dominant king of Sweden at the start of the Thirty Years War.;;Gustavus Adolphus (of Sweden)|Gustav (II|the Second){1}? Adolf
Physics;;Their interactions typically proceed along two modes, the so-called "normal" processes and the "U" or Umklapp processes. Their dispersion relation give rises to branches known as acoustical and optical, and the Mossbauer effect occurs when an object recoils without emitting one of these. They obey Bose-Einstein statistics and obey the periodicity conditions set by Brillouin zones. Treating these particles as analogous to waves yields a quantity called the crystal momentum, and they explain such properties of solids as electrical and thermal conductivity. For ten points, identify these pseudo-particles, which represent the quantizations of lattice vibrations.;;phonon(s)
Music;;Michael Marissen argues that this work’s use of major mode keys of the soft hexachord was intended to complement L’Estro Armonico.  Its composer’s Sinfonia in F Major is an early version of its first portion lacking the third movement and the polonaise of the fourth movement.  A lengthy solo passage for harpsichord caps the first movement of one piece, and another has two fast movements separated by two slow chords. The third of these works divides the orchestra into three parts, while the second features solo violin, flute, oboe and trumpet. Catalogued as BWV 1046-1051, FTP name this collection of six instrumental pieces by Bach, named for a Margrave.;;Brandenburg concertos
Literature;;A light moment in this play occurs when one character puts on a green dress and starts shouting at the chickens to look at her. We learn that all the finches of Evaristo the Birdman were killed with a pestle by his wife, the servant Poncia. One woman is enraged when a picture of her fiancé is stolen, but it is soon found between the sheets of Martirio’s bed. That fiancé, Pepe el Romano, courts the oldest and sleeps with the youngest of five sisters in this play, part of its author’s Rural Trilogy. FTP, Adela breaks the cane symbolizing the authority of her mother, the title character, in this play by García Lorca.;;(The) House of Bernarda Alba|(La) Casa de Bernarda Alba
United States History;;This man is described as "a being darkly wise and rudely great" in the subtitle of a book about him by Ralph Korngold. First elected on an anti-Masonic platform in 1833, he derived most of his influence from chairmanship of both the Ways and Means Committee and the Appropriations Committee. A strong supporter of the Morill Tariff, he helped push through the first Confiscation Act and was one of only four representatives to vote against the Crittenden-Johnson resolution. He is more famous for beginning the impeachment proceedings against Andrew Johnson, as well as for helping to draft both the 14th Amendment and the Reconstruction Act. FTP, identify this Radical Republican, a representative from Pennsylvania.;;(Thaddeus) Stevens
Art;;In his book Shaping a Nation, Carter Wiseman writes that an important feature of its design was introduced to "relieve the... monotony of a smooth facade". Its main architect himself noted that new structural principles can be seen most clearly "when we use glass in place of the outer walls;" consequently, this building is notable for its tinted windows, as well as blinds that can only be in three positions. It’s also famous for a bronze curtain wall, and sits across Park Avenue from the Lever House, another building designed in the International Style. Commissioned by Phyllis Lambert, the daughter of Samuel Bronfman, FTP, name this skyscraper in New York City designed by Philip Johnson and Mies van der Rohe.;;Seagram (Building)
Miscellaneous;;In one film, this actor’s character uses a metronome while questioning a man playing snippets of Poulenc’s Perpetual Motion No. 1. In that film, he plays a man who becomes suspicious of two former students who host a strange party with food served off of a trunk. In another film, his character becomes suspicious after a man leaves late at night with a sample case, and then later washes some knives and a saw at a sink. A third film sees his character become suspicious upon seeing Judy wearing a necklace said to belong to Carlotta Valdes, whose spirit supposedly forced Madeleine to jump out of a bell-tower. FTP, name this actor who appeared as Rupert Caddell in Rope, and as a wheelchair-bound photographer and an acrophobic former policeman in Rear Window and Vertigo, respectively.;;(James|Jimmy) Stewart
Religion/Mythology;;At the end of her life, this daughter of Telephassa was worshipped under the name of Hellotis in the kingdom of her husband Asterius. Her father was the twin brother of Belus, and one of her brothers was Phineus, who as an old man was tormented by the Harpies. She received a javelin and a hound that never missed their targets, and the bronze man Talos, who later guarded the kingdom of one of her sons. This daughter of Agenor was the object of her brother Cadmus’s search, but he never found, FTP, this mother of Rhadamanthys and Minos who was abducted by Zeus in the form of a bull.;;Europ(a|e){1}?
Psychology;;This man referred to the brain as a "mystery box" in a noted debate or battle with William McDougall, and supposedly conducted a study involving drinking ten gallons of rye whiskey. A student of Henry Donaldson, his own pupils included Harvey Carr and Rosalie Rayner. His personal proclivities are discussed in Breaking the Silence, a 1988 book by his granddaughter Mariette Hartley. After being hired at Johns Hopkins, he wrote Psychology from the Standpoint of a Behaviorist and conducted the Kerplunk experiment as well as one involving a white rat and an 11-month old baby. FTP, name this American psychologist who performed the Little Albert experiment.;;(John) (Broadus) Watson
Literature;;One character in this work uses a live snake as a whip to goad a reluctant ghost into reanimating a corpse.  One man has a nightmare in which the ghost of his former wife Julia foretells his death; his body is later cremated using burning brands stolen from another man’s pyre by Cordus.  An army is single-handedly held off for a time by the heroic Scaeva near Dyrrachium, setting the stage for the fateful battle.  This poem breaks off shortly after Pothinus dies leading an assault against the palace of Cleopatra.  Another passage echoes Vergil’s description of Priam’s dead body in its treatment of the headless corpse of Pompey.  FTP name this epic poem centering on Pompey’s conflict with Caesar, written by Lucan.;;Pharsalia|Bellum Civile|(The) Civil War
Chemistry;;This relation is extended by Randall-Wilkins theory and the substitution of Marcus theory into it will produce DeVault-type control coefficients. It can be used as an electronic model to predict failure mechanisms including void formation and metal migration, and is very similar to the Eyring Equation which also applies to mixed phase and condensed situations. The namesake pre-exponential factor assumes the constancy of the collision frequency and the steric factor. Its basic formulation states that the rate is equal to a constant times the exponential of negative E sub a over RT. FTP, name this equation of chemical kinetics including a term for activation energy, named for a noted Swedish chemist.;;Arrhenius (Equation)
United States History;;A definitive study on this engagement was authored by Hugh Cole, who devotes a section to discussing the Losheim Gap. It also stresses the importance of the oft-overlooked Operation Bodenplatte carried out on a holiday and alternately known as Operation Hermann. The clash saw the murder of the Wereth 11, a group of waylaid black soldiers, and courageous stands at St. Vith and Bastogne, which turned the fight and made up for failure to garner intelligence through ULTRA. Anthony McAuliffe became famous for his reply of "Nuts" and Patton for his diary statement that it was "lovely weather for killing Germans". FTP, name this final German offensive of World War II also known as the Battle of the Ardennes.;;(Battle of the) Bulge
Literature;;At the beginning of this work, the title character shows a reporter a picture of his wife and daughters, and later comments to his wife that unless another character becomes interested in paint, he'll never get the chance to be interested in Irene. The minister David Sewell advises the title character on his daughters' romantic difficulties in this novel, which ends with the marriage of Penelope and Tom Corey. The destruction of the Back Bay house and its burning from an unextinguished fireplace add to the title character's financial problems. Ending with the ruin of the title character by a railroad after he refuses to sell some property to Englishmen, for ten points, identify this novel about an entrepreneur, written by William Dean Howells.;;(The) Rise of Silas Lapham
United States History;;A dissent by Justice Swayne denied the authority of the court to "interpolate a limitation," while the majority opinion claimed that a piece of legislation passed five years earlier had only "one pervading purpose". Former Justice John Campbell argued for a broad interpretation of the amendment on which this case hinged, and a central distinction was between state and federal citizenship. Justice Field acknowledged the validity of the legislation but dissented from the majority opinion by Samuel Miller, since incorporation of the Crescent City Company was not necessary to achieve the purpose. Holding that the Fourteenth Amendment was limited to protecting blacks, FTP, identify this group of cases brought by a butchers' association.;;Slaughterhouse (Cases)|(The) Butcher(') s Benevolent Association of New Orleans (v(.)|versus) (The Crescent City Live-Stock Landing and Slaughterhouse Company)
Miscellaneous;;This player has spent short stints with the Arizona Diamondbacks, who drafted him as their third expansion pick, and with the Pittsburgh Pirates, who traded him away with Anastacio Martinez and Brandon Lyon in return for Freddy Sanchez. Initially drafted by the Red Sox, he spent four mediocre seasons with the Royals after being acquired in 1998. Both of his career home runs have come off of Steve Trachsel, the last of which being the most memorable en route to a 5-0 victory in the playoffs. Just recently given a 4-year deal by the Milwaukee Brewers, FTP, name this pitcher who won MVP honors this year after starting game 7 in the NLCS for the St. Louis Cardinals, and is fittingly nicknamed "Soup".;;(Jeff) Suppan
Chemistry;;Some therapies for prostate cancer utilize this effect to grow ice on the prostate gland, thereby freezing the tumor. The entropy change with respect to pressure resulting from this effect is given by minus the volume over the temperature. This effect is used in one of the stages of the Linde cycle, and in order for cooling to occur, the gas undergoing it must be below the inversion temperature. For an ideal gas, its namesake coefficient, which is given by the derivative of temperature with respect to pressure at constant enthalpy, is zero. For ten points, identify this doubly-eponymous isenthalpic process, in which the throttling of a gas results in a temperature change.;;Joule(-) (Thomson|Kelvin){1}? (effect)
Literature;;This writer classified clay and gravel plains and granite wastes as immoderate soils in his classic "In Praise of Limestone".  In one poem he states of the title character, "The day of his death was a dark cold day," and proclaims, "Let the Irish vessel lie / emptied of its poetry".  He repudiated another poem in part because he found the line "We must love one another or die" over-obvious.  In addition to "In Memory of W. B. Yeats" and "September 1, 1939" he wrote a poem in which he notes that the "expensive delicate ship…Had somewhere to get to and sailed calmly on" even after seeing "Something amazing, a boy falling out of the sky".  FTP name this poet who considered Brueghel’s Icarus in his "Musée des Beaux Arts".;;(W(ystan)) (H(ugh)) Auden
Religion/Mythology;;One of its namesake texts is the samgraha sastra by Asanga, and represents the Yogachara school of this teaching. Its only definitive sutra of Chinese-origin is the Platform Sutra, and some of its early texts may be traced to the Kushan empire monk Lokaksema. Containing the Sutra of Perfect Wisdom, it emphasizes the central role of karuna in the path to wisdom and formulates a doctrine of the "Three Bodies". Its teaching of universal endowment with Buddha nature and transmission of excess merit explains why it disfavors those who manage to escape samsara, and prefers bodhisattvas instead. FTP, name this branch of Buddhism with a name literally meaning "The Greater Ox-Cart," often opposed to Theravada.;;Mahayana (Buddhism)
World History;;At the International Monetary Conference, this man helped block James G. Blaine’s bimetallism plan, and Blaine’s work in the Pan-American Conference spurred this man to write the essay "Our America".  He published his own translation of Helen Hunt Jackson’s Ramona and singled out "Ismaelillo" as his best literary effort.  He published the Montecristi Manifesto scant weeks before his 1895 death at the Battle of Dos Ríos.  The lyrics for "Guantanamera" came from the collection Versos Sencillos written by, FTP, this poet and journalist known as the "apostle of Cuban independence".;;(Jos(é|e){1}?) (Julián) Mart(í|i){1}? (P(é|e){1}?rez)
Art;;John Ruskin derided its creator for painting "the foulest things he could see by rushlight". Seymour Slive of Harvard has definitively debunked the popularly believed poor reception of this painting, one of whose titular subjects had a watercolor copy of it made for his personal album, as well as an oil copy by Gerrit Lundens. A small girl, the mascot of the titular group, stands in the left middle next to a man in red, while the two title figures, one all in yellow and one in a red sash, lead the titular group, who hoist their pikes in the air. For ten points, identify this painting which depicts the company of Captain Franz Banning Cocq, the most famous work of Rembrandt van Rijn.;;(The) (Night Watch|Company of Frans Banning Cocq and Willem van Ruytenburch){1}?
World History;;One clash in this conflict was the Battle of the Bridge of Dee, which saw the Viscount Aboyne, the son of the Marquis of Huntly, driven back and defeated. A more substantial clash saw the Viscount Conway retreat after defeat of Henry Wilmot’s cavalry at the Battle of Newburn. After that, the Treaty of Ripon was negotiated and provided for payment, one year after this conflict had been temporarily ended by the Peace of Berwick, negotiated by men including Alexander Henderson and the earl of Rothes, John Leslie. The Treaty of London was finally signed in 1641and provided the Covenanters with significant reparations. FTP, give the name for these wars fought against Charles I by the Scots from 1639-40, named for a certain religious office.;;Bishops(') (Wars)
Literature;;After the title character of this novel wins two thousand louis by betting on a horse named for her, Xavier de Vandeuvres discovers that he has lost everything through a crooked bet and sets fire to the stables, killing himself and the horses. The title character is first spotted by Fauchery while playing the part of "The Blonde Venus," and Philippe Hugon is imprisoned for stealing army funds for her. Among the title character's lovers are Muffat and the actor Fontan, who beats her, as well as Georges Hugon, who stabs himself with scissors in her bedroom. Ending with the title character's death from smallpox on the eve of the Franco-Prussian War, for ten points, identify this 1880 novel from the Rougon Macquart series, written by Emile Zola.;;Nana
Noncomputational Math;;Korselt's criterion can be used the check for them, and they form the only candidates for solutions to Lehmer’s Totient problem. In order to be one of these, a number n must divide the denominator of n-1th Bernoulli number, and their general definition requires that n is one if and only if the n-th power-raising function from the ring Z-sub-n to itself is the identity. Alford, Granville, and Pomerance proved in 1994 that there exist infinitely many of these numbers, beginning with 561, 1105, and 1729.  Squarefree and having at least three prime factors, these numbers satisfy the congruence of Fermat’s Little Theorem for all choices of base.  For ten points, identify these numbers that are often also called absolute pseudoprimes.;;Carmichael (numbers)
Miscellaneous;;One of this author’s stories is set during the Festival of Summer in a city whose grandeur rests entirely on the privations of a feeble-minded child kept locked up in a tiny room; the child’s plight occasionally leads an inhabitant of the title city to leave for the mountains.  In addition to "The Ones Who Walk Away from Omelas," she wrote a novel set on the planet Urras and its moon Anarres.  A daughter of the dragon Kalessin is the title character of another of her novels, which continues the storyline of an early trilogy focusing on the wizard Sparrowhawk in such novels as The Farthest Shore and The Tombs of Atuan.  FTP, name this author of Tehanu, The Dispossessed, and The Earthsea Trilogy.;;(Ursula) (Kroeber) Le Guin
Economics;;This theory has been extended by the construction of Biger and Hull. The risk-neutral measure of it can be given by the Carmeron-Martin-Girsanov theorem, and its most well-known variants are the Cox-Ross-Rubinstein method and the Garman-Kohlhagen measure, which extends it to foreign values. The market’s expectation creates the volatility smile problem in this method, which assumes geometrical Brownian motion and an absence of arbitrage and delta-hedging.  Introduced in the Journal of Political Economy in 1973, it results in a partial differential equation and won Robert C. Merton a Nobel for work in 1997. FTP, name this economic formula, the most popular way of pricing options, named for two economists.;;Black(-) Scholes (theory|formula|model|method)
Religion/Mythology;;The god Atar was created to defeat one of these.  Another one residing under Wawel Hill in Krakow was tricked with a fake lamb stuffed with sulfur, and died after drinking half the Vistula River.  In Norway and Sweden they were referred to as orm or ormr.  An ever-watchful one guarded a special tree tended by some daughters of Atlas, and one of these creatures almost killed Wiglaf, who refused to abandon Beowulf.  In addition to Azhi Dahaka and Ladon, another of these creatures was named Fafnir.  FTP, name this type of creature whose name forms part of the title of Uther.;;dragon(s)
Literature;;One character in this work exclaims, "Australia must be pretty, with all the dear little kangaroos flying about," then condemns Australia as vulgar, with "horrid kangaroos crawling about," on hearing that James wants to live there with Agatha.  In the third act, one man says of men, "We are all of us in the gutter, but some of us are looking at the stars".  Soon afterwards, the remarks of Dumby and Cecil Graham lead that man to define a cynic as "A man who knows the price of everything, and the value of nothing".  FTP name this Oscar Wilde play in which Mrs. Erlynne saves the reputation of her daughter, the title character, by revealing herself in Lord Darlington’s rooms to claim the title item.;;Lady Windermere(') s Fan
Biology;;These compounds affect gene transcription by diffusing across the plasma membrane and causing receptor zinc-finger transcription factors to migrate into the nucleus.  They all have a cyclopentanophenanthrene nucleus, and in fungal cell membranes, some of these terpenoids act as precursors to vitamin D.  They are used to boost livestock production, maintain blood volume, and treat inflammatory and degenerative diseases such as asthma, arthritis, and AIDS wasting.  The hormones cortisol and progesterone are examples of, FTP, this class of compounds that all share the fused four carbon-ring structure of cholesterol, best known for their illegal bodybuilding effects.;;steroid(s)
Music;;The first theme of this D minor piece modulates to C major and reappears three times in full, beginning a fourth repetition as the music fades away.  That theme is set to the words "Meine Ruh is hin, mein Herz ist schwer".  The climax is a high G harmonized by a C# diminished chord in the piano as the title character sings of the kiss of her beloved.  At that moment, the cyclic accompaniment figure in the piano pauses, and then builds momentum to a steady whirring after beginning from individual rotations of the title object.  FTP, name this Schubert lied based on a scene from Goethe in which Faust’s love is working in her room at the title object.;;Gretchen am Spinnrade|Gretchen at the Spinning Wheel
Religion/Mythology;;It supplanted an earlier effort by Matthew Parker, and drew heavily on previous work by John Rogers and Theodore Beza. Its origin lay in one of the points of the Millenary petition, which itself resulted in the Hampton Court conference, where its creation was authorized. William Wiston attempted a revision of this work in the context of reviving Arianism, while Samuel Wilberforce attempted a modernization and Rastafarians maintain that it is a corruption. Prefacing this work are the Epistle Dedicatory and The Translators to the Reader, and by royal order, there were to be "no marginal notes at all...but only for the explanation of the Hebrew or Greek words". FTP, name this popular translation of the Bible named for an English monarch.;;(The) King James (Version|Bible)|(The) Authorized (Version)
World History;;The southern branch of this movement erroneously identified the Magyars as Slavs. Their leader, Colonel Paul Pestel, proposed Jacobin-style dictatorship but departed from his French model in advocating communal land ownership as a solution to the deprivation of the peasants. The competing Northern Society proposed instead emancipation and a democratic system in the constitution of Nikita Muraviev, while radicals coalesced around Kondraty Ryleev. The military officers who met in Senate Square were dispersed and exiled to Siberia. FTP, name this movement which, upon the abdication of Constantine, resisted the accession of Nicholas I as Tsar in the last month of 1825.;;Decembrist(s) (revolt|movement)
Chemistry;;New types of these compounds are being synthesized using so-called Gemini structures. As their number increases, their scission energy generally grows as well. They are commonly classified into four groups: non-ionic and anionic types, the cationic type which comprises chains with quaternary amines and halide counterions, and the amphoteric type which have the properties of zwitterions. Beyond the CMC, these compounds form aggregates known as micelles. Usually consisting of a lipophilic tail carrying a hydrophilic head group, they include emulsifying agents and other solubilizers. Sometimes known as detergents, FTP, name these compounds which greatly reduce the surface tension of water when used in low concentration.;;surfactant(s)
Literature;;One section of this poem notes, "fainting Virtue scarce maintained her ground," while a relevant historical reference addresses "monarchs murdered for imagined crimes" and notes that the "fleece accompanies the flock".  Nahum Tate authored a second part a year after the first, and the original author invokes Thomas Hobbes at one point with a line about "nature’s state, where all have right to all".  Beginning with the line "In pious times, ere priestcraft did begin," and set against the backdrop of the Popish Plot and the Duke of Monmouth’s revolt, FTP name this poem that uses the rebellion of one of the title characters against King David as a pretense for discussing British politics, a work of John Dryden.;;Absalom and Achitophel
Miscellaneous;;To distinguish themselves from followers of Aurobindo Ghose and B. G. Tilak, its supporters were to write the slogan "do or die" on their clothing.  Its author had adopted the phrase from his reading of Tennyson.  Though it appeared in the title of a 1928 work on the struggle in South Africa, the author's African colleagues were afraid that this idea too closely approximated the "passive resistance" ideal of the English suffragettes.  FTP, name this concept deployed in the "Quit India" movement, a form of nonviolence translated as "soul force" and championed by Mahatma Gandhi.;;satyagraha
Geography;;Leopordo Batres excavated a major building at this site, but its investigation was initially carried out by Manuel Gamio, who founded a dig campaign here in 1917, and its mapping project was headed by René Millon. The Ciudadela is the main complex at the center of this site, which is bisected by the Avenue of the Dead, and the Adosada Platform was a later addition to its Feathered Serpent Pyramid. The Pyramid of the Moon and the massive Pyramid of the Sun sit at the north and eastern ends. Translated from the Nahuatl as the "City of the Gods," FTP, name this Mesoamerican metropolis of the 2nd-3rd centuries CE, which was apparently sacked by Toltecs in the 7th century, and sits in the valley outside of Tenochtitlan.;;Teotihuacan
Chemistry;;Their namesake minerals, such as allanite, specify their dominant member using a suffix known as a Levinson modifier.  Their principal economic sources include ion-adsorption laterites and the minerals loparite, monazite and bastnäsite.  They appear in a certain type of lunar highlands rock together with potassium and phosphorus, as indicated by the acronym KREEP.  Their namesake minerals include gadolinite and xenotime, which contains yttrium.  Cerium has the highest crustal abundance among, FTP, this group of elements consisting of scandium, yttrium and the lanthanides.;;rare-earth(s)|rare-earth element(s)
Literature;;One work by this man tells of a character named Bainish who sees the ghost of his daughter Rebecca and concludes, "one should always be joyous".  His assistant Devorah Telushkin wrote about him in Master of Dreams.  His first English language novel was The Family Moskat, which came out ten years before his poem The Magician of Lublin.  His short stories "The Little Shoemakers" and "From the Diary of One Not Born" appear in the collections A Friend of Kafka and The Death of Methuselah.  FTP name this Polish-born author of The Spinoza of Market Street and Enemies: A Love Story, perhaps best known for his tale of a fool named Gimpel.;;(Isaac) (Bashevis) Singer
Music;;This piece marked the first use of three French horns in symphonic orchestration.  An early C sharp is reinterpreted as D flat at the start of a downward resolution into a solo for first horn.  This occurs during the recapitulation, which sees the second horn come in four bars before the rest of the orchestra.  Its composer adapted the musical themes of its finale from his "Prometheus" Variations, and it shares its nickname with the seventh of Liszt’s Transcendental Etudes.  The second movement Marche funèbre is sometimes extracted from, FTP, this symphony "Composed to celebrate the memory of a great man," originally dedicated to Napoleon and written by Beethoven.;;Beethoven('s) (Symphony) (No(.)) 3 (in E-flat major)|Eroica|Beethoven(')s Opus 55
World History;;One man of this name planted swords in a tent to ensure the execution of Turnus Herdonius.  One man of this name forced the augur Attus Navius to cut a whetstone with a razor, and once had his cap taken and then replaced by an eagle.  A third man of this name killed or drove off Gabii’s leaders after hearing that his father had cut off the heads of the tallest poppies in his garden.  The earliest married Tanaquil, his son married Servius Tullius’s daughter, and his grandson Sextus raped the wife of Collatinus, Lucretia.  FTP, give the family name of the 5th and 7th kings of Rome, the latter of whom was nicknamed "the Proud".;;Tarquin(s)
Geography;;Lake Bosumtwi in the center of this nation is either a volcanic crater or the site of a meteorite impact, and the south features a promontory known as Cape Three Points. The country's highest mountains, Mount Afadjato and Mount Torogbani, are located in the far east, beyond the dam at Akosombo. That hydroelectric plant, built in 1965 shortly after independence, forms the reservoir of this nation’s major lake into which white and black tributaries flow, Lake Volta. In pre-colonial times, Cape Coast Castle in the south was a center of the slave trade, while the interior was dominated by the Ashanti kingdom. FTP, name this West African nation, which under British rule was known as the Gold Coast.;;Ghana
Physics;;Its discovery was made possible by a technology known as "beam cooling" described in a 1972 paper on "stochastic damping of betatron oscillations" by one of its discoverers. Because it does not participate in quark flavor changes*, its interactions are harder to detect than those of its two companions. It is its own anti-particle, and its signature decay is an electron-positron pair or a muon pair. Along with two other particles, it is predicted by the Weinberg-Glashow-Salaam theory, and its discovery helped earn Rubbia and Van der Meer the 1984 Nobel Prize in physics. With a mass of about 91.2 GeV, FTP name this particle which mediates the electroweak force, the neutral partner of the charged W-bosons.;;(the) Z (boson)
Literature;;Two sisters in this work confirm the identity of a corpse by the four dropped stitches on his sock.  Another character in this work forgets to buy nails to go with the beautiful white boards she purchased for Michael.  Stephen Pheety, Colum Shawn and Eamon Simon correctly predict that Bartley will not delay his trip to Connemara to sell a horse, and Cathleen and Nora secure a blessing on his voyage by shaming Maurya.  Maurya’s fear after seeing Bartley on a red mare followed by Michael on a grey pony are borne out by Bartley’s death by drowning in, FTP, this one-act play by Synge.;;Riders to the Sea
Miscellaneous;;A handbook on this topic by Cornelius Donovan compares the practice of it to playing a musical instrument or holding a pen and notes that its greatest charm lies in its "reflective aspect as an exposition of the mental system". The Scotsman George Combe made this topic the subject of his book The Constitution of Man, and Johann Spurzheim helped spread it to Britain and American, while Bernard Hollander wrote about it in The Mental Function of the Brain. Phineas Gage was a useful case study for practitioners of this theory, developed mainly by Franz Joseph Gall. A popular 19th century pseudoscience, FTP, name this study which attempts to find meaning by looking at the bumps people have on their head.;;phrenology
Biology;;A prolonged fast can activate a selective pathway in these structures that involves KFERQ proteins.  I-cell disease results from a defect in the addition of the mannose-6-phosphate moiety used to target enzymes to them, and a deficiency of the enzyme glucocerebrosidase ("gloo-coh-ser-eh-BRO-sih-dase") in these organelles leads to Gaucher’s ("go-SHAYZ") disease.  Their membranes contain hydrogen ion pumps and chloride ion channel proteins that maintain an interior pH of about 4.8, ideal for their proteasomes and other hydrolytic enzymes.  Autophagy occurs in, FTP, these organelles responsible for enzymatic digestion of cell components and ingested matter.;;lysosome(s)
Literature;;This man borrowed from Othello to write his poem "Goats and Monkeys," and asked, "Where shall I turn, divided in the vein," in a poem from his collection Two Poems on the Passing of an Empire. His dramatic works include one about Henry Trewe and John Phillip inspired by Robinson Crusoe, and an adaptation of Tirso de Molina's The Joker of Seville. He wrote a play which ends with Makak's return, with the help of Moustique, to the titular geographical feature, as well as a transposition of the Odyssey into his native land. For ten points, identify this author of Dream on Monkey Mountain and Omoros, a native of St. Lucia.;;(Derek) (Alton) Walcott
Art;;This painting was commissioned by the Baron de Julien, a priest who had cuckolded a bishop, and its artist took the job five years after returning from his Prix de Rome trip.  Julien’s flush cheeks are reminiscent of the artist's style in such works as Blind Man’s Bluff.  On the left, a cupid statue with a finger to its mouth observes the action from above, while two putto statues look at the title object from below.  The aforementioned bishop sits at the right side of the work, while Julien hides in the lower-left bushes and looks up the billowing pink skirt of his mistress, who is kicking off her left shoe.  A tree to the far right suspends, FTP, which title object of a lush Rococo landscape by Jean-Honoré Fragonard?;;(The) Swing
Religion/Mythology;;Some accounts state that he was the son of Phoenix, but most accounts agree that his father was a son of Paphus who sent one real ship and 49 small earthenware ships crewed by dolls to the Greeks during the Trojan War.  One of his lovers tried to make him jealous by sleeping for a time with Butes, and the other got him gored to death on Mount Lebanon.  He was born when a sword split a myrrh tree in half, and spent his formative years in a chest, then in Hades.  FTP name this son of Cinyras and Smyrna who was ordered by Calliope to spend equal amounts of time making sweet love with Persephone and Aphrodite.;;Adonis
Art;;This man's early work included illustrations in the satirical paper The Vanguard, though he claimed to dislike propagandistic art, stating "my one theme is humanity". His work depicting Prometheus bound was inspired by Michelangelo, and the critical reaction to his first major work, House of Tears, caused him to leave his native country. Skeletons clad in robes look on as another skeleton gives birth to a skeleton baby in "Gods of the Modern World," part of his monumental series for the Baker Library at Dartmouth, while the mural Catharsis resides in the Palace of Fine Arts in the capital of his home nation. FTP name this Mexican muralist of The Coming of Quetzalcoatl and Man on Fire.;;(Jose) (Clemente) Orozco
Literature;;The protagonist suggests that his name might be Aaron Sparks or George Speeds and claims to have sung with Uncle Roy and his Red Creek Wranglers.  One of the last scenes in this work takes place in a diner called the Hot Spot, where the protagonist orders ham and grits for his female companion before abandoning her, after which he drives on to Mobile and picks up a hitchhiker whom he lectures about the saintliness of mothers.  Telling of a one-armed carpenter and his scheme to fix up and steal the car belonging to Lucynell and her mother, FTP, name this story of Tom Shiftlet, a work by Flannery O’Connor whose title follows the words "Drive Carefully" on signs that Tom sees on the road.;;(The) Life You Save May Be Your Own
Miscellaneous;;He attended Gilmore High School where he was a fencing champion in 1976, and from there he joined the Navy but had his hopes dashed when he was only stationed in Fallon, Nevada. An early girlfriend of his was Greta Post, and he was later engaged to the orthodontist Ilene Markham, played by Sherry Hursey, but they split up at the wedding and he finally married Trudy in the series finale. This came just after the death of his mother Alma, who had been quite a large presence in his life. At one point, he’s suspected of carrying on an unlikely affair with Heidi, but that’s soon proven untrue. FTP, name this pudgy flannel-wearing sidekick played by Richard Karn, Tim Taylor’s able assistant on "Tool Time".;;(Al) Borland|Al
United States History;;This event inspired the Frank Zappa song "Trouble Every Day," and was the subject of an essay published in the 10th volume of the Situationist International, "The Decline and Fall of the Spectacle-Commodity Economy". The McCone commission was later appointed to investigate its causes, one of which was the enactment of Proposition 14, and its location is home to a famous construction by Simon Rodia. Its immediate trigger was the arrest of Marquette Frye, who was pulled over for drunk driving on August 11th, which sparked tensions already in place due to a law that counteracted the fair housing portion of the 1964 Civil Rights Act. For ten points, identify this 1965 riot in a black neighborhood of Los Angeles.;;Watts (riot(s))
Literature;;In writing about this novel, its author noted that "the only good thing about the story is the girl," and that girl, much to another character's chagrin, purchases a red stain gown trimmed with gold fringe on her 20th birthday. That character, Austin, also notes with disappointment that Mrs. Almond's daughter has married "very punctually," and later visits Mrs. Montogomery, who admits that her brother is lazy and has spent his savings. Lavinia Penniman's overactive imagination initially aids the suit of a man first encountered at a stockbroker's party, but Dr. Sloper's opinion of that man as a "deluded fortune hunter" and Catherine's own willingness to give up her inheritance drive away Morris Townsend. For ten points, identify this Henry James novel, named for the New York neighborhood where the Slopers reside.;;Washington Square
Miscellaneous;;In the "Concluding Remarks" to this work, the author writes of the creation of a system where all men are equally superfluous. Another section credits Hobbes’ Leviathan with describing a "reckoning of the consequences that follow from the rise of a new class in society whose existence is essentially tied up with property". That section, entitled "The Political Emancipation of the Bourgeoisie," ends by discussing the Dreyfus affair, after which the author talks of the "annihilation of action". Originally entitled "The Three Pillars of Hell," its third and final section includes a chapter on "ideology and terror," a "novel form of government," after the prior two volumes focused on imperialism and anti-Semitism. FTP, name this 1951 book by Hannah Arendt, about how governments like Nazi Germany come to power.;;(The) Origins of Totalitarianism
World History;;Probably the most comprehensive study of this historical figure is the 1967 three-volume work of Carl Burckhardt. This man undertook what he called "the reformation of the third order of the realm" in his political testament, but at first he was forced to flee to Blois in the wake of the murder of Concino Concini. He established the Company of One Hundred Associates, and an attempt to eliminate him was known as the Day of the Dupes. He’d gain plenty of enemies later in his career like Gaston of Orleans and the marquis de Cinq-Mars. Succeeded by Mazarin, FTP, name this chief minister to Louis XIII starting in 1624, a cardinal known as the "Red Eminence".;;(Cardinal) Richelieu|(Armand) (Jean) du Plessis (de) (Richelieu)
Chemistry;;In the limit of low pressure and coverage, this relation can be derived from Hirasaki’s model. Solid-phase microextraction techniques have been used to determine its constants, two of which are dimensionless, and the rest of which must be converted between units, while their reciprocal is the water partition coefficient. Its application to the solvent is a special case which falls under Raoult’s Law, and it assumes dilute ideal solutions. Most simply stated as P equals KC, it holds that the concentration of a solute gas in a solution is directly proportional to the partial pressure of that gas above the solution. The cause of decompression sickness, FTP, give this gas law named for an English chemist.;;Henry(')(s) (Law)
Geography;;This nation includes the historic Solentiname Archipelago as well as Ometepe Island, and it has national parks on Zapatera Island and surrounding its Mombacho volcano. Its borders are defined largely by rivers, the Coco River in the north and the San Juan in the south. Its major port city, on the Escondido River, is Bluefields, and other sizeable cities include Rivas, León, and Chinandega. Another important river in this nation is the Tipitapa, not so much for its length, but for its role in connecting the two large bodies of water within the country. Containing the province of Zelaya, FTP, name this largest Central American country situated between Costa Rica and Honduras.;;Nicaragua
World History;;In the year of his crowning he seized a treasure from his mother, Emma, convinced that she still sympathized with the Danes who had driven him from the monastery of Ely when he was a child. He punished the residents of Dover for rioting against his brother-in-law Eustace of Boulogne and installed Robert of Jumieges as Archbishop of Canterbury. These moves by this Norman-educated king raised the suspicions of his aristocratic opponents, the earls Leofric of Mercia, Siward of Northumbria, and Godwin of Wessex. FTP, name this penultimate Anglo-Saxon king of England, who ruled from 1043 to 1066 and was canonized a century later.;;Edward the Confessor
Literature;;A reading of Spinoza is central to this author's short story "In the Basement," while a story by the titular author, "The Confession," is read by one of the characters in his "Guy de Maupassant". This author's most famous work contains a story in which the nameless narrator, a propaganda officer, kills the titular animal. In addition to "My First Goose," that work also includes "Crossing into Poland," and this man is well-known for creating the character of the Jewish gangster Benya Krik in the short story "The King," which is part of his cycle set in his native city, the Odessa Stories. For ten points, identify this Jewish writer who died in a gulag in 1941 and is best known for his collection Red Cavalry.;;(Isaac) Babel
Religion/Mythology;;A later version of this document was approved at the same time as a Tome and two notable letters, and the discussion which led to its approval included a debate over the word "homousios". The question of whether a word was written with one or two instances of the letter "nu" is important to its interpretation, and it was accepted by Damasus I after being promulgated at a meeting which established trinitarianism. The "filioque" clause of this document has been rejected by the Eastern churches, and it ends by stating that "we look for the resurrection of the dead and the life of the world to come". For ten points, identify this profession of faith, deceptively not issued by a namesake 325 C.E. council.;;(The) (Nicene|Niceno-Constantinopolitan){1}? (Creed)
Noncomputational Math;;One of these which performs an important action only when writing data to disk is used in the Reiser4 file system and is known as a dancing one. The Day-Stout-Warren algorithm runs in linear time when operating on these objects, of which the radix variety is used to store sets of strings. The tasks of spatial searching and the storage of database information usually use the R and B varieties respectively, while types known as scapegoat, splay, red-black, and AVL are all self-balancing and binary. For ten points, identify these directed acyclic graphs, a type of data structure which consists of nodes that each have one parent and possibly many children.;;Tree(s)
Music;;One of his operas includes the arias "With my mother" and "How strange and dead," as well as a furiant dance and "The Dance of the Comedians".  His orchestral works include the Triumphal Symphony, the Festive Symphony, and a collection of symphonic tone poems, including one that opens with paired flutes depicting two springs.  He said that the finale of a string quartet "includes a long-drawn out note, the fatal whistling" meant to symbolize his syphilis-induced deafness.  FTP name this composer of the opera The Bartered Bride and the string quartet From My Life who depicted "The Moldau" in his Má vlast.;;(Bedrich) Smetana
Literature;;In one story in this collection, one character kills a young deer while another watches a fourteen-point buck walk by without shooting it. In another, a man is entrusted with an envelope full of money and told to say "No" to the messenger who will come to collect it. That messenger, in the story "Delta Autumn," is a woman who bore Roth's son, for whom the main character gives the woman his hunting horn. In the title story, Samuel's body is brought back from Illinois through the arrangements of Gavin Stevens.  Other stories in this collection include "Pantaloon in Black" and "The Fire and the Hearth". Also including a story about a hunt for Old Ben, "The Bear," for ten points, identify this collection of stories linked by such characters as Lucas Beauchamp and Isaac McCaslin, written by William Faulkner.;;Go Down(,) Moses
Philosophy;;Usually included in this man’s collected works are his letters to Count Toreno on a common subject. He proposed a choice between conflicting Christian religions in "Not Paul, but Jesus," a work written under the name Gamaliel Smith and edited by Francis Place. He discussed certain Anarchical Fallacies in a work by that name, and hired Edwin Chadwick as a secretary late in life, long after more adventurous works like Auto-Icon; Or, Farther Uses of the Dead to the Living and his treatise on education Chrestomathia. He’s better known for proposing pain and pleasure as sovereign masters of the body in Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation. An advocate of the "greatest happiness for the greatest number," FTP, name this English founder of utilitarianism.;;(Jeremy) Bentham
Biology;;One class in this phylum is distinguished by its posterior-end opisthaptor, a second class has an anterior-end scolex, and a third class has sub-epidermal rhabdites.  They contain filling tissue known as parenchyma, and some species have photoreceptors known as ocelli.  Some species of this phylum engage in penis fencing, while cross-fertilization and transverse fission are common in the cestodes and the free-living turbellaria, respectively.  These triploblastic acoelomates are unsegmented and bilaterally symmetric.  Flukes and tapeworms can be found in, FTP, this phylum of flatworms.;;Platyhelminthes
Literature;;Near this work’s end, we hear of a count of known munificence.  The title character’s "spot of joy" was a "faint half flush that [died] along her throat," but in an ominous moment the speaker states, "I gave commands; / Then all smiles stopped together".  The speaker mentions his "nine-hundred-years-old name" and points out a bronze sculpture of a sea-horse being tamed by Neptune.  "A heart…too soon made glad" is considered a failing of the title character, whose likeness is preserved in a painting by Frà Pandolf.  FTP name this Robert Browning poem in which a Duke discusses a dead wife.;;My Last Duchess
Religion/Mythology;;This character’s dreams include one of a mountain falling on him and one of a man bringing him water after a bull throws him down.  In another dream he feels a sexual attraction to a meteorite that he cannot lift.  This dream leads his mother, the Wild Cow, to prophesy the arrival of a man as powerful as Ninurta created by Aruru to be his companion.  With that companion he kills the Bull of Heaven and the guardian of the Cedar Forest, a demon known as Humbaba.  FTP name this mythical king of Uruk who teams up with Enkidu in a Mesopotamian epic.;;Gilgamesh
Miscellaneous;;On Arrested Development, news of a copyright belonging to this group leads Tony Wonder to choose "something with Poe" for his next DVD.  In one work, we learn that they weigh in at 850 pounds after they call out Mick Wall.  The Offspring’s Dexter Holland once stated a fake plan to steal this group’s next album title.  One of this band’s songs refers to a man who’s been knocking and won’t leave the singer alone, and another refers to a place that will "bring you to your knees".  Chinese Democracy is a long-anticipated album by, FTP, this band whose songs "Mr. Brownstone" and "Welcome to the Jungle" can be found on Appetite for Destruction.;;Guns n(') Roses
World History;;This man appointed British citizen Bob Astles, known as the "white rat," as a special anti-corruption advisor. Upon his assent to power, he renamed his government house the Command Post, and replaced the old GSU with the SRB, headquartered at Nakasero. Likely responsible for the death of Pierino Okoya, he exiled all Asians from his country including the Indian and Pakistani businessmen, and attacked the Acholi and Langi peoples. His country would come to be ruled by Yoweri Museveni, who played a role in unseating him, but his reign was actually book-ended by Milton Obote. Accused of aiding the Palestinians at Entebbe, FTP, name this ruthless dictator of Uganda from 1971 to 1979.;;(Idi) Amin (Dada) (Oumee)
Art;;Not long after this artist turned to illustrating historical novels, his son died, which led to the loss of this man's pension and the creation of the works for which he is now most famous. In writing about his own work, this artist claimed that only at 73 did he "finally comprehend something of the true quality of birds," and that at 110, "each line shall surely possess a life of its own". His earlier works include two collections of Festivals as well as a depiction of foreigners observing the customs of his country, but he is most famous for a collection of which one drawing inspired Rilke's poem Der Berg, as well as his namesake manga. A late contemporary of Hiroshige, for ten points, identify this painter of The Dream of the Fisherman's Wife, as well as such ukiyo-e works as Thirty Six Views of Mount Fuji.;;(Katsushika) Hokusai
Physics;;Since this phenomenon occurs when the separation scale is on the order of about 4 angstroms, it displays the limitations of the Bethe-Slater curve, which predicts the opposite behavior. Like a similar phenomenon, its susceptibility curve is non-differentiable at a critical point, at which a spontaneous sublattice moment develops. This phenomenon is exploited in the exchange bias technique, and the susceptibility of materials that exhibiting it behaves according to the Curie-Weiss law in the paramagnetic regime. For ten points, identify this behavior which disappears above the Neel point, and in which neighboring magnetic domains align with spins pointed in opposite, rather than the same, directions.;;antiferromagnetism
United States History;;Pierre de Smet was a key figure in the negotiation of the first treaty of this name, during which Mitchell and Fitzpatrick offered $50,000 in goods to one side, though Congress later reneged on that promise. Another agreement of this name required one of the agreeing parties to send their children to school, and marked the area north of the North Platte as being off limits to settlers. Crazy Horse refused to honor the provisions of the second treaty of this name, which had resulted in the abandonment of the fortifications of the Bozeman trail, but the discovery of gold in the Black Hills led to its repeated violation. Named for the Wyoming town in which they were signed, for ten points, identify these two treaties of 1851 and 1868, the second of which confined Red Cloud and the Oglala Sioux to a Nebraskan reservation.;;(Treaty of) (Fort) Laramie
World History;;Prior to this battle, one commander sent a message for reinforcements to Eystein Orre, but he arrived very late, shortly before the entire army’s retreat to Riccall. The victorious commander stopped at Helmsley and plotted his attack on a relaxed and unready army situated along the Derwent river. The clash came after the Battle of Fulford, which had seen the defeat of Edwin of Mercia and Morcar of Northumbria. A legend holds that the victors were successful only after spearing a "monstrous giant," and thus defeated the armies of Tostig, the exiled earl of Northumberland, and Harald Hardrada. FTP, name this 1066 CE victory for Harold of England immediately before Hastings, named for a certain structure.;;(Battle of) Stamford Bridge
Physics;;The occurrence of this effect in atmospheric molecular oxygen is the dominant cause of polarized atmospheric emissions around 60 GHz. The Lyman-alpha transition is a manifestation of this effect, and the energies associated with one form of it can be written as being proportional to the Lande g-factor. This effect obeys selection rules which permit a change in orbital quantum number by plus or minus one, and a change in the magnetic quantum number by either zero or plus or minus one. Its strong-field form is known as the Paschen-Back effect, and its weak-field, or anomalous form was the first to be discovered by its namesake. FTP, identify this effect in which degenerate energy levels of an atom are split by a magnetic field.;;Zeeman (Effect)
Literature;;One minor character in this novel is the doctor Friedrich Welfer, who was granted a medical license despite giving "kiss my ass" as the answer to every question on his exams. During his time in prison, the title character becomes an altar boy for Otto Katz, until Katz loses him in a card game to Lukas. Using his skills as a former dog trader, the title character steals a dog that belongs to Colonel Kraus, after which he is sent to the front, despite having earlier been dismissed for feeblemindedness and having shown up to the recruiting station in a wheelchair. Ending with the title character's capture by his own troops after dressing up in a Russian's uniform, for ten points, identify this novel about the titular Czech infantryman, the most famous work of Jaroslav Hasek [ha-shek].;;(The Fateful Adventures of) (the) (Good|Brave){1}? Soldier Svejk (During the World War)|Osudy dobreho vojaka Svejka za svetove valky
World History;;He hosted a television series examining environmental and agricultural issues titled Concertando while serving as dean of his alma mater, the National Agrarian University.  A soft drink bearing his name was released in 2005 to support Si Cumple, a new political party associated with Nueva Mayoria and Cambio90, his former political party.  He was blocked from running, but his party finished third in the election and his daughter Keiko received the most votes for Congress.  FTP, name this man who conducted a coup against his own government in 1992 and resigned the Peruvian presidency in 2000 by fax from Japan.;;(Alberto) (Kenya) Fujimori
Geography;;This river receives the water of the nearby Saladillo and Ludueña streams and contains the Ibicuy Islands near its outlet. Home to a series of former waterfalls known as Sete Quedas, this river runs through the opposite cities of Resistencia and Corrientes. Arising partly out of the Grande River, it contains the Yacyretá Dam and shares its name with the capital of the Entre Ríos province. Now crossed by the Rosario-Victoria Bridge, named for two major cities on its banks, it eventually merges with the Uruguay River to form the Río de la Plata. FTP, name this major South American river reminiscent of a carnivorous fish.;;Paran(á|a){1}? (River)
Philosophy;;At one point, in order to illustrate what he does not mean, the speaker cites a verse of the poet Stasinus which includes the line "where there is fear there is also reverence". A distinction is drawn between such antipodal pairs as carrying and being carried, leading and being led, and loving and being loved before approaching the actual subject. Several references are made to Daedalus and his skilled artwork, capable of making materials move on their own. It begins by asking Socrates why he has left the Lyceum and come to the "Porch of the King Archon," where the title character has himself come to lay charges of murder against his father. FTP, name this early Platonic dialogue about the nature of piety.;;Euthyphro
Biology;;Antagonists of this compound include amphenone and spironolactone, which can be used to treat its overproduction, known as Conn’s syndrome.  Atrial natriuretic factor suppresses this compound’s release and inhibits the release of renin, which is involved in a feedback system with this compound and angiotensin II.  Following its release from the zona glomerulosa it stimulates ion pumps in the capillaries surrounding the distal convoluted tubules in the kidneys, resulting in increased excretion of potassium ions and increased blood pressure and volume.  FTP, what is this mineralocorticoid which increases reabsorption of water and sodium ions from filtrate?;;Aldosterone
Art;;In a letter to the man who would go on to sell this work, its creator noted that his interest was "religious atavism". Fred Kliener considered this work to be the first true symbolist painting, and a deer can be seen wandering across the canvas in the upper left, while a tree branch sets off the upper right as the stage for the main event. The artist described the setting of the event that gives this painting its alternate name as "pure vermillion," while women in "intensely black clothes" and "yellow-white bonnets" look on. For ten points, identify this painting, in which Breton women observe combat between a divine being and a mortal, created by Paul Gauguin.;;(The) Vision After the Sermon|Jacob Wrestling with the Angel
Literature;;This man was the subject of praise in George Orwell's 1940 essay Inside the Whale, in which Orwell also praised this man's Black Spring. A 1949 novel by this man landed Maurice Girodias in trouble and was the first in a series of works whose plot leads up to his divorce from his wife June. In one of his novels, he appears as a narrator who acquires a job with the Cosmodemonic Telegraph Company, while a more famous novel begins with the lines, "We live at the Villa Borghese and we are all dead". Inspired by his travels in the United States in the early 1940s to write The Air Conditioned Nightmare, for ten points, identify this author of the Rosy Crucifixion trilogy as well as Tropic of Capricorn and Tropic of Cancer.;;(Henry) Miller
Miscellaneous;;This thinker distinguishes between dyadic groups and the problems of collective action in larger groups in the essay "Quantitative Aspects of the Group". He writes of the titular reckless life experience in "The Adventure," a component of his elaborated system of social types, which includes identifications like "the man in the middle," the "mediator," and "the poor". He discusses the reciprocal nature of dominance in an oft-cited chapter on "Superordination and Subordination," and talks about the rationalizing effects of modernity in "The Metropolis and Mental Life". A close colleague of Tonnies and Weber, FTP, name this pioneering German sociologist probably best known for a work about the social transition from barter economy entitled The Philosophy of Money.;;(Georg) Simmel
United States History;;In his inaugural address, this man noted that "the great scheme of our constitutional liberty rests upon a proper distribution of power between the State and Federal authorities". He made Caleb Cushing his attorney general, and appointed only one Supreme Court Justice, John Campbell. His administration's foreign policy mistakes included recognizing William Walker's filibuster government in Nicaragua as well as having his Secretary of State William Marcy wind up on the receiving end of the Ostend Manifesto. This man's nomination was the result of deadlock between Lewis Cass, Stephen Douglas, and James Buchanan, and his cabinet included Jefferson Davis as Secretary of War. For ten points, identify this man, nicknamed "Young Hickory" for his ardent Jacksonianism, a Democrat who was elected President in 1852.;;(Franklin) Pierce
Chemistry;;Chesworth and Dejou applied this simple equation to work in soil chemistry, as a basis for the Hume-Rothery rules. It can be extended to flow systems with the introduction of feed streams and extensive variables, and is sometimes used in conjunction with DePriester charts to tabulate data. It can be quickly transformed into Euler’s formula for simple polyhedra and arises out of an equation of its namesake and Duhem. Its mathematical formulation for a system at equilibrium equates the number of components plus 2 to the degrees of freedom plus the number of distinct states. FTP, name this basic rule of thermodynamics named for a guy who also has a certain free energy.;;Gibbs phase (rule)
Literature;;The main character of this work would have a cup of coffee with a shot of cane liquor every Monday, and goes home to change out of his riding clothes after being invited for breakfast by the narrator's sister. One character in this work writes to another for 17 years, though when the recipient comes to Guarija, the letters are all unopened. This work begins with the arrival of a bishop by boat, and later in this work, the main character tells his mother, Placida Linero, that he dreamt of walking through a forrest in the rain. The titular action takes place after a woman is returned home on her wedding night by Bayard San Roman because she is not a virgin. For ten points, identify this novel in which the deflowering of Angela is avenged by her brothers Pablo and Pedro Vicario on Santiago Nassar, written by Gabriel Garcia Marquez.;;Chronicle of a Death Foretold|Cronica de una muerte anunciada
Art;;One Russian adherent of this movement later went on to write the poems "A Cloud in Trousers" and "The Backbone Flute," while another, Viktor Khlebnikov, devised a "translogical language" called zaum. That language was used in the writing of a musical work originating from this movement's aesthetic, the opera Victory over the Sun, while Sant'Elia created a series of architectural sketches inspired by this movement, called "New City". This movement's manifesto was written by the author of the poem "War the Only Hygiene of the World" and published in Le Figaro in 1909. Creating such works as "Unique forms of Continuity in Space,". for ten points, identify this artistic movement whose adherents included Giacomo Balla and Filippo Marinetti, and which emphasized modernity, speed, and violence.;;Futurism
Music;;our years after its premier, this work’s commissioner finally heard it and sent the composer a message stating, "Beethoven is dead and [this work’s composer] alone can revive him".  The primary theme was recycled from the composer’s unpublished concert overture Rob Roy. Paganini commissioned this piece after acquiring a Stradivarius viola, and the viola part portrays the melancholy title character.  Partially inspired by the composer visit to the region of Abruzzo, where all of the movements are set, FTP, name this second symphony by Hector Berlioz which was inspired by and takes its title from a poem by Lord Byron.;;Harold in Italy(,) (Symphony with Viola obbligato)
World History;;Juan de Urtubia led the sacking of this city by the Navarrese Company 68 years after it was captured by the Catalan Company following the battle of Halmyros.  It is generally assumed that this city gained control of two additional districts in a confederacy following its 427 BCE capture of Plataea.  Cassander repaired the damage this city suffered following its unsuccessful revolt against the League of Corinth, which came 3 years after its defeat alongside Athens at Chaeronea.  Philip II of Macedon spent time as a captive in this city, giving him an opportunity to study the improved phalanx tactics developed by Epaminondas.  FTP name this polis which enjoyed a few decades of hegemony on the strength of its Sacred Band.;;Thebes
Religion/Mythology;;One lesser branch of this group was known as the Dragovitsians, while another was called the Patarenes. The only prayer recited by its members was "Our Father," recited 120 times per day, and trained an elite caste known as "the Elect". Their leader was condemnded by Nicholas III, and this group had its origin in a community of Armenians originally brought to Philipopolis by John Tzimisces. Theologically related to the Cathars, they believed that the world had been created by Satan, God's eldest son, and that Jesus entered Mary through the ear. Rejecting Christ's miracles and infamous for their orgies, for ten points, identify this group of dualist heretics led by Basil the Physician, eradicated in the Byzantine empire and Bulgaria in the thirteenth century.;;Bogomil(s)
Literature;;The only attempt at an English translation of this work was made by the John Dee. Ole Worm made a Latin translation, which was banned by Pope Gregory IX, while the translation made by the Greek scholar Theodorus Philetas provides its most common name. This work is thought to have its source in the Book of Enoch, and the beings described in it are believed to be Nephilim. A couplet by this work's author appears in the story "The Nameless City," while John Merrit accidentally finds this book on a bookshelf in "The Case of Charles Dexter Ward". Only five copies are known and can be found at locations such as the British Museum and Miskatonic University. For ten points, identify this fictional work, ascribed to an insane Arab, Abdul Alhazred, which is purportedly the source of Lovecraft's Cthulhu mythos.;;Necronomicon|Al Azif
Earth Science;;This period’s standard section, which includes the Capitan reef and the Wolfcampian and Guadalupian layers, is the Glass Mountains of Texas.  Certain foraminifera known as fusulinids are index fossils for this period, which saw the appearances of order Coleoptera and of gymnosperms.  Named by Murchison for an ancient kingdom west of the Urals, it saw the formation of Pangaea.  Hypotheses ranging from glaciation on Gondwana to volcanic eruptions in Siberia have been advanced for the changes in the fossil record at its end.  FTP name this last period of the Paleozoic that ended in the largest known extinction event.;;Permian
Religion/Mythology;;He died while journeying to Mount Meru after making the empty boast that he could kill all his enemies in one day.  While hiding behind the reborn hermaphrodite Sikhandi, he launched a torrent of arrows, killing his great-uncle Bhishma.  The sun dimmed when this youngest son of Kunti killed Kunti’s eldest son Karna during the battle of Kurukshetra.  He shot five arrows through a ring to win his wife, but an unfortunate command from Kunti to share his prize resulted in his four brothers also marrying Draupadi.  FTP name this hero in the Mahabharata who receives advice in the Bhagavad Gita from his charioteer, Krishna.;;Arjuna
Biology;;The foremost study on this affliction was authored by Herbert Schreir and Judith Libow, in a book that analyzes the case of "Christopher". Catherine Ayoub has written about its proper separation into two components, the PCF and FDP elements, and their respective psychologies. It was first proposed by Roy Meadow of Leeds University in an article in The Lancet in 1977, years after Richard Asher had given the name to a related condition. Groups like M.A.M.A. have coalesced to question its legitimacy, and it is sometimes known as FII. FTP, name this psychological disorder in which a person causes illness in another person under their care in order to fulfill emotional needs, thus acting as the namesake proxy.;;Munchausen (Syndrome) (by) Proxy|M(S)BP
Physics;;Anfinsen’s thermodynamic hypothesis uses the minimum of this quantity to predict protein structures, and in the Henon-Heiles equation, this quantity is given by "one half r-squared plus one-third r-cubed times sine of 3-theta". The Jeans length gives the scale at which one form of this quantity will result in the stability of a gas cloud. For a dipole in an electric field, it is the negative dot product of the moment and the electric field.  The derivative of this quantity with respect to a position gives the force field, and for a spring, it is given by one-half times the spring constant times the displacement squared. For ten points, identify this quantity, the energy a system has by virtue of its configuration.;;potential (energy)|PE
Geography;;Its original inhabitants retained only the kingdom of Amathus after six Arcadian colonies were founded here. It may have been the Hittite trading center of Alashiya and was later claimed as a conquest by Thutmose III and Sargon II. In the later Middle Ages it served as a sugar plantation and a refuge for the deposed kings of Jerusalem, who ruled the island as the house of Lusignan and squabbled with the Genoese and Venetians. Captured by the Ottomans in the sixteenth century, in 1878 it became a British naval base. FTP, name this ancient source of copper, an island in the Eastern Mediterranean still disputed between Greeks and Turks.;;Cyprus
Literature;;In one of this man’s works, a barber who had offered to set up a shelter for the homeless breaks the hand of a water-seller and competes for a woman who disguises herself as her own cousin in order deal with Shu Fu and Yang Sun.  In a work based on the thirteenth century work Hui Lan Ji, the judge Azdak rules that Grusha or Natalla will get custody of Michael based on which of them can pull the child out of the titular diagram.  Another work sees the deaths of Katrin, Eilif and Swiss Cheese, who are survived by the other title character, Anna Fierling.  FTP name this German playwright of The Good Woman of Setzuan, The Caucasian Chalk Circle, and Mother Courage and Her Children.;;(Bertholdt) Brecht
Art;;One of this artist’s works originally featured an angel, which was removed at the request of Clare Boothe Luce, who commissioned the painting depicting Hampshire House and the suicide of Dorothy Hale.  Images of Alexander the Great, Martin Luther, Ghandi, Napoleon, Hitler, and Marx are to the left of the embryo of Moses, in one of this artist’s paintings. Andre Breton got her a showing at the Julian Levy Gallery, and her other works include a depiction of herself sitting under a portrait of Dr. Farrill, whom she credited with saving her life, as well as Miscarriage in Detroit, inspired by retablos. For ten points, name this Mexican artist, the wife of Diego Rivera who notably painted a self-portrait with monkeys, as well as a painting depicting two versions of herself.;;(Magdalena) (Carmen) (Fri(e)da) Kahlo (y Calder(ó|o){1}?n)
Philosophy;;Sarah Waterlow wrote a 1984 philosophical study on this work. The end of its most famous part uses the example of a wall, which comes about because stones sink to the bottom and wood floats to the top, or perhaps it comes about for protection. Prior to this, the work defines the ideas of luck and chance as those things which occur "for something" but only coincidentally, after discussing the four causes - the material, formal, efficient, and final causes - in Part 3 of Book 2. Book 1 gets straight to the main point discussing nature as a principle of change, and the final four of the eight total books all deal primarily with motion. FTP, name this work by Aristotle which deals with the development of a science, rather than mechanics or electromagnetics as its name might imply.;;Physics(a)|Phusika
Miscellaneous;;A technique using the 48-bit AGGR allows endpoint addresses to be stored in its header, enabling tunneling via its predecessor.  Created by a team lead by Steve Deering at PARC, convention states that strings of zeros in these addresses can be replaced by a double colon and the last 32 bits can be written in decimal instead of hex.  Although its predecessor’s header is half as big and is limited to four billion nodes, address translation has slowed its adoption, even though its 128-bit address space allows for 3.4 times ten to the 38 nodes.  China’s Next Generation Internet is abandoning the fourth version of, FTP, what addressing protocol usually paired with TCP that is to replace IPv4?;;I(nternet) P(rotocol) (v(ersion)) 6;;I(nternet) P(rotocol)
World History;;Of the nobles on the losing side, only Huntly, Lindsay, and Home escaped alive. The last of them, Lord Home, is sometimes alleged to have made an agreement with Lord Dacre to sit out the battle, and was pilloried in its aftermath. A skirmish was initially fought at Milfield, on a pretext of instigation by a man called "the bastard," John Heron, but the action then moved to Branxton Hill, which provides an alternate name for the battle. Thomas Howard, the Earl of Surrey, commanded forces since the remainder of the English army was in France under Henry VIII, and the result was a crushing defeat of James IV. FTP, name this 1513 victory for the English over the Scots, described in Walter Scott’s Marmion.;;(Battle of) Flodden (Field)
Literature;;One of this author’s short stories concerns a petitioner and a cleaning woman, who tries to answer his petition for a boat, while one of his novels ends on April 25th, 1974, the date of a revolution in this writer’s home country. He set one of his novels in a location taken from a Platonic allegory, and Azio Corghi based a 1989 opera on this man’s Memorial of the Convent. Another of this man’s novel is set in 1936, when the title character returns home after 16 years abroad and wanders the city with the ghost of the poet Fernando Pessoa. More famous is a novel which depicts a landmass that detaches from a continent, forming the titular object, and another work about an illness that leaves people able to see only white light. Also the writer of Baltasar and Blimunda, for ten points, identify this author of The Stone Raft and Blindness.;;(Jos(é|e){1}?) (de Sousa) Saramago
Religion/Mythology;;This man’s Chandi di Var is a poetic composition about an aspect of the goddess Durga, and its first stanza forms the first part of the ardaas. He called any who would die for their faith into a tent, after which he emerged holding a sword dripping with blood. The men were not killed and the event formed the basis for the Amrit ceremony, after which adherents are called khalsa, for those "five beloved" men. His father, Teg Bahadur, sacrificed himself up to the current Mughal emperor, Aurangzeb, after which this man succeeded him and compiled the Dasam Granth. He declared that the Guru Granth Sahib would be the ultimate and last guru, but, FTP, name this 10th and final human guru of Sikhism.;;(Guru) Gobind (Singh|Rai Sodhi)
Music;;Other works that share its name include a setting of Guinaud’s poetry by De Joncieres, an 1889 fantasy by Glazunov inspired by Liszt’s tone poems, and an orchestral work prefaced by the poems of Levis, written by Gilson.  These works, along with D’Indy’s L’Etranger, helped inspire this piece.  The first edition manuscript given to Varèse includes brass fanfares that were later removed from the third section, a dialogue between the wind and the title setting.  Proceeding "from dawn to noon" in the first movement, FTP name this Debussy piece whose second movement depicts the "play of the waves".;;(La) Mer|(The) Sea
Religion/Mythology;;He cleansed Pelops of blood-guilt in the western stream of Oceanus, and a practical joke by his uncle resulted in him ejaculating on his half-sister’s thigh, making him the father of Erichthonius.  He drove off the River-god Scamander to help Achilles, and the blinded Orion took his apprentice Cedalion as a guide after finding his workshop.  During the revolt of the giants, he scalded Mimas with a ladle full of red-hot metal.  Pandareus and Tantalus conspired to steal a golden mastiff created by this god, and his other creations include a net that caught Ares in bed with his wife.  FTP name this husband of Aphrodite, the lame smith-god of the Greeks.;;Hephaestus
United States History;;This man tapped the head of the American Relief Administration to be his Commerce Secretary, and his Supreme Court appointments included Edward Sanford and the first Justice from Minnesota, Pierce Butler. The first Senator to be elected president, he was grouped with Charles Forbes, Will Hays and Harry Daugherty in the Ohio Gang. Thomas Walsh exposed the corruption of this man’s administration, documented in Samuel Hopkins Adams’ 1939 book Incredible Era. Elected on a platform of a "return to normalcy" over James Cox, for ten points, identify this president who was succeeded upon his 1923 death by Calvin Coolidge.;;(Warren) (Gamaliel) Harding
Literature;;This man appears in a work set in "a fair oasis of the purest desert," and a novel with this title sees Miriam’s father come to grips with his son Menuchim being retarded.  In a third work, another character based on this man meets a downtrodden balloon seller and a sardonic popcorn vender named Zuss and Nickles, respectively.  Robert Frost’s blank verse comedy A Masque of Reason focuses on this man, as does Joseph Roth’s novel about Mendel Singer.  A man who sees his children killed by war, drunk drivers and murderers is based on, FTP, what Biblical character whose story is retold in Archibald Macleish’s play J.B.?;;Job
Miscellaneous;;Kieth Soto of the New York Times is the son of one of its members, but was convinced not to publish a story about it in return for learning how his father died.  The wife of its NCOIC at the same time was attempting to get the truth out of a woman who stole $40,000 from an investment club by claiming to be selling her house to move to Minnesota for treatment. Tiffy Gerhardt, however, is having an affair with Colonel Tom Ryan, played by Robert Patrick, who is the group’s CO. Operating under the cover of the 303rd Logistical Studies Unit, a reference to an earlier Mamet work, Wag the Dog, FTP, name this drama with Dennis Haysbert on CBS, about a fictional special forces group.;;(The) Unit
World History;;Lithic similarities led Stanford and Bradley to propose that the culture of this name represents a migratory outpost of the Solutrean culture.  A character of this name appears in a story "on the Alleged Romance of Business" in The Square Egg.  The culture of this name has long been held to have crossed the Bering Land Bridge and peopled the Americas.  In his Histories, Gregory of Tours heaps praise on and discusses the conversion of a man of this name, a son of Childeric I.  The story "Tobermory" appears in the Chronicles of, FTP, this literary character created by Saki who shares his name with the husband of the Clotilde and founder of the Merovingian dynasty.;;Clovis
Biology;;They contain large Sym plasmids that bear nod genes coding for factors that induce cortical cell division, and their gene expression is modified by uptake of flavonoids.  Following the recognition and attachment steps mediated by the protein rhicadhesin, they multiply in infection threads.  Effective strains produce large structures whose reddish color comes from the oxygen buffer leghemoglobin, which is partially encoded in the host plant.  FTP name these gram-negative bacteria that form symbiotic relationships with legumes, producing nitrogen-fixing root nodules.;;Rhizobi(um|a){1}?
Wolrd History;;During this dynasty, a Catholic scholar developed a philosophy of the rights of the people that is classified as part of the "practical learning" modernization movement known as Silhak.  Its fourth ruler is credited with developing the official writing system of fourteen consonants and ten vowels, replacing the hanja system.  It was formed after in the late 14th century when an opportunity to invade China was passed over by King U’s general in favor of overthrowing the Goryeo.  FTP, name this dynasty that ruled Korea until annexed by Japan in 1910.;;((Chos|Jose){1}?on|Yi){1}? (Dynasty)
Philosophy;;This man’s essays on interpersonal utility theory and Austrian methodology are collected in his volume Socratic Puzzles. He argued against Edmund Gettier by suggesting a "truth-tracking" solution to the definition of knowledge in Philosophical Explanations, while the Prisoner’s Dilemma and Newcomb’s problem are covered in his The Nature of Rationality. Another book draws the example of trading with Wilt Chamberlain and introduces the concept of the Lockean proviso for property appropriation, while he argued against an opponent by claiming that "it needn’t be that the foundations underlying desert are themselves deserved all the way down". For ten points, identify this late Harvard philosopher, who attacked John Rawls’ Theory of Justice in his Anarchy, State, and Utopia.;;(Robert) Nozick
Literature;;One of this play’s two settings is frequented by a pewter platter spinner named Tom Twist and a horse doctor named Jack Slang.  Roger and Diggory are servants in the employ of a character whose role was originated by Ned Shuter, an actor mentioned in the prologue written by David Garrick.  Two characters in this play are directed to the Buck’s Head, recognizable by the pair of horns over its door, after asking for directions at the Three Jolly Pigeons.  Constance Neville winds up with George Hastings despite the schemes of the mother of Tony Lumpkin.  Young Marlow ends up marrying Kate Hardcastle after mistaking her for a serving wench in, FTP, this comedy by Oliver Goldsmith.;;She Stoops to Conquer
World History;;This ruler issued a "divine pragmatic sanction" nullifying certain donations, and was influenced by the theological advisors Domitian of Ancyra and Theodore Askidas. His armies were defeated at the Battle of Callinicum, after which his minister Peter Barsymes devised a set of fiscal reforms. His theological quarrel with Pope Vigilius is sometimes called the Three Chapters dispute. A year after he negotiated the so-called "Endless Peace" with the Persians, his army won at Tricamerum over Gelimer and the Vandals and he commissioned Tribonian to supervise the creation of the Digesta, the Institutiones, and the Novels, all components of his namesake legal code. FTP, name this great Byzantine emperor from 527-565 CE.;;Justinian (I|the First|the Great)|(Flavius) (Petrus) (Sabbatius) Justinian(us)
Noncomputational Math;;The Nielsen type of these can be used to derive the Cesaro equation. One of these named after Cotes represents the solutions to a central orbit subject to an inverse-cubed force law, and a polygonal one may be generated from the ratios of the inradius to circumradius of a regular polygon. One of these objects named after Ulam is a graphical representation of the primes, while the Cornu type is a plot of the solutions of the Fresnel integrals. More famous are the Fermat and hyperbolic varieties, which correspond to special cases of the equation "r equals a times theta raised to the 1 over n power". For ten points, identify these mathematical curves, of which the most famous is the Archimedean.;;spiral(s)
Art;;This painting is alluded to in Chilean writer Rosamel del Valle's Eva the Fugitive and was featured on the cover of an edition of Philip Pullman’s The Subtle Knife. A red flag is seen in the background towards the top of this work and like the painter's creation of the previous year, The Soothsayer's Recompense, this painting features multiple arcades, one of which shades an abandoned horse trailer. A half-shadow of a man appears at the far end of the title setting, and each of the planes in this painting have their own perspective. Most famous for its image of a girl rolling a hoop with a stick, for ten points, identify this painting by Giorgio de Chirico.;;Melancholy and Mystery of a Street
Biology;;In photosystem II, this process involves electron transfer to and within the cytochrome b/f complex.  In mitochondria, it sees the first donated electron reduce Cytochrome C while the second passes through cytochromes b566 ("b 566") and b562 ("b 562").  Assimilation of matrix protons into the radical molecule replenishes the reducing agent, ubiquinol.  Each ubiquinol oxidation is accompanied by the release of four protons into the intermembrane space, producing the pH gradient for chemiosmotic ATP synthesis.  FTP, identify this proton-motive cycle sharing its single-letter designation with a key coenzyme.;;Q (cycle)
United States History;;One of the men responsible for negotiating this agreement had earlier published evidence in Le Matin which exonerated Alfred Dreyfus. Among the smaller islands addressed by this agreement were Perico, Naos, Culebro, and Flamenco, while damage resulting to private parties from construction was to be appraised by a joint commission from both countries party to it. It also provided for sanitation and water distribution in the city of Colon, while providing for an initial payment of $10 million and yearly payments of $250,000, and was repealed by the Torrijos-Carter agreement. Superseding a treaty bearing the name of one of its namesakes and that of Herran, for ten points, identify this 1903 agreement which gave the United States exclusive control of the Panama Canal.;;Hay-Bunau-varilla (treaty)
Philosophy;;At one point, the author uses the metaphor of building a house, saying that people will pronounce a house perfect when it is completed, but that one cannot pronounce anything perfect without knowing the intention of its maker. The paradox of Buridan’s Ass is rejected as irrational, and its author later concludes that rational man is freer abiding by the laws of a State than living independently in solitude in part four, "Of Human Bondage, Or The Strength of the Emotions". Presenting its author’s double aspect theory of the mind, its first part, "Concerning God," begins the distinction between such ideas as substance, attribute, and mode. FTP, name this magnum opus "presented in a geometrical order," by Baruch Spinoza.;;Ethics
Literature;;In one of this man's short stories, the narrator is mesmerized by the translucent skin and blue veins of a local notary's wife, with whom he spends Christmas Eve. In addition to "Midnight Mass," he wrote a story in which Dr. Bacamarte imprisons everyone in the town of Itaguai for insanity, "The Psychiatrist". He penned the poetry collection Crisalidas and a novel in which the protagonist goes mad pretending to be Napoleon III after inheriting the title creature. Another of his novels chronicles the title character's jealousy over Capitolina, Dom Casmurro. The creator of Quincas Borba, for ten points identify this Brazilian author of Philosopher or Dog and The Posthumous Memoirs of Bras Cubas.;;(Joaquim) (Maria) Machado de Assis
Geography;;This city is home to a 10-kilometer-long Central Park, as well as Esplanadi Park, and its Uspenski Cathedral is considered the largest Orthodox Church in Western Europe. A great number of its buildings were designed by Carl Ludvig Engel, including its university’s library. Located in part on the bay of Töölö, Rauta-tien-tori is a major square adjacent to its Ateneum museum and Central Railway Station, designed by another major architect. A bronze statue of Alexander II lies in the Senate Square, which was home to the nation’s Parliament until the Eduskunta building replaced it. FTP, name this "White City of the North," the capital of Finland.;;Helsinki
Noncomputational Math;;Computationally equivalent to determining if a number is a quadratic residue modulo a prime, among the algorithms proposed to solve it are an elliptic curve method named for Lenstra. Pollard’s rho algorithm for achieving this iterates a polynomial formula until it falls into a cycle, while Fermat’s method uses trials to find an appropriate difference of two squares and generalizes to the continued fraction method. A fast method for it is the quadratic sieve, and it can be done in polynomial time by the quantum-computational Shor's algorithm. For ten points, identify this problem in NP and co-NP, whose difficulty insures the success of RSA encryption, and which consists of breaking an integer into a product of primes.;;(integer|prime) factorization
World History;;He stated that he only vomited once in his life and confessed that his breast was shaggy in the self-satirical Misopogon, or Beard-Hater.  His Gallic campaign saw victory at Strasbourg, and ended when he was ordered to put down the siege of Amida, which led the Petulantes to revolt and crown him in Paris.  He ordered Alypius of Antioch to rebuild the second temple of Jerusalem and promulgated the School Edict, which prevented Christian schools from using pagan texts.  He also reversed the policies of his predecessor, Constantius II, declaring freedom of religion in a 362 edict.  Known for attempting to revive Hellenism, FTP name this Roman Emperor whose moniker came from his rejection of Christianity.;;Julian (the Apostate|II|the Second){1}?|(Flavius) (Claudius) Iulianus;;Julian
Religion/Mythology;;Martin Noth conjectured that it was the second of five historical works written by an author known as D. In its seventh chapter, the thief Achan was stoned in the valley of Achor. It ends with the burial of Eleazar next to his son and the bones of Joseph at Shechem, where were brought safely back from Egypt, and its chapter 24, verse 20 contains its namesake's famous farewell address. Its famous episode was preceded by an encounter with the Commander of the Lord’s army in which the title figure took off his sandals, and it mentions that the Book of Jasher also recounted the event in which the moon stopped in the Valley of Aijalon and the sun stopped over Gibeon so that God gave the Israelites victory over the five kings.  FTP, name this Old Testament book that saw the conquest of Canaan, including the Battle of Jericho.;;(The) (Book of) Joshua|(Sefer) Yehoshua
Literature;;The main character of this novel seduces Lena, and one of the main character's friends is killed by a ship's axe after trying to make love to a wooden figurehead called Niobe. The main character uses one of his talents to help Jan steal a necklace for his mother, and during a visit to a cathedral places the title object in the hands of the baby Jesus. The main character's grandmother at one point hid Joseph Koljaiczek in her skirts, while the man who gives him his last name swallows his Nazi party pin and dies when the Russians invade. The protagonist's voice can shatter glass, and he decides to stop growing at age three. For ten points, identify this novel about Oskar Matzerath, the first work in Gunther Grass' Danzig Trilogy.;;(The) Tin Drum
Music;;(Give first and last name).  This man’s last painting was a portrait of his neighbor and tennis partner, Arnold Schoenberg.  He bought a copy of Forsyth’s Orchestration for use in working on a commission from Damrosch.  He was the soloist at the premiere of that work, which was preceded on the program by Glazunov’s 5th symphony, chosen for the Charleston rhythm featured in his Concerto in F.  He bought four taxi horns for a work inspired by a trip to Europe, and the rhythms of a train ride in Boston inspired another piece that opens with a clarinet glissando.  FTP, name this composer of An American in Paris and Rhapsody in Blue.;;G(eorge) Gershwin|J(acob) Gershovitz
Religion/Mythology;;The father of Echepolus shared his name with this son of Capys and Themiste or Hieromneme.  His first daughter-in-law shared her name with a daughter of Erechtheus who was the mother of Ion, Achaeus and Dorus.  He traveled with Antenor to demand the return of his cousin Hesione, and secretly bred his mares with the immortal horses of his uncle Laomedon.  His son was the result of a dalliance with a goddess disguised as a Phrygian princess, who later saved him by using her girdle to divert a thunderbolt thrown at him after he boasted about the affair.  This made him lame, so he had to be carried away from Troy on his son’s shoulders.  FTP, name this mortal lover of Aphrodite, the father of Aeneas.;;Anchises
Literature;;He penned a dramatic poem about a sick knight who can only be cured by a maiden sacrificing her life for him, "The Golden Legend".  That poem is collected with a retelling of Christ’s life called the Divine Tragedy, which forms his Christus trilogy, along with another duo of poems that ends with a scene of St. John wandering the face of the earth.  That scene appears in his New England Tragedies after two tales of Puritans and witchcraft, John Endicott and Giles Corey.  One of his poems considers "These Hebrews in their graves" in the title locale, and another focuses on the grandson of Nokomis.  FTP, name this American poet of "The Jewish Cemetery at Newport" and The Song of Hiawatha.;;(Henry) (Wadsworth) Longfellow
United States History;;In order to find that the plaintiffs had standing, the majority opinion distinguished this case from Tiletson v. Ullman. The majority also "declined the invitation" that Lochner "be our guide," while Justice Brennan joined a concurring opinion that favorably cited Harlan's dissent in Poe v. Ullman. That concurrence was written by Justice Goldberg, who noted that "the concept of liberty protects those personal right that are fundamental," and rested his argument on the 9th. Representing the first use of William Douglas' "penumbral" reasoning, the principles established in this case were later extended by Eisenstadt v. Baird, and this case is famous for Justice Stewart's dissent, in which he called the law in question "uncommonly silly". FTP, identify this 1965 case concerning contraceptive distribution to married couples.;;Griswold (v(.)) (Connecticut)
Philosophy;;This author's critical work includes a discussion of Nathalie Sarraute's novel The Planetarium.  Walter Benjamin's essay on Nikolai Leskov, "The Storyteller," is praised in her Under the Sign of Saturn. Her last novel was based on the life of the actress Helena Modjeska, and attracted controversy with claims that she plagiarized Willa Cather.  Max dies at the end of her story "The Way We Live Now," and she discussed the work of Edward Weston, Lewis Hine, and Diane Arbus in On Photography.  She also wrote a novel about Emma Hamilton, The Volcano Lover, and an essay about Illness as Metaphor. FTP, identify this American author of "Notes on 'Camp,'" which was collected in Against Interpretation.;;(Susan) Sontag
Chemistry;;The Gibbs-Bogoliubov inequality can be used in conjunction with a trial state to give an upper bound on this quantity, while Weekes-Chandler-Andersen perturbation has been applied to Lennard-Jones fluids to give an analytic solution. Proportional to Boltzmann’s constant and the natural logarithm of a system’s equilibrium constant at constant volume, a system in thermal equilibrium minimizes it. Defined as the internal energy of a system minus the product of its absolute temperature and entropy, FTP name this thermodynamic potential, a free energy named for a German physicist.;;Helmholtz (free energy|function){1}?
Economics;;Tom Baker authored an article "on the genealogy of" this economic concept. Roland Maude-Griffin and John Nyman have written a paper on the welfare effects of it in a belated response to a work by Mark Pauly on the economics of this. First coined by Kenneth Arrow, this term arises in international law in the case of odious debt where loans give incentives to foster corrupt regimes, but the classic case of this phenomenon deals with health insurance, the possession of which may inefficiently affect how patients make use of medical services. FTP give the economic term for the irresponsible behavior people tend to exhibit when all risk is transferred away from them.;;moral hazard
World History;;This explorer established a trading post in Calicut on the Malabar Coast, but it was attacked by a band of Muslims, and he was forced to return and bombard the post. Earlier in that same journey, he had sailed into Porto Seguro and after spotting Mount Pascoal, he dubbed his discovery Vera Cruz, a holy appellation in honor of it being Easter. He returned and was received by Manuel I, but mysteriously never again sailed. Some argue that his major find merely confirmed a discovery of Amerigo Vespucci, but in any case it was quickly renamed for the red dye-producing wood discovered there. FTP, name this Portuguese explorer, known as the discoverer of Brazil.;;(Pedro) (Alvares) Cabral
Chemistry;;One example of this type of chemical reaction is the Meerwein-Ponndorf-Verley procedure, which is carried out with isopropanol, and is the opposite of the Oppenauer Reaction. This type of reaction will convert camphor into borneol. Another example is the CBS reaction, though a more famous one of these creates 1,4 cyclohexadienes and is named for Birch. Another one involves heating with amalgamated zinc in hydrochloric acid, or it can be done with Raney nickel by hydrogenation. FTP, name this type of organic reaction including the Clemmensen, the opposite of oxidation.;;reduction(s)
Literature;;A side plot of this work involves a Welsh clergyman and his rival, a French doctor, who believe that a local innkeeper dislikes their accents, prompting them to band together for revenge.  One man spends part of this play disguised as Mr. Brook, and beats another man disguised as the wise woman of Brentford; the latter appears in the final scene dressed as Herne the Hunter.  Fenton beats out Slender and Doctor Caius for the hand of Anne, the daughter of one of the title characters, who dump into the Thames a load of laundry containing Falstaff.  FTP name this Shakespeare comedy in which Falstaff courts Mistresses Ford and Page.;;(The) Merry Wives of Windsor
Biology;;Animals that show evidence of this include European bisons and northern elephant seals, and it is thought to have occurred in giant pandas about 43,000 years ago.  Because of this effect, skin grafts from one cheetah to another do not create an immune response.  A variant that occurs when a small group separates from the rest of a population, resulting in increased genetic drift and inbreeding, is called the founder effect.  FTP, name this evolutionary event in which a significant percentage of the population or species is killed or unable to reproduce, resulting in a population reduction of 50% or more.;;bottleneck effect |(population|genetic){1}? bottleneck
Chmeistry;;Along with EDP and TMAH, a combination of this and deionized water can be used to etch silicon anisotropically to <111> (one-one-one) planes.  It is most commonly produced by either the Raschig process or the more efficient Atofina-PCUK cycle. This compound’s sulfate was suggested in the 1970s as a cancer treatment by Joseph Gold, and its most common industrial use is in rocket fuel. It is a reducing agent used in basic conditions in the first step of the Wolff-Kishner Reaction. FTP, identify this compound consisting of two amine groups with chemical formula N2H4.;;hydrazine
World History;;In 1839, John Lloyd Stephens bought this city from someone claiming to be the rightful owner for fifty dollars.  Its rulers included Smoke Squirrel and Smoke Monkey, who came to power after its golden age as the center of the Xukpi kingdom came to an end with the death of 18 Rabbit, who is believed to be Waxaklahun Ubah K’awil.  Its ruins include the hieroglyphic staircase and a series of portrait stelae.  Located in western Honduras on the border with Guatemala, FTP name this cultural and scientific center of the classical Maya.;;Cop(á|a){1}?n
Miscellaneous;;It quotes Sartre's observation of a waiter in the cafe in a section on "reality and contrivance," and ends with applications to management thinking. It describes the process of showing socially acceptable characteristics called mystification and notes that marginalized people tend to be forced into discredited groups. The concepts of "line" and "disidentifiers" are explained in the author's other works, Interactive Ritual and Stigma. Containing chapters on "discrepant roles" and "performances," FTP name this work that takes a "dramaturgical" approach to the study of social interactions, based on the metaphor of an actor giving a performance, the best known work by Erving Goffman.;;(The) Presentation of Self in Everyday Life
Literature;;In one short novella by this author, the title character walks in the rain to Cottolengo to monitor an election, while another work by this man consists of 27 meditations by the namesake character. In addition to The Watcher and Mr. Palomar, this man wrote novels about Agilulf and the Baron of Ombrosa, which together with another novel form his trilogy Our Ancestors. That work concerns Medardo of Terralba, who is blown apart by a cannonball.  One of his novels consists of dialogues between Marco Polo and Kublai Khan about the title locations.  Invisible Cities and The Cloven Viscount are novels by, FTP, this Italian author of If on a Winter's Night a Traveler.;;(Italo) Calvino
Music;;It was the inspiration for the later Piano Sonata No. 2 of Boulez, who elaborated on its contrapuntal form.  The first movement of the piece, Allegro, introduces fortissimo B-flat chords, and the very short Scherzo parodies the first.  The third movement, one of the longest of any solo piece up to the time, is an Adagio sostenuto that is said to have inspired much Romantic-era music.  The final movement, marked Allegro risoluto, begins with contrapuntal meanderings before breaking out into a full fugue similar to its composer’s Grosse Fuge. FTP, name this piano sonata by Beethoven whose name describes both the instrument and the piece’s difficulty.;;Hammerklavier|(Beethoven('))(s) Piano Sonata (No(.)|Number){1}? 29
Biology;;Its upper portion forms the top part of the greater curvature. The lesser curvature, which also begins at the cardiac orifice, is about four times shorter than the greater curvature, so it is described as J-shaped.  Its volume increases when the rugae are stretched.  Parietal cells produce intrinsic factor, necessary for vitamin B12 absorption, and a chemical that activates the zymogen secreted by chief cells.  Gelatinase, amylase lipase and pepsin participate in breaking down boli, producing chyme which passes through the pyloric sphincter into the duodenum. FTP, name this organ that lies between the esophagus and small intestine.;;stomach
World History;;One man by this name was twice made hospodar of Wallachia, the second time ending with his capture by Austria and imprisonment at Brno. His more famous grandson of the same name lost an arm at the Battle of Dresden, but came to lead the "Friendly Society" which displayed a flag depicting a phoenix rising from its ashes on the reverse. He called for his compatriots to take a stand at Jassy, but this former aide-de-camp to Alexander I and phanariot was left high and dry and crushed at Dragashan. FTP, name this hero in the Greek War for Independence, whose more successful brother Demetrios lent the family name to a Michigan town near Ann Arbor.;;(Alexander) (H)Ypsilanti(s)
Literature;;He gave himself a minor role as Father Higgins in an "apprenticeship work" about Willie Seopola.  Several of his plays, including The Island, were largely a result of improvisation, while a woman giving premature birth formed the basis for The Cell, which both he and his wife Sheila claim was his first work.  His play focusing on Zachariah and his lighter-skinned half-brother Morris was grouped in his Family Trilogy with Hello and Goodbye and Boesman and Lena.  Another work features the waiters Willie and Sam, who drops his pants after hearing a racist joke from Hally.  FTP name this South African playwright of Blood Knot and Master Harold…and the Boys.;;(Harold) (Athol) (Lanigan) Fugard
Religion/Mythology;;One of these will supposedly respond to the numbers 3 and 21. Another first appeared on Earth and became known as the King of the White Cloth. The one representing the awareness of death is the favorite wife of Shango, who is the one of thunder and lightning. The trickster and messenger among them is Eshu, who is also the keeper of the Ase. Oshun, the one of beauty, supposedly came into existence when Olodumare experienced the first emotion, and the mother is Yemoja. Also called Divine Attributes of Olorun, FTP, identify this collection of Yoruban gods, which serve as the saints or spirits in Santeria tradition.;;orisha
United States History;;The namesake location of this idea is today home to a statue by Leonard Crunelle, and this idea's formulator inquired whether another man would side with Mr. Trumbull. The man whose questions prompted this idea's formulation mentioned in his speech the voting-down of Chase's amendment, and asked whether this was done to prevent a clash between Congress and the Supreme Court. Formulated in an attempt to reconcile popular sovereignty with the Dred Scot decision during the second of a series of famous debates, its formulator replied to Lincoln that "the people of a Territory can, by lawful means, exclude slavery from their limits prior to the formation of a state". For ten points, identify this position advanced by Stephen Douglas and named for an Illinois town.;;Freeport (Doctrine)
Economics;;His first publication, based on Morning Chronicle articles a year before, caused the repeal of the Bank Restriction Act. This man’s writing were collected after his death by Maurice Herbert Dobb and his longtime follower Piero Sraffa. He discusses labor-saving techniques in a chapter "On Machinery," and after marrying a Quaker, he wrote The High Price of Bullion and formulated a theory that would be discovered concurrently by Robert Torrens. A proponent of the idea that real income tends to remain near subsistence, FTP name this economist who, in his Principles of Political Economy and Taxation, discussed the Iron Law of Wages and formulated the principle of competitive advantage.;;(David) Ricardo
Philosophy;;It notes that "a mother teaches her baby to talk by talking to it as if it understood long before it really does" in describing the pretension that is needed to make the pretence into a reality.  It remarks that "the only person who could repent perfectly is a perfect person," and he wouldn't need it, in a section that follows the "shocking alternative". This leads the author to propose his so-called "Trilemma," which rejects the "moral teacher" stance by claiming that Jesus must have been the son of God, a liar, or a lunatic. Using the moral law to establish the existence of God in "The Rival Conceptions of God," it calls the world "enemy-occupied territory" in "The Invasion". For ten points name this work originally broadcast on the BBC during World War II, written by C. S. Lewis and dealing with a certain religion.;;Mere Christianity
World History;;Prior to the initial engagement at Aphetae, the defector Scyllias warned one side in this battle of a trap.  That side’s commanders included Ocytus’s son Adeimantus and the overall commander Eurybiades, who led a delaying action to allow evacuation of Euboea.  After the arrival of 53 more Athenian ships, the main phase of the battle took place on August 11, 480 BCE, and both the Greeks and the Persians suffered heavy casualties.  FTP name this battle, traditionally believed to have taken place simultaneously with the land battle at Thermopylae.;;Artemisium
Literature;;This work includes a memory of "four light-green eggs speckled with brown".  A missing mate inspires the song of a creature addressed as the poet’s "dusky demon and brother," and at the end of this poem the sea whispers to the poet "the low and delicious word death, and again death, death, death, death".  This poem features a he-bird addressed as "the solitary guest from Alabama," who visits the gray beach of Paumanok.  First titled "A Word Out of the Sea" and "A Child's Reminiscence," FTP name this Walt Whitman poem beginning with the boy-poet getting up from bed.;;Out of the Cradle Endlessly Rocking
Philosophy;;His was charged with atheism for calling God the universal moral order in "On the Grounds of Our Belief in a Divine Government of the Universe," a preface to an essay by his friend F. K. Forberg. He lectured "On the Idea of a True War" and wrote about Characteristics of the Present Age and, after being booted out of Jena, was eventually elected rector of the new University of Berlin where he had given his Addresses to the German Nation in 1807. Also the author of The Vocation of Man and The Vocation of the Scholar, FTP, name this son of a ribbon weaver who journeyed to Konigsberg to meet Kant, and whose best known work is his Attempt at a Critique of All Revelation.;;(Johann) (Gottlieb) Fichte
United States History;;One battle of this name saw the division of Francis Barlow fight off a counter-attack from Breckinridge that was launched after Hancock's corps captured several trenches. Another battle of this name was preceded by fighting at Mechanicsville and Beaver Dam Creek, after which George McClellan ordered his troops to high ground near Gaines' Mill, which gives that battle its alternate name. One battle of this name began on June 3rd after Grant had advanced towards Richmond, and ended when Meade launched a disastrous assault on Lee's forces, entrenched at the titular location on Boatswain's Creek. Occurring towards the end of the Overland Campaign, for ten points, identify this last Confederate victory of the Civil War, which cost the Union about 13,000 casualties, but did not stop Grant from marching on Petersburg.;;(The) (Second|2nd){1}? (Battle of) Cold Harbor
Art;;A student at Columbia under Clarence White, this artist first gained critical recognition from a group including Imogen Cunningham and Willard Van Dyke. Following World War II, this artist produced such collections as Mormon Villages and The Irish Countryman, and her report with her husband Paul Taylor led to her employment by Roy Stryker, who had hired Esther Bubley for similar reasons. Her work was used in an exhibit on Executive Order 9066, but she remains better known for a work whose title figure remained unknown for forty years until she identified herself as Florence Owens Thompson, a portrait produced as the result of her hiring by the Farm Security Administration. For ten points, identify this photographer who produced some of the most famous images of the Great Depression, including Migrant Mother.;;(Dorothea) Lange
Literature;;Characters in this novel include one man who advocates the "Salvation and Five Percent" doctrine and another who is praised in the pages of the Advocate-Times. Along with Cecil Roundtree, the title character attends the S.A.R.E.B. convention, during which he scraps his speech about the good life and instead quotes statistics on industry and manufacturing.  The title character privately envies his friend's affair with May Arnold, and approves of his son Ted's elopement. When the title character's wife falls ill, he breaks with Tanis Judique and rejoins the Good Citizen's League. Focusing on a friend of Paul Riesling and husband of Myra, for ten points, identify this novel about a resident of Zenith written by Sinclair Lewis.;;Babbitt
Noncomputational Math;;For relative precision, its effective value is the coefficient of variation, while for population means, it is Z sigma squared over allowable difference squared.  The model-based approach to obtaining it uses an unbiased predictor Z hat whose variance is a correction factor times the distribution variance over n for a mean estimator. Its namesake proportion is the fraction of successes of Bernoulli trials, and its space is the largest set in the sigma-algebra formed by the set of all possible events for a random variate. The finite population Central Limit theorem applies when its size goes to infinity.  Markov chain Monte Carlo and simple random techniques are used to obtain, for ten points, what selection from a population that forms the basis of surveys?;;sampl(e|ing){1}? (size)
World History;;One of this country’s most important leaders put down "the tippler’s revolt," and two of its earlier rulers were known as "the Peopler" and the "Farmer King". This country signed the Treaty of Methuen in 1703, which hampered its industry, and its scandals included the Tavora Conspiracy and a civil war known as the War of the Two Brothers or the Liberal War. After victory in the Battle of Aljubarrota came the establishment of the Aviz Dynasty, while its later rulers would include the Queen Maria da Gloria. The Estado Novo was brought to an end here in 1974, most associated with the long-time rule of Antonio Salazar. Led by the Braganza family, FTP, identify this Iberian country with a capital at Lisbon.;;Portugal
Music;;Its famous chorus is the only encore James Levine ever allowed at the Metropolitan Opera; oddly, though, the encore at its premiere was not that chorus but "Immenso Jehovah". The opera begins with a love triangle, as Fenena and Abigaille compete for the affections of Ismaele; however, after Abigaille discovers she is a slave and not the daughter of the title character, she launches a coup and lands the crown. The opera ends as Fenena and the Jews are about to be sacrificed on the altar of Baal, but they are saved by the title king. FTP, name this Verdi opera set in Babylon that includes a chorus of Hebrew slaves singing "Va, pensiero, sull’ali dorate".;;Nabucco|Nabucodonosor
United States History;;This man drew on his experiences as Secretary of State to write such gripping fare as Foreign Relations and Pan-American Peace Plans. This man fought with Congress for intruding on his territory with the Knox-Porter resolution, and his diplomatic achievements included the negotiation of the Treaty of Berlin with Germany and chairing the Washington Naval Conference. More famously, this man cast the deciding vote and wrote the majority opinion in NLRB vs. Jones and Laughlin Steel Corp. which upheld the constitutionality of the Wagner Act, a move that helped to diffuse the court-packing controversy sparked by the invalidation of the NIRA in the Schechter case while this man was Chief Justice. Losing in 1916 to Woodrow Wilson by only 23 electoral votes, for ten points, identify this American politician, the only man ever to resign from and return to the Supreme Court.;;(Charles) (Evans) Hughes
Physics;;This man's namesake instability describes how electrostatic repulsion can overcome surface tension to deform a spherical droplet of charged liquid, and his namesake dimensionless number, the product of the Prandtl number and Grashof number, determines whether heat flows primarily through convection or conduction. An instability named for him and Taylor describes a heavy fluid floating on a light one, and several parameters are known as his namesake criteria, one referring to combustion and the other to the angular resolution of an optical system.  The creator of an incorrect blackbody energy density formula along with James Jeans, for ten points, name this physicist best known for his eponymous scattering which explains why the sky is blue.;;(Lord) Rayleigh|(John) (William) Strutt(,) ((3rd|third){1}? Baron Rayleigh)
Literature;;The first three sections of this four-part work were published anonymously after poor reviews of the author's previous work addressed to Burlington.  Originally meant to be a part of a larger work, including some of its author's Imitations of Horace, its author claims to be "opening the fountains" in the introduction, and references Milton in his wish to "vindicate the ways of God to man".  Dedicated to Henry St. John, Lord Bolingbroke, its third and fourth sections deal with society and happiness, and its first section, dealing with the universe, evokes the Great Chain of Being and famously declares "whatever is, is right".  FTP name this philosophical poem consisting of four epistles written in heroic couplets by Alexander Pope discussing the human situation.;;(An) Essay on Man
Art;;This painting's theme may have been suggested by the play The Three Cousins, though it was more likely inspired by Houdar de la Motte's opera ballet La Venitienne. Most of the artistic techniques were probably taken from the artist's close study of Rubens' Garden of Love. A statue wound about with flowers appears on the right. In the center, a man faces away from the viewer and holds a staff in his left hand, with his right arm around a woman in a bright gold dress, while four other couples stand under the large trees that dominate the upper right of this painting.  On the left, cherubs fly around the red and white sails of a golden boat, which people are boarding, while the far right features Cupid's quiver of arrows at the base of a statue of Venus. For ten points, name this painting depicting a leisurely trip to an enchanted island, a fete-galante by Watteau.;;(A) (Pilgrimage|Embarkation){1}? (to|from){1}? Cythera|Pelerinage a (l'île de) Cythere|L'Embarquement pour Cyth(è|e){1}?re
Music;;This man's early works include the string septet Shaker Loops and the piano piece Phrygian Gates.   His time as composer in residence for the San Francisco Symphony produced works like a tribute to the Second Viennese School, Harmonielehre, and a choral work using the text of a John Donne poem and two Emily Dickinson poems, Harmonium.  He used missing persons reports, internet postings, and cell phone conversations as the text for his 9/11 tribute, On the Transmigration of Souls, and wrote operas about the hijacking of the Achille Lauro and the visit of a President to a certain country. FTP name this modern American composer of The Death of Klinghoffer and Nixon in China.;;(John) Adams
Religion/Mythology;;It was frequently persecuted by Melchites for its adherence to a Cyrilline Christology, and in 2001 Peter VII agreed to recognize its marriages and baptisms. The only pre-reformation church to use grape juice in communion, it is currently led by Shenouda III, and it traces its origin to the condemnation of Patriarch Dioscorus at the Council of Chalcedon. In communion with the Armenian Church and the other members of the Oriental Orthodox Communion, it granted autocephality to the Tawahedo Ethiopian church in 1959, and performs most of its liturgical rites in an extinct afro-asiatic language. For ten points identify this so-called monophysite church, centered in Alexandria, named for the dialect of Egyptian it uses in services.;;Coptic (Orthodox)
Literature;;In one of this author's stories, a woman dies of pneumonia and sees a vision of a gigantic parrot, and in another, the title character saves the Emperor of Occitania from the Caliph of Cordova and is taken up to heaven by Jesus posing as a leper. One of his works, inspired by a trip to Carthage, recounts the love of Matho for the title priestess. In one work, Frederic Moreau pines for the older Madame Arnoux but ultimately rejects her, and in this author's best-known novel the title character swallows arsenic after having affairs with Rodolphe and Léon. Famous for such works as Salammbo and A Simple Heart, for ten points, name this author of The Sentimental Education and Madame Bovary.;;(Gustave) Flaubert
Biology;;The serine protease that normally breaks down this compound can be permanently inactivated by di-isopropyl-phospho-fluoridate, or temporarily inhibited by neostigmine, which is used as a treatment for myasthenia gravis because it prolongs the actions of this compound.  It binds with two distinct classes of receptors – one that comes in five types that are coupled to G proteins, and another class of ionotropic receptors.  Those muscarinic receptors for this molecule are found at effector organs of the parasympathetic nervous system, while nicotinic receptors for it are found at all autonomic ganglia and at motor end plates of skeletal muscles.  Broken down by a namesake esterase, FTP name this neurotransmitter synthesized from its two namesake constituents, one of which includes coenzyme A.;;acetylcholine
World History;;This event was supposedly portended by the eruption of the Kuwae volcano, which caused a "magnificent red fire" in the sky. One source is a diary on it written by contemporary Nicolo Barbaro. The German engineer Johannes Grant was called in early, but the construction of the "Cutter of the Throat," or Rumeli Hisan, restricted naval support, and a causeway of greased logs across the Galata ended supply shipments from Genoa. The injury of Giovanni Giustiniani demoralized the defenders holding the Blachernae Wall, as did the use of the Basilic, a 27-foot long cannon which blasted at the Theodosian walls. FTP, identify this 1453 event in which Constantine XI died in battle and Mehmed II took control of the Byzantine capital.;;(siege|fall|conquest|taking|defeat){1}? (of) Constantinople
Literature;;A posthumous edition of this man’s writing was compiled by Beatus Rhenanus, who appended a life of him. He wrote an anonymous satire in which Pope Julius II attempts to storm Heaven with those killed in his wars, Julius Excluded. He discusses church abuses in his Colloquia, but considered his greatest work the compilation of a critical Greek New Testament, the basis of the Textus Recepticus. He is best known, though, for a satire in which the title figure is born in the "pagan Eden," the Fortunate Isles, and nursed by Drunkenness and Ignorance as the daughter of Youth and Plutus, a work written to amuse this man’s friend Thomas More. FTP, identify this Dutch humanist and author of In Praise of Folly.;;(Desiderius) Erasmus (of Rotterdam)
World History;;This man's first administration saw the passage of the Ecclesiastical Titles Act, and as home secretary under Lord Melbourne he was responsible for reducing the number of capital offenses. His 1845 stance in favor of total free trade forced his opponent Robert Peel to follow him, and as foreign secretary, he proposed mediating the American Civil War, only to be denied by the man whose recognition of Napoleon III had caused the collapse of this man's first ministry. He spoke in 1817 in opposition to the suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act, but it was as paymaster under Charles Grey, in which capacity he fought for the rights of English Dissenters and Irish Catholics, that he saw his greatest success. FTP, name this liberal Whig, the driving force behind the Reform Bill of 1832 and Prime Minister from 1846 to 1852 and again from 1865 to 1866.;;(John) Russell(,) ((1st|First){1}? (Earl of Russell)) (,) (Viscount Amberley of Amberley and Ardsalla)
Literature;;At one point in this work, an oath is sworn over a jug of Thracian wine after it is pointed out that sacrificing a sheep over a shield would be inappropriate.  The main character comes up with a metaphor of Greece as a piece of wool that needs to be spun into yarn, and when the Commissioner casts aspersions on this idea, Kleonike empties a chamber pot over him.  The chorus of old men tries to smoke out a group from their entrenched position at a site where Kinesias shows up with a neglected baby and an enlarged member.  Ending with an agreement aided by the naked figure Peace, FTP name this Aristophanes work in which the title character convinces Greek women to withhold sex until the Peloponnesian War is ended.;;Lysistrata
World History;;Artifacts bearing the name of Meskalamdug and Akalamdug were found in Early Dynastic II tombs in this city.  Its King Shulgi is considered the author of the first law code, and Messanepadda founded this city's first dynasty.  Its most prominent period, which followed Utu-Hegal's expulsion of the Gutians and preceded the Isin Larsa Period, was its third dynasty.  This site includes the remains of a temple to Nanna, and was the subject of excavations led by Sir Leonard Woolley.  FTP identify this city once located on the west side of the Euphrates River about 150 miles southeast of Babylon, famous for its well-preserved ziggurat and for being the hometown of Abraham.;;Ur
Noncomputational Math;;The work of Vaughan Jones has connected these objects to the Ising model of statistical mechanics, while Dehn's theorem demonstrates that if one of these objects' namesake group is isomorphic to the integers, then the object itself is isomorphic to a closed loop. Dowker notation can be used to enumerate prime ones, examples of which are the hyperbolic, torus, and satellite types. The determinants of these structures are given by evaluating the Alexander polynmial at negative one, and other invariants related to these objects are the Jones and HOMFLY polynomials. Manipulated by Reidemesiter moves and generalizable in three dimensions to links, for ten points, identify these mathematical objects, examples of which include the bend, trefoil, and pretzel varieties.;;knot(s)
Miscellaneous;;This man, who started two games for the Arizona Cardinals in 1994, hosted the 2006 Barefoot Open, so named because he prefers to play golf with bare feet. Defensive tackle Charles Martin became infamous for his dirty hit on this player, who first came to attention during the 1981 Holiday Bowl, when he led a miraculous comeback win over SMU while playing for BYU. In 1996, he won a rather ironic Super Bowl ring as a backup to Brett Favre, but he’s better remembered for throwing deep to Willie Gault and mooning a television station helicopter en route to another Super Bowl win. FTP, name this headband-wearing "punky QB" who got under the skin of Mike Ditka while leading the 1985 Chicago Bears to glory.;;(Jim) McMahon
Music;;One character in this work woos Giovanna’s charge while disguised as the poor student Walter Maldè.  That same character seduces the Countess Ceprano after summarizing his womanizing philosophy in the aria "Questa o quella".  The title character is tricked into helping break into his own house, where Borsa, Marullo and their companions succeed in carrying off the title character’s daughter to the Duke of Mantua.  Monterone’s curse on the title character is fulfilled when his daughter Gilda sacrifices herself to Sparafucile’s knife.  Featuring the aria "La donna è mobile," FTP name this Verdi opera about the titular hunchbacked jester.;;Rigoletto
World History;;The winning side in this battle took up position at the New Park, while a significant contingent of "camp-followers" stayed in secret reserve at Coxet Hill. Six years after the battle came the issuance of the Declaration of Arbroath, which was sent to Pope John XXII. It occurred after a pact between the brother of the winning side's king and Philip Mowbray, the local commander of a castle under siege, after which a force of Thomas Randolph was victorious in skirmish with Robert Clifford and Henry Beaumont. More famous for the heroic slaying of Henry de Bohun, the victors forced a hasty retreat by Edward II. FTP, name this 1314 battle which secured Scottish independence, a victory for Robert de Bruce.;;(Battle of) Bannockburn
Religion/Mythology;;In the tale of Hedinn and Hogni, this deity convinced Hedinn to crush Hogni's wife and kidnap his daughter, in order to fulfill another god's wish for an everlasting battle.  In the Hyndluljoth the giantess Hyndla recognizes the boar Hildesvini as this goddess’s human lover Ottar in disguise.  According to the Prose Edda, her palace Folkvangr is the destination of half of the slain warriors, and she would have had to marry the giant Blast if he had completed the walls of Asgard in time.  She had sex with four dwarves to obtain the necklace Brisingamen, and usually traveled in a chariot drawn by two cats.  FTP name this daughter of Njord, a Vanir goddess of love and fertility.;;Frey(j)a|Friia
Chemisry;;The Zincke form of this class of compounds results from the reaction of a pyridinium salt with 2,4-DNP and a primary amine. The presence of this functional group can be distinguished by an absorption band around 2720 to 2820 inverse centimeters in IR spectroscopy, or by a chemical shift of around 9-10 delta in proton NMR spectroscopy.  They undergo disproportionation in the Cannizzaro Reaction to yield acids and alcohols, and they can be detected by a brick red precipitate in Fehling’s Test or by the formation of a silver mirror on the wall of a test tube in the Tollens test. FTP, name this class of organic compounds defined by a terminal carbonyl group.;;aldehyde(s)
Literature;;One literary character with this first name recognizes her companion in a portrait of her ancestor, the Countess Millarca Karnstein.  Another character with this first name is the wife of the title character in Lord Byron's Beppo.  The object of the title vampire’s desires in le Fanu’s Carmilla shares this first name with a woman who grew up at Avilion with her sister Iris and drove her car off a cliff after World War II, as reported at the beginning of Atwood's The Blind Assassin.  One character of this name comes out of her shell after kissing Jim, the "gentleman caller," and another literary character of this name was the subject of the poetry collection called Song Book, or Il Canzoniere.  FTP give the name shared by Tom's sister in The Glass Menagerie and the object of Petrarch's affection.;;Laura
Miscellaneous;;One particularly far-fetched theory finds information about this discovery in the short story "Dayspring Mishandled". The team of Oakley, Clark, and Weiner shared credit for unmaking the truth about it, some 30 years after Raymond Dart insisted that his Taung skull was bona fide. Arthur Smith Woodward is generally thought innocent of this forgery, though his aid was enlisted by Charles Dawson, for whom this find was dubbed Eanthropus dawsoni. Actually consisting of a transported orangutan jawbone and some modern skull fragments, FTP, name this archaeological hoax discovered at the namesake village in Sussex.;;Piltdown (Man)
World History;;This city became a center of the final flourishing of the dynamic monarchianism heresy by granting harbor to Paul of Samosata.  One of its kings was given the title "corrector totius Orientis" after defeating Quietus and becoming a bulwark against the Sassanians. Later, its princes Herennianis and Timolaus were marched in a triumph after its destruction following the assassinations of Herodes and Odaenathus.  Its nominal then crown passed to Vaballathus and this city then seized Egypt before being defeated at Antioch and Emesa by the forces of Aurelian. For 10 points, name this seat of power for the regent Zenobia.;;Palmyra|Tudmor
Astronomy;;A localized region on this body has been termed "hilly and lineated," or "weird terrain".  That region of this body’s Discovery Quadrangle is hypothesized to have formed due to seismic waves generated by the formation of the antipodal feature.  Smooth plains, including Odin and Tir Planitiae, surround its large, multiring Caloris impact basin.  The 43 arc-second per century forward shift in its perihelion was an early observed confirmation of general relativity.  FTP, name this terrestrial planet visited by Mariner 10, the innermost of the solar system.;;Mercury
Art;;The Hollywood art satirist John Decker painted Charlie McCarthy as this painting’s subject. It brought its long-dead creator out of obscurity when it was purchased, under the title "Portrait of a Man" at an 1865 auction and is now found in the Wallace Collection. An inscription on the upper right notes that the anonymous subject is twenty-six years old; he wears ruffles on his wrists, attached to his black doublet inlaid with gold and colored lace. A giant collar, visible pink around the nose and curled hair brushed backwards also appear, along with an enormous, upward-pointing mustache and a goatee on this man wearing a gigantic black hat. For 10 points, identify this misnamed painting of a man who is merely smiling, a work by Franz Hals.;;(The) Laughing Cavalier
World History;;The official anthem of this organization proclaimed that its banner was more meaningful than death, and members carried daggers marked "blood and honor". In its waning days, it was lead by Arthur Axmann and its members were assigned to Kurt Meyer’s panzer division and the anti-aircraft batteries of Berlin. Originally directed by the Gauleiter of Vienna, Baldur von Schirach, it had a counterpart called the Bund Deutscher Mädel for females, while all males were required to join this group at age thirteen after graduating from the Deutsches Jungvolk. FTP, Prince Claus of the Netherlands and Pope Benedict XIV are noted alumni of this compulsory organization for teenagers under the Nazis.;;(the) Hitler Youth|Hitlerjugend
Literature;;He depicted a small-scale insurrection in The Crimson Island and wrote a play about the life of Moliére, A Cabal of Hypocrites. One of his was a reworking of his play The Day of the Turbins, and in one of his shorter works a testicular transplant turns Sharik into a monster named Polygraph Polygraphovich. In a novel by this author, the naked woman Hella and a shady clown named Koroviev-Faggot learn that "manuscripts don’t burn" while performing in the stage show of the magician Woland, in a story running parallel to an interpretation of Faust and the crucifixion of Jesus. For 10 points, name this author of Heart of a Dog and The Master and Margarita.;;(Mikhail) (Afanasyevich) Bulgakov
Religion/Mythology;;The mystical levels of this group are described in the Epistles of the Brethren of Purity and Loyal Friends. They believe in the return of Muhammad at-Tamm from occultation, and subgroups include the Bhoras and Mustalis in Bombay and the Nizaris, led by the Aga Khan. The Assassins were also members of this sect, which was taken up by Ubayd Allah to found the Fatimids. Also known as the Stoppers because they believed the line of imams stopped at their namesake, this group was formed in 765 CE during a dispute over the successor to Jafar al-Sadiq. FTP, name this Shia group known either by the name or the ordinal position of that imam, the major Shiite division which is smaller than the Twelvers.;;Ismaili(s)|Sevener(s)|Sab(')yah
United States History;;A "conference" by this name published the magazine The Truth and sponsored the preaching of Dwight Moody and the International Prophetic Conferences. That conference followed the Second-Coming theology of William Miller and was founded by James Inglis. Another organization with this name was co-founded at Mary Talbert’s house by William Trotter and lasted until the Springfield riots made a new, integrated organization necessary. Organized as a response to the overly compromising Atlanta Compromise of Booker T. Washington by W.E.B. DuBois and became the precursor to the NAACP. For 10 points, identify this "movement" named for the Northern New York landmark near which it was organized.;;Niagara
Chemistry;;The cyclic type of these compounds may undergo de-symmetrization in the Evans reaction, and the maleic type can be created by the oxidation of benzene. They may be symmetrical or mixed, which affects the complexity of their nomenclature, and their oxygen atom may be replaced by sulfur, in which case the molecule may be given the designation "sulfane". Consisting of two carbonyl groups with only an oxygen between them, the acetic type is a quite common reagent that is created when two molecules of acetic acid come together and kick off water. FTP, name this functional group with a name that literally means "without water".;;(acid) anhydride(s)
Music;;This advocate of Simon Sechter’s counterpoint system dedicated his fifth symphony to education minister Carl Stremayr.  This composer of the "Study Symphony" also created the "Symphony of Rests" and attempted a choral work entirely in Lydian mode, Os Justi.  A complete edition of his masses and symphonies was commissioned from Robert Haas.  His admirer Hans Richter conducted the premiers of his 8th symphony and his 4th symphony, whose third-movement Scherzo depicts a hunting scene.  FTP name this Austrian devotee of Wagner who penned a "Romantic" symphony.;;(Joseph) (Anton) Bruckner
Literature;;An anecdote in one of his books describes a scam to make Bolenciecwcz eligible for a football game by conducting an economics exam whose only question is "name one means of transportation".  An anecdote about getting the "lady on the bookcase" cartoon published is found in another of his memoirs.  His memoirs include The Years with Ross, which describes his time at The New Yorker, and My Life and Hard Times. The title character of one of his stories is able to shoot the Webley-Vickers 50.80 with both hands, boss around Doctor Renshaw and captain a hydroplane, but only in fantasies that enable escape from his henpecking wife. For 10 points, name this author of "The Secret Life of Walter Mitty".;;(James) (Grover) Thurber
Philosophy;;In the philosophy of science, James Brown declared that this "does not work" but John Norton denied that thought experiments can "transcend" it. Lynn Nelson attempted to establish a "feminist" version of it, and a Paul Feyeraband paper grouped it with explanation and reduction. Wilfrid Sellars paired it with "the philosophy of mind" in his magnum opus discussing the "myth of the given". William James wrote some "essays in [the] radical" type of it, a 2000 article by Stephen Neale found a "milestone" of it, and John Locke is usually regarded as the forefather of the British type of it. FTP, give the term for this branch of metaphysics based on sense perception and direct experience, often contrasted with rationalism.;;empiricism
Biology;;A model for its synthesis incorporates the tenets of catalytic cooperativity and rotational catalysis, which were formulated by Paul Boyer.  This molecule binds to Walker A and Walker B motifs, and it can be synthesized via the binding change mechanism.  During the formation of pyrimidines, it joins with ribose 5-phosphate to form PRPP.  It is synthesized in the F0F1 complex, and it is catalyzed by dynein for use in flagella.  It is produced under low-oxygen conditions by substrate-level phosphorylation, as in the last three reactions of glycolysis.  FTP name this energy-carrying molecule produced by the electron-transport chain.;;a(denosine) t(ri)p(hosphate)
Literature;;At the end of this work, the main character's music teacher notes that he "reminds me more and more of that unfriendly homosexual," and among the bedtime stories told to the main character is the plot of Romeo and Juliet. The last chapter of this novel consists of a letter from Berto, whom the main character's mother married because of his looks. The main character is intrigued by a version of the life of Johann Strauss, The Great Waltz, which he writes about in the essay "The Movie I Liked Best".  It is set in the town of Vallejos and centers on Jose Casals, nicknamed Toto, a cinema buff who particularly enjoys the movies of the title actress.  FTP, identify this first novel of Manuel Puig.;;Betrayed by Rita Hayworth|(La) traicion de Rita Hayworth
Religion/Myhtology;;While taking them through Hylaea, their captor impregnated a half-woman, half-snake with Scythes, the ancestor of the Scythians.  Some of them were dragged backwards into a cave by Cacus, an uncle of their original owner.  Menoetes first reported their theft to their owner, a son of Callirhöe and Chrysaor.  Their theft from Erytheia followed the deaths of the herdsman Eurytion and the two-headed dog Orthrus, and they were eventually sacrificed to Hera by Eurystheus.  Acquired between the quests for Hippolyte’s girdle and the apples of the Hesperides, FTP name these bovines belonging to a three-bodied giant.;;(the) (cattle|cows){1}? of Geryon
World History;;Upon ascending, this ruler established the Institute for Promotion of Exchange to handle exports. Initially serving under Edelmiro Farrell, he later employed a minister known as "the Wizard," Jose Lopez Rega, and a paramilitary "death squad" called Triple A, first developed during the massacre at Ezeiza. He dubbed his political platform "Justicialismo" or "the Third Way," and reformed the constitution which had been based on the writings of Juan Bautista Alberdi in 1949. Shortly after death, his country would be seized by Jorge Videla. Initially rising to power on the support of the descamisados, FTP, name this longtime president of Argentina whose wife died of cancer and was known as Evita.;;(Juan) Per(ó|o){1}?n
Miscellaneous;;He sings "I like tits for lunch, a big tits attack / I like tits for breakfast, eggs benedict" in a track from his 1983 album You Bought It, You Name It.  His debut solo album was 1972s Barnstorm, and other solo tracks include "Turn to Stone" and "A Life of Illusion".  His first experience in a group came with Dale Peters and Jim Fox in the James Gang.  On his fifth album But Seriously Folks, he sings "I go to parties sometimes until four, it’s hard to leave when you can’t find the door" on the track "Life’s Been Good".  FTP, name this classic rocker who had a wacky run for President in 1980, sang about the "Rocky Mountain Way," and continues to be the lead guitarist for the Eagles.;;(Joe|Joseph) (Fidler) Walsh
Literature;;He argued against the possibility of good literature being produced by temperate people in his poem "Wine".  After reading Alexander Pope’s Windsor Forest, he wrote a similar work dedicated to Pope entitled Rural Sports.  This author of the mock-epic The Fan was the primary librettist for Handel’s Acis and Galatea and wrote Trivia: Or, The Art of Walking the Streets of London. In one of his plays, Mrs. Trapes delivers embarrassing news and Mrs. Coaxer’s bribe proves futile, and the machinations of a man who fences stolen property and turns thieves in to the police fail to prevent either Lucy Lockit or Polly Peachum from pining for Macheath. For 10 points, name this author of The Beggar’s Opera.;;(John) Gay
Physics;;They drop in intensity in a Forbush decrease following a coronal mass ejection.  Their spectral index goes from about 2.7 to 3 at the so-called knee, and it is thought that above the knee they consist predominantly of heavy nuclei.  One model for their production is the Fermi acceleration mechanism operating in shocks in supernova remnants.  Their highest-energy sources are concentrated in the northern galactic latitudes around the Virgo supercluster.  First detected by Hess during a balloon ascent, FTP name these particles with energies up to 10^20 electron-volts which can originate in the Sun, the Milky Way, or from extra-galactic sources.;;cosmic ray(s)
World History;;This kingdom was partitioned under the Treaty of Tudillén, though its ruler Sancho the Wise was able to resist the agreement. Berengaria of this kingdom married the English king Richard I. One Joan of this kingdom was the mother of French kings Louis X, Philip V, and Charles IV, and another was the daughter of Charles the Bad. Founded early on by Iñigo Arista, a queen of this kingdom wrote the Heptameron. A later ruler from here was advised by the Duke de Sully and was the victor at the Battle of Coutras who assassinated the Duke of Guise, winning the War of the Three Henrys. FTP, name this long-independent state which was then absorbed into France by its native son, who became the French king Henry IV.;;(Kingdom of) Navarre|Pamplona
Psychology;;This man’s first published article discusses why the Paducah was renamed the Geula and recounts his experience on a South American fruit freighter which smuggled Jews into British Palestine. Inspired by that example in "Beds for Bananas," he formulated the "dilemma of Heinz," in which a man breaks into a pharmacy to steal a new drug in order to save his wife. His assistant Carol Gilligan wrote the 1982 book In A Different Voice¸ alleging that his major theory is biased towards "privileged white males". He identified "naive hedonism," "good boy" and "individual principles of conscience" as sub-stages in his major theory, which generally assigns children to "pre-conventional," "conventional," and "post-conventional" stages. FTP, name this American psychologist who created a hierarchy of moral development.;;(Lawrence) Kohlberg
Earth Science;;This process produced the Clipperton zone and still occurs on both sides of the Gorda Ridges in the Mendocino zone. It began during the Jurassic period, and, according to the Vine-Matthews hypothesis, works against Earth’s magnetic field by preserving remnants of previous magnetic polarities. The involvement of basaltic magma in this process is responsible for the characteristic "zebra skin" pattern of magnetism, and it creates the trenches which cause transform faults. The Benioff zones diverge from protrusions created by this process, which accounts for the lack of pre-Mesozoic minerals by constantly recycling material. For 10 points, name this process that occurs on the midocean ridge system and forms new crust.;;seafloor spreading