Chemistry;;One group of these compounds is based on hydroxamic acid and typically consists of non-ribosomal peptides, known as siderophores.  The namesake effect of these compounds describes their increased thermodynamic stability as a result of a more positive entropy, and molecules like DMSA can be used in their namesake therapy to treat certain poison victims. Seen biologically in porphyrins and chlorophyll, a common example of these is the amino acid EDTA. For 10 points, name these coordination compounds in which one or more polydentate ligands bind with and often sequester a central metal ion.;;chelate(s)|chelating agent
United States History;;He served in the O.S.S. as the head of the Africa Section in the Research and Analysis branch.. His doctoral dissertation compared rule of a mandated area, French Togoland, with rule of a colony, Dahomey, and near the end of his life, he negotiated a settlement between Great Britain, Iran, and Bahrain. With John P. Davis, this man formed the National Negro Congress, and his book A World View of Race was a study of race relations in the United States. He was also the chief researcher for Gunnar Myrdal’s book An American Dilemma. For 10 points name this American diplomat who came up with the Israel-Palestine partition plan.;;(Ralph) Bunche
Art;;His teacher Claude Gillot's interest in the commedia dell'arte and scenes d'opera were an important influence on this artist, whose depiction of Diana was an inspiration for Manet’s Dejeuner Sur l’herbe. A clown during intermission is the subject of his Gilles, and he painted a wounded soldier in convalescence in Les Fatigues de la guerre. His Gersaint signboard shows an art dealer's shop, though more typical works include Do You Want to Succeed with Women? and The Pleasures of Love. A rococo artist known for his fetes galantes, this is, for 10 points, what painter best known for his depiction of pilgrims traveling to a mythical island, Embarkation to Cythera.;;(Antoine) Watteau
Economics;;Robert Hall’s imposition of it on the permanent income theory implies that consumption is a random walk, and this idea is a building block for the theory of "tax smoothing". John Maynard Keynes provided an early version of this theory by discussing the "waves of optimism and pessimism" that determine economic activities, and an example of this theory in practice is the fact that stock prices depend in part on what prospective buyers and sellers believe the price will be in the future. First proposed by John Muth, for 10 points, name this economic assumption which requires accounting for market actors' knowledge of policy when attempting to influence the economy.;;rational expectations (theory)
Music;;A famous ostinato from this work’s first movement is quoted in the Intermezzo interotto of Bela Bartok’s Concerto for Orchestra.  The composer suggested employing a relief drummer for the 352 bar "little puppet-like tune" in the first movement, which features a C major theme later quoted in the tonic minor as a "requiem". The second movement begins with a fugue-like theme in the strings followed by a high variation on the theme played on an oboe.  A march, repeated twelve times in eleven minutes, follows a theme said to represent the Nazi incursion into Russia.  For 10 points, name this symphony by Dmitri Shostakovich named for a city.;;(Shostakovich) Symphony (No(.)|number|#){1}? (7|Seven){1}?|Leningrad Symphony
Noncomputational Math;;It is a special case of a conjecture that one half times the smallest integer less than the quantity seven plus the square root of 48 times the genus of an orientable space plus 1, close quantity, is equal to a certain number associated with the space. Originally known as Guthrie’s conjecture, a fallacious counter example was published as an April Fools day joke. This theorem showed that except in the case of the Klein bottle, the Heawood conjecture holds.  Originally solved by reducing the problem to 1,936 cases that were checked by computer, for 10 points, identify this theorem, which states that any map in a plane can be filled in with a certain number of colors.;;(The) (Four|4){1}?-Color (map) (Theorem)
Religion/Mythology;;Hippolytus referred to this man as "stump-fingered", and it has been speculated that he cut off his thumb to disqualify himself from Jewish priesthood. The Church in Egypt claims this man as its founder. The only reliable information on this man is in Philemon 24, in which he is mentioned as sending greetings to the Christians of Colossae, and the Apostolic Father Papias of Hierapolis stated that this man recorded the teachings of St. Peter. Identified as the man who fled naked at Jesus’ arrest, for 10 points, name this patron saint of Venice and traditional author of the second Synoptic Gospel.;;(Saint|St(.)) Mark (the Evangelist)
Literature;;This author created the honest locksmith Gabriel Varden and a man who is killed in a duel, John Chester. In one novel by this author, a misplaced five-pound note is found in one character's hat, necessitating the aid of a mysterious "Single Gentleman" in order to escape his sentence of transportation. The malevolent dwarf Quilp and rakish attorney Sampson Brass fail to help Kit Nubbles reach Little Nell before she dies in that book. In an unfinished novel by him, Jack Jasper and Neville Landless are suspected of murder. For 10 points, name this atuhor of The Old Curiosity Shop, Barnaby Rudge, and The Mystery of Edwin Drood, plus David Copperfield.;;(Charles) Dickens
Miscellaneous;;In one episode of this show, a man obnoxiously sings "Swing Low, Sweet Chariot" and claims he was persecuted for stealing Girl Scout cookies. In another episode from this past season, a boy known as LJ was kidnapped by a woman with the unlikely name of Susan B. Anthony. Its current storyline involves the search for five million dollars originally stolen by D.B. Cooper, and its pilot showed agents Hale and Kellerman attempting to shepherd the execution of a man convicted of killing the Vice President's brother. For 10 points, name this FOX show which started with Michael Scofield's plan to get Lincoln Burrows out of Fox River State Penitentiary.;;Prison Break
Geography;;Concerns regarding this nation’s Okavango Delta resulted in its neighbor's scuttling of plans to build a hydroelectric dam at Popavalle, and its border along the main channel of the Chobe River is in dispute. Although this country was the first African nation to experience a falling birthrate due to increased life expectancy, it suffers from a high AIDS rate, and it is bounded to the west and north by Namibia; Zambia and Zimbabwe to the northeast; and South Africa to the south. Formerly known as Bechuanaland and named for its predominant Setswana ethnic group, for 10 points, name this Southern African nation with capital at Gaborone.;;Botswana
Literature;;A novel by this writer is often paired with his brother Clifford’s Thorn Fruit, published in the same year, while his 1880 non-fiction work entitled The Science of English Verse reflects a strong interested in music, as in the tale of Lady Horn and other personified instruments, "The Symphony". This author of Tiger-Lilies wrote, "The Creeks overflow" and "a thousand rivulets run twixt the roots of the sod" in his "The Marshes of Glynn". For 10 points, name this Confederate veteran and Macon, Georgia native who made his living as a flautist but also claimed that he is "fain for to water the plain" in his poem "The Song of the Chattahoochee".;;(Sidney) Lanier
United States History;;Its first public meeting was held at Storer College, and it was formed at the Erie Beach Hotel. Its Declaration of Principles listed seven duties for its members to follow. Its charter members included Monroe Trotter, the founder of the Boston Guardian, and John Hope, the first president of Spellman College. Following the 1908 Springfield race riot and the publication of William English Walling’s article "Race War in the North," white liberals merged with this organization to found the NAACP. A reaction against Booker T. Washington and the Atlanta Compromise, for 10 points, name this movement led by W.E.B. DuBois that called for full equality for African-Americans.;;Niagara (Movement)
World History;;Phillip Kearny became the first American to win the French Legion d’honneur due to his actions at this battle, serving in General Louis Morris’ cavalry. Sixteen days after it, the Peace of Villafranco was signed. General Ludwig von Benedek’s vigorous delaying action here prevented the destruction of the losing army, whose commander Franz von Gyulai was recently fired. Emperor Franz Josef and Napoleon III were among the rulers who participated in this battle, which led to the annexation of Lombardy by Sardinia-Piedmont. For 10 points name this last battle of the Second War of Italian Independence, whose bloodshed inspired Henri Dunant to form the International Red Cross.;;(Battle of) Solferino
Philosophy;;He wrote The Axioms of Projective Geometry and The Axioms of Descriptive Geometry, and his study of symbolic reasoning's relation to algebra is discussed in his Treatise on Universal Algebra. He developed a complex technical structure called "the philosophy of the organism", and he believed that the universe consists entirely of becomings, discussing this view in Process and Reality. This author of Science and the Modern World and Adventures of Ideas collaborated with his Cambridge student on a three-volume work that failed to rigorously prove set theory. For 10 points, name this British philosopher who wrote Principia Mathematica with Bertrand Russell.;;(Alfred) (North) Whitehead
Physics;;One term in the mathematical expression of this law includes a partial derivative with respect to time of a polarization, but in a vacuum, that term simplifies to the product of permittivity and the partial time derivative of the electric field. The integral and differential forms of it can be related with the Kelvin-Stokes theorem. It would not be affected by the existence of magnetic monopoles, unlike some other equations named for the man who also added that displacement current term to this law, James Maxwell. For 10 points, name this law which states that the line integral of the magnetic field around a closed loop is equal to the permeability times the enclosed current.;;Ampere'(s) (Law)|Ampere-(Maxwell)'(s) (law)
Literature;;One character in this work is shown "how awful goodness is" after being caught "squat like a toad" near a woman's "organs of fancy". That character had earlier opened a palace built by Mulciber called Pandemonium and held a council including Belial and Mammon after floating on a burning lake for nine days. This poem's original ten books were revised to twelve, and an introductory note to its second edition states that it is written in "English heroic verse without rhyme". For 10 points, name this epic poem which begins: "Of Man’s first disobedience, and the fruit of/ that forbidden tree, whose mortal taste/ brought death into the world," written by John Milton.;;Paradise Lost
Art;;He sculpted a terra cotta work in which the title figure is breast-feeding another one in Charity with Four Children. One title character blows a conch shell while his father hovers over him in his Neptune and Triton, and the title figure pushes against Pluto's face in The Rape of Proserpina. Another work shows the three title figures fleeing Troy, while another found in the same location, the Borghese Gallery, depicts a youth readying to sling a rock. In another work, a hidden window in the Cornaro Chapel showers light down gold rods toward an angel holding an arrow. For 10 points, name this sculptor of the Fountain of Four Rivers and The Ecstasy of St. Theresa.;;(Gianlorenzo) Bernini
Literature;;In one of her novels, characters based on actual people include the alcoholic professor Wunsch and Dr. Howard Archie, and the novel opens in Moonstone, Colorado, where the mandolin player Spanish Johnny lives. A protagonist of this author is moved by a Julie Breton painting and has an epiphany at Panther Canyon. In addition to the story of aspiring opera star Thea Kronborg, this author wrote about Joseph Vaillaint's journey through the New Mexican desert with Jean Latour, and Carl Linstrum's love for Alexandra Bergson. For 10 points, name this writer of Song of the Lark, Death Comes For the Archbishop, and O Pioneers!.;;(Willa) Cather
Biology;;A derivative of this molecule serves as a cofactor for the methyl-malonyl-Coenzyme A mutase, and it is also needed for the action of the methyl-transferase that converts homocysteine to methionine. The inactivity of that enzyme leads to a thymine shortage, which is the cause of problems associated with deficiencies in this molecule. It can only be absorbed through cubulin receptors in the terminal ileum while bound to a product of parietal cells known as intrinsic factor. For 10 points, name this vitamin needed to prevent pernicious anemia, which is also called cyano-cobalamin thanks to its central cobalt atom.;;(Vitamin|coenzyme) B12;;Cyanocobalamin
World History;;Paintings created during it are found in the caves of Ajanta, and its sculpture is in the temples of Ellora. Its lands were divided into provinces known as desa or bhukti, and were governed by kumaramatyas. The reign of its third ruler was detailed in the writings of the Chinese monk Fa Hsien, and the Iron Pillar of New Delhi was erected during it. Its capital was Pataliputra, and one of its greatest rulers, Samudra, conquered Nepal and was known to be a musician. For 10 points, name this dynasty in power from 320 to 550 CE, a Northern Indian lineage that was founded by Chandra.;;Gupta (Dynasty)
Religion/Mythology;;One named Nomia fell in love with Daphnis and blinded him for his infidelity, and Helios mated with one named Aegle to produce the Charites. Ones assigned to Hades were called Avernales, and a group in Bithynia lured Hylas into either death or everlasting bliss. Their subclasses included Crinaeae, Pegaeae, Eleionomae, Potameides, and Limnades, and Melite of the Aegaeus River had a liaison with Heracles that produced Hyllus. Located in bodies of freshwater, they were the counterparts of the Nereids and Oceanids. For 10 points, name this other group of mythological Greek water nymphs.;;Naiad(s)
Religion/Mythology;;After using an early microscope to discover the "two germs," this man oversaw a three-step process which took four hundred years to produce yellow and red. His activities were exposed by the Mahdi in 1930, some millenia after this man and 59,999 of his followers were exiled by the King of Mecca to the island of Pelan in the Aegean. There, he used a process of "grafting" to selectively breed for evil over a 600-year period. The scripture Message to the Blackman in America by Wallace Fard describes this figure's corruption of the Original Man and creation of a race of devils. For 10 points, name this figure from Nation of Islam theology, the inventor of white people.;;(Doctor|Dr(.)) Yakub
Literature;;The protagonist of this novel expresses his tiredness of boiled potatoes while eating with his friend Joseph. Afterwards, he sees his fiancée with Sam Okoli, the Minister of State, before getting an interview for his eventual job with Mr. Green at the Public Service Commission. Later on, the protagonist’s grandmother plans to commit suicide if the protagonist marries the osu Clara, whom he had met while studying law in England, thanks to a scholarship from the Umuofia Progressive Union. Opening with Obi Okwonko’s trial, the novel eventually shows how he came to taking bribes. For 10 points, name this Chinua Achebe novel, a sequel to Things Fall Apart.;;No Longer at Ease
World History;;Reversing the Edict of Restitution, the terms of this agreement resulted in the sovereignty of the Helvetic Body, and the Ober, Elbe, and Weser being given to Sweden. France made away with three Lorraine bishoprics and certain rights in Alsace. In addition, the Holy Roman Empire could no longer raise taxes under this agreement, which renewed the terms stated in the Peace of Augsburg by allowing each German state to choose its own religion. Also allowing Calvinism, it was comprised of two treaties signed at Münster and Osnabrück. For 10 points, name this 1648 settlement which ended the Thirty Years War.;;(Treaty|Peace) (of) Westphalia
Physics;;In 2007, researchers at the International Space Station used this property to grow crystals in ways that counteract Earth’s gravity. Haberditzl's ABIS system and Pascal's constants describe a material's tendency toward this property, which MO theory predicts should occur in molecules with paired electrons. One of its best known consequences was initially thought to violate Earnshaw's Theorem, and it is described as a molecular version of Lenz's law. Exhibited strongly in pyrolitic graphite and bismuth, its perfect form is found in superconductors, and materials exhibiting it can be levitated. For 10 points, name this induced form of magnetism that opposes an applied magnetic field.;;Diamagnetism
World History;;One early victory for this man came against his grandfather at Echbatana, and this man’s general Gubaru conquered Opis, giving him control of a vast canal system. He suffered a draw in the Battle of Pteria against Croesus, but managed to catch up to him near Sardis and soundly defeated him at Thymbra. He promulgated the Edit of Restoration, which ended the Babylonian captivity of Jews. He was succeeded by Cambyses II after his death near the Syr Darya during a campaign towards Egypt. For 10 points, name this Achaemanid ruler and conqueror from Persia, whose namesake cylinder is one of the earliest charters of human rights.;;Cyrus (the Great|II|the Second|the Elder){1}?;;Cyrus
Geography;;The Menominee river and the St. Clair river form boundaries around this state, two principle rivers of which are the Au Sable and Cheboygan. The Porcupine Mountains contains the Lake of the Clouds in this state, which sees its East and Middle branches of the Escanaba river join in the town of Gwinn. Saginaw Bay separates its "Thumb" region, and the Straits of Mackinac separate its Upper and Lower portions. It is the only state consisting of two peninsulas and bounded by four of the five Great Lakes. For 10 points, name this state whose cities include Grand Rapids, East Lansing, Flint, and Detroit.;;Michigan
Music;;The manic sexual desires of the title nun are the subject of this composer’s opera Sancta Susanna, while Thorton Wilder collaborated with him on his tragicomedy about the Bayard family, The Long Christmas Dinner. His use of a non-diatonic system was detailed in The Craft of Musical Composition and applied in his piano piece Ludus Tonalis. The composer of a viola concerto whose title means "The Swan-Turner," he took a suggestion to write Symphonic Metamorphoses on Themes of Weber. For 10 points, name this German composer of the requiem When Lilacs Last in the Dooryard Bloom’d and an opera about the painter of the Isenheim altarpiece, Mathis der Maler.;;(Paul) Hindemith
Biology;;Goldbeter and Koshland expanded it in a 1983 paper to account for ultrasensitivity brought on by covalent modification, and the pigment depletion formula is one modification of it.  Savageau considered dimensionally restricted conditions, and a key step in its derivation was due to Briggs and Haldane.  An Eadie-Hofstee diagram uses it, though it is more famously the basis of the double reciprocal Lineweaver-Burke plot.  One of its namesake's eponymous constant used in it can be defined as the substrate concentration at which the reaction occurs at half of its maximum speed.  For 10 points, name this doubly eponymous equation that describes enzyme kinetics.;;Michaelis-Menten (equation )
Psychology;;With Wasserman, he created a Cluster School where all rules were made by democratic consent of the students, and James Rest developed the Defining Issues test as an extension of this man’s work. His most famous construct was criticized as phallocentric by Carol Gilligan in her In A Different Voice; that work was done after asking seventy boys in Chicago whether it would be allowable for a poor man to steal medication for his wife. He wrote of the pre-conventional, conventional, and post-conventional stages. For 10 points, name this psychologist who wrote The Philosophy of Moral Development.;;(Lawrence) Kohlberg
Miscellaneous;;After being drafted fifteenth overall, he was traded for Martin Murrsepp, Bubba Wells, and a draft pick. In 2000, he was the #2 scorer, behind Michael Meeks and ahead of Todd MacCulloch and Rowan Barrett, on an Olympic team which upset Russia and Yugoslavia. In 1993, he made six free throws in the final thirty-one seconds of a first-round NCAA game against second-seeded Arizona to lead his West Coast Conference champion Santa Clara team to victory. Now playing with Shawn Marion and Amare Stoudemire, he won the 2005 and 2006 MVP awards. For 10 points, name this Canadian point guard for the Phoenix Suns.;;(Steve) Nash
Literature;;In one of her works, a flat tire causes a character to announce, "Pass the butter to the victim," and Mrs. May is ultimately killed by an animal on the farm. In addition to "Greenleaf," this author wrote a short story in which a boy knocks over a woman and breaks her ankle, and his grandfather Mr. Head denies being related to avoid paying the medical bill. One of her novels is about the teenage preacher from Powderhead, Francis Marion Tarwater, while another features Enoch Emery's theft of "the new jesus" and the fake blind man Asa Hawks. For 10 points, name this writer of The Violent Bear It Away and "Good Country People," who created Hazel Motes in Wise Blood.;;(Flannery) O'Connor
Music;;The aria "Di provenza il mar" is sung by one character in this opera to comfort his son, whose love for the title character was first admitted to her by Gastoné de Letorières in Act I. Later, the title character’s new husband, the Baron Dauphol, becomes infuriated with the gambling successes of Giorgio Germont's son, who misunderstands the title character's warnings and storms off.  Earlier, the duet "Libiamo" is sung at the opening party by Alfredo and the object of his affection, the titular courtesan. For 10 points, name this opera in which Violetta eventually dies of consumption, a work by Giuseppe Verdi.;;(La) Traviata
United States History;;The last speaker here was Samuel Fielden. Carter Harrison joined the crowd for the time and left before it started. Following a trial which Joseph Gary presided over, Albert Parsons, George Engel, and others were hanged, and Louis Lingg committed suicide. The day before this event, one person was killed outside the McCormick Harvesting Compnay Plant. Governor John Peter Altgeld pardoned three of the men convicted in this event, and later continued a pro-union stance during the Pullman Strike. For 10 points, identify this incident of May 4, 1886 where someone threw a bomb into the crowd at a Chicago marketplace.;;Haymarket (Square) (Riot)
Religion/Mythology;;He killed the demon Puloman and married that figure’s daughter. He aborted Diti’s fetus and broke it into forty-nine parts, and each piece grew into the Maruts. He makes his home in Svarga, and in one story he learns that every previous holder of his name has been turned into an ant. After he is caught having an affair with Ahalya, Maharishi cursed him with vaginas all over his body. In preparation for a battle, he drank a huge amount of soma and destroyed ninety-nine different fortresses; he fought in order to restore water to the world. He rides on the back of the white elephant named Airavata, and he wields the thunderbolt Vajra. For 10 points, name this Vedic god of thunder.;;Indra
Biology;;This hormone's releasing factor is the human analog of bombesin, and activation of somatostatin-2 receptors on the cells that release this hormone can inhibit its release.  One form of this peptide acts upon the D cells of the antrum, and overproduction of this hormone leads to Zollinger-Ellison syndrome.  Usually secreted in the presence of calcium and amino acids, it binds to enterochromaffin-like cells and stimulates the release of histamine, and it also binds to chief cells to stimulate the release of pepsinogen.  For 10 points, name this digestive hormone secreted by G cells, which regulates the secretion of gastric acid in the stomach.;;Gastrin
Art;;William Priestly aided this man in his plans for the Resor house, and this architect also created what was then Canada's tallest building, the Toronto-Dominion Centre. His plans to build a home for a Chicago kidney specialist were preceded by the construction of a pavilion consisting of a raised terrace and eight cruciform columns for the Barcelona Exhibition. In addition to the Farnsworth House in Plano, he co-produced a skyscraper on Park Avenue for a distilling company and was the last director of the Bauhaus. For 10 points, name this German architect whose collaboration with Philip Johnson produced the Seagram building, known for the adage that "less is more".;;(Ludwig) Mies (van der) (Rohe)
World History;;His right-hand man was assassinated by a military conspiracy, and he helped organize the National Committee for the Rapid Realization of Independence. He was recruited through the Office of Strategic services by Preston Goodfellow, and his namesake line banned foreign fishing around Liancourt Rocks. He brutally put down a rebellion on Cheju island during his time in office. The April 19th movement ousted him and his wife Franziska Donner from power, and, like Sun Yat-Sen, he fled to Hawaii, he after being replaced by Yun Boseon. For 10 points, name this man who came to power in 1948 and opposed Kim Il Sung as the first president of South Korea.;;(Syngman) Rhee
Philosophy;;One member of this group outlined the distinction between "phronesis" and "techne" and criticized the dissolution of epistemology from science. This group included that author of Theory and Practice and Knowledge and Human Interests, who wrote The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere. It also included "On Borrowed Experience" about radio soap operas and The Arcades Project, respectively by Herta Hertog and Walter Benjamin. Leading members were the author of The Culture Industry, Theodor Adorno, and The Theory of Communicative Action, Jurgen Habermas. For 10 points, identify this neo-Marxist circle named for a German city.;;(The) Frankfurt (School)
Literature;;This work describes how the "Pansy at my feet" repeats certain questions. Its tenth stanza opens by asking "ye Birds, sing, sing a joyous song!", and it ends by thanking "the human heart by which we live,/Thanks to its tenderness, its joys, and fears". It opens with words from its author’s poem "My Heart Leaps Up," followed by describing a time "The earth, and every common sight,/To me did seem/Appareled in celestial light," and it goes on to describe how "the heavens laugh" with "ye blessed creatures" and the "Child among his new-born blisses". For 10 points, name this poem about "Recollections of Early Childhood," written by William Wordsworth.;;Ode(:) Intimations of Immortality (from Recollections of Early Childhood)
Literature;;The marriages of Laura and Flora end this author’s It is Better than It Was, while Cesar Ursino marries Flerida Colona in his It is Worse than It Was. This author wrote about Don Carlos and Juan competing for the love of Maria in The Fake Astrologer, while Julia turns out to be Eusebio’s sister in his The Devotion of the Cross. This author is better known for writing a play about Don Alvaro’s tape of Isabel, the daughter of title character Pedro Crespo, as well as a play which sees Rosauro married to Astolfo after Sigismundo becomes King of Poland. For 10 points, name this Golden Age Spanish dramatist who wrote The Mayor of Zalamea and Life is a Dream.;;(Pedro) Calder(ó|o){1}?n (de la Barca)
Physics;;The BBC recently introduced a codec for video transmission named for this man, who noted that several size ratios in the universe were of the same magnitude in his large numbers hypothesis. A representation of the Clifford algebra is expressed in his eponymous 4 by 4 matrices, and he expanded on the work of Poisson to account for second-class constraints in his eponymous brackets. His comb is a series of another function that he names, and his eponymous sea led to the prediction of a certain particle and grew from his relativistic version of the wave equation. For 10 points, name this man who predicted the positron and names a unit impulse delta function.;;(Paul) Dirac
Literature;;Religious themes became present in this author's later works as seen in the Catholic messages in The Wild Orchid. The title character of this author's third work leaves her fiancée, Helge Gran, and begins a relationship with his father before leaving for Rome and committing suicide in another. Those works, Gunnar's Daughter and Jenny, joined one about the murder of the fiancee of Olav called The Master of Hestviken, while the trilogy composed of Bridal Wreath, The Mistress of Husaby, and The Cross depicted the life of a fourteenth-century knight's daughter. For 10 points, name this Norwegian author of the Kristin Lavransdotter series.;;(Sigrid) Undset
World History;;While Henry Ireton’s cavalry charge from Mill Hill in this battle was repulsed, the opposing army attacked the baggage camp to search for loot. The question of, "Will you go upon your death"?, posed by Marmaduke Langdale, prevented reserves from fighting. While one side saw temporary after separating George Goring from the rest of his forces, others rode south to the siege at Oxford, leading to this battle. By the end, the losing infantry was surrounded, and Prince Rupert stayed to fight Lord Fairfax and the New Model Army while the king fled. For 10 points, name this 1645 battle which saw Oliver Cromwell defeat the army of Charles I in the English Civil War.;;(Battle of) Naseby
Religion/Mythology;;This religion has a namesake "Steele" in the city of Xi’an, indicating that it was accepted by the Emperor Taizong. Babai the Great resurrected a version of this heresy, while another notable proponent was Theodore of Antioch. The Assyrian church of the east continues to follow a version of this doctrine, which rejected the term "Theotokos" for Mary. Cyril of Alexandria violently opposed this heresy, and along with Manicheism, it was denounced at the Council of Chalcedon. For 10 points, name this heresy denounced at the Council of Ephesus which believed that Christ exists in two natures, named after an Archbishop of Constantinople.;;Nestorian(ism)
Noncomputational Math;;The iterated version of it was solved by Ernie Brickell in 1984 using a Cray-1, and a special case of it is used in the currently unbroken Chor-Rivest public key system. Its decision version was proved to be NP-complete by reducing the exact cover problem to it.  One special case of it is the decision version with the constraint that the cost equals the value, and is equivalent to asking whether there exists a subset of a set of integers which has a given sum. For 10 points, name this combinatorial optimization problem, whose simplest formulation gives a set of items, each with a different weight and value, and asks you to maximize the value while being able to fit them in a certain bag.;;Knapsack (problem )
Physics;;For a black hole, this quantity is calculated as Boltzmann's constant times the area divided by 4 times the square of the Planck length. The Tsallis variety of it relates it to non-extensivity, and the Shannon type is used in information theory. It can be calculated for a monatomic ideal gas in the Sackur-Tetrode equation, and it is the negative derivative with respect to temperature of Helmoltz Free Energy.  Its discontinuous nature in mixing was the subject of the Gibbs paradox, and its tendency to increase is the subject of the Second Law of Thermodynamics. For 10 points, name this quantity symbolized S, a measure of disorder.;;Entropy
United States History;;Two Airborne Divisions botched their initial orders in this mission, but nonetheless captured Saint-Mere-Eglise. To compensate for a lack of armor, one side's engineers here devised a plan to construct a Mulberry harbor by sinking transport ships at Arromanches, and used floating tanks, which the British dubbed "Hobart’s Funnies". After this battle, the British advance on the east ground to a halt outside of Caen, while American forces swung west from Utah and Omaha across the Cotentin Peninsula, cutting off the Germans in Cherbourg. For 10 points, name this Allied landing in northern France, which took place on June 6, 1944.;;D-Day|Operation Overlord|Battle of Normandy|Debarquement
Philosophy;;One of Gilles Deleuze’s dissertations was on this man’s "expressionism". He distinguished between false and fictitious ideas in his On the Improvement of the Understanding. In his earliest tract, he denied the mind-matter duality of Decartes and held that the existence of free will cannot be accounted for, while in a later work he advocated a historical reading of the Bible and accounted for miracles as moral fables, not natural events. His neutral monism and accused pantheism may have led to this author of Tractatus Theologico-Politicus being "excommunicatied" by the Dutch Jewish community. For 10 points, name this writer of Ethics.;;(Baruch) (de) Spinoza
Miscellaneous;;An important study on the economic role of this product was written by David Christy. A national quota for it was set by the 1934 Bankhead Act, and in 1814, Francis Lowell created the first factory for processing it, which helped take dominance of it away from Manchester and Birmingham. Samuel Slater memorized the blueprints for the first mill for it in America. The long staple length of the Mexican kind soon made this product the "King" of the American South. Its ascendancy was helped by the invention of a machine that separated its fiber from seedpods. For 10 points, name this crop, for which Eli Whitney made a namesake gin.;;cotton
Chemistry;;They can be formed by reacting ketones with hydrazoic acid in the Schmidt reaction, or from the Willgerodt Rearrangement by reacting an aryl alkyl ketone with an ammonium polysulfide. Cyclic ones are formed in the Beckmann rearrangement, and their hydrolysis is made more difficult due to contributions from a secondary resonance form. The Hoffman rearrangement converts a primary one of these into a primary amine with one fewer carbon atoms, and they are formed by reacting a carboxylic acid with an amine, as in protein synthesis.  For 10 points, name these compounds with a carbonyl group bonded to a nitrogen atom.;;amide
Literature;;Edmund White’s Hotel de Dream fictionalizes this author writing his lost novel about a male prostitute, supposedly titled Flowers of Asphalt. He described a man eating his own heart in the poem "In the Desert," from The Black Rider and Other Lines, and he began a short story with "None of them knew the color of the sky". His most famous character dies in a barn fire in "The Veteran," a sequel to a work where that character watched Jim Conklin die in the woods and only received the title mark by accident, from a fellow soldier. For 10 points, name this author of "The Open Boat" and a novel about teenage soldier Henry Fleming, The Red Badge of Courage.;;(Stephen) Crane
World History;;Horace Vernet painted this figure on his deathbed, while Antoine-Jean Gros’s paintings of him include one at Jaffa and one at the Arcole Bridge.  In one work by his most famous depicter, he stands in his signature pose as his candles burn out at dawn in his study, while in another the names of Charlemagne and Hannibal are carved  into a mountain beneath the hooves of his leaping horse.  If it were not for a mis-measurement of The Marriage at Cana, the painting of him placing a crown on his wife’s head would be the largest at the Louvre, whose central hall bears his name.  For 10 points, name this favorite subject of Jacques-Louis David, former Emperor of France.;;Napoleon (Bonaparte)|Bonaparte
Geography;;This region contains the Ngorongoro Highlands, which were once part of its namesake national park. The natrocarbonatite lava that erupts from this region’s volcano, Oldoinyo Lengai, northwest of the city of Arusha, is responsible for its lack of trees. The Grimeti River runs through this region’s center, while on its northern edge, the Mara River feeds the Maasai Mara Reservoir. These locations, as well as the Olduvai Gorge, are visited twice a year by two million wildebeests and zebras as a part of a long circular route. Lying beside the Great Rift Valley, for 10 points, name this plain of Tanzania and Kenya, home to a huge-ass migration.;;(the) Serengeti (Plain);;Tanzania
World History;;Among the early tribes that lived here were the Elmyians. It was the site of three namesake wars in the fifth and fourth centuries BCE, the last of which was between Agathocles and Hanno the Navigator, and under Roman rule it was briefly governed by the corrupt Gaius Verres. One of its notable Norman rulers was known as "Roger" of this place, and in the thirteenth century, it witnessed a revolt against Charles I and a massacre of Frenchmen that began just before Easter services. When he conquered this area, its Ferdinand I renamed his former holdings as the "Kingdom of the Two" of them. For 10 points, name this Greek-colonized Italian island, the birthplace of the Mafia.;;Sicily
Astronomy;;He anticipated Cantor’s later work with his paradox, which shows there are as many perfect square numbers as whole numbers.  He wrote a tract against Orazio Gassi that claimed comets were optical illusions, The Assayer, and proposed that the distance covered by an object accelerating at a constant rate was proportional to the square of time. One of his works recounts a discussion between Salviati, Sagredo, and Simplico, but fails to discuss the Tychonian system. For 10 points, identify this man whose Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems drew ire from the Church for its support of a heliocentric model of the universe, an early improver of and user of the telescope.;;Galileo (Galilei)|Galilei
Music;;A recent John Adams piece fictionally claims that his father knew this man.  His chamber works include From the Side Hill and The Other Side of Pioneering, while his Second Symphony ends with a chord nicknamed "the Bronx Cheer".  Central Park in the Dark was written as a response to the "cosmic drama" of a better-known piece dominated by woodwinds seeking "the invisible answer".  In addition to The Unanswered Question, he wrote a piano sonata with movements nicknamed for Emerson and Hawthorne, and the Alcotts.  For 10 points, name this eclectic American composer of The Concord Sonata and Three Places in New England.;;(Charles) Ives
World History;;In the Byzantine period, this city became renowned for its silk industry, and served as the capital for the Catalan Company. Thucydides has representatives from this city argue that they were not responsible for siding with the Persians because they were then ruled by a tyrant. They secured their hegemony over Greece when Epaminondas lead them to victory over the Sparta at Leuctra in 371 BCE. The most famous unit from this city, the Sacred Band, was destroyed by the Macedonians at Chaeronea. For 10 points, name this Boetian city which ruled Greece before the arrival of Alexander the Great and was the setting for the myths of Cadmus, Polyneices, and Oedipus.;;Thebes
Literature;;He adapted Grimms’ fairy tales into verse, set in his own country, in The Tale of the Fisherman and his Fish and The Tale of the Dead Princess and the Seven Warriors. In one of his romances, a hero rescues his lover from the evil magician Chernomor, while in an early novel, loosely based on his own ancestry, Peter the Great adopts a moor. A statue of Peter haunts a hero lost in the streets of Saint Petersburg in one of his poems. Also the author of a work where Lensky is shot in a duel by Tatiana’s lover, for 10 points, identify this author of The Bronze Horseman, Ruslan and Ludmila, and Eugene Onegin.;;(Alexander) Pushkin
Literature;;In Mamet's American Buffalo, Teach gripes about the stinginess of Gracie and a character of this name. A Wordsworth figure with this name "wanders forth with freedom bold" but goes made after the Youth deserts her. Lycidas commands "look homeward angel, and melt with" this word. One character of this name spends two hours upstairs with Joey without "going the whole hog" after finally meeting her husband Teddy’s family in The Homecoming, while another is Rabbit Angstrom’s first infidelity. The Old Testament character of this name follows Naomi to Israel and marries Boaz in a namesake book. For 10 points, name this great-grandmother of David.;;Ruth
Economics;;A Robert Samuelson article says that this man is a "single-bullet" theorist who ignores cultural factors in his attempt to explain why the same programs work in the West and fail elsewhere. His work has focused on the unmeasured "dead" part of the economy, which has no legally protected way to be invested. He advocates that title rights be given to small assets held by the poor in such books as The Other Path. This former president of the Copper Exporting Countries Organization now leads the Institute for Liberty and Democracy. For 10 points, name this Peruvian author of The Mystery of Capital, who shares his name with an explorer.;;(Hernando) de Soto
Miscellaneous;;One of its characters is killed when he doesn’t know the name of a farm. After success in Signal Hill, the killer  moves on to Little Boston, where he encounters trouble from William Bandy and the Church of the Third Revelation. The soundtrack is comprised of pieces by noted Estonian composer Arvo Part in this film, whose final scene shows adopted, deaf son H.W. leaving beforeEli Sunday is bludgeoned to death with a bowling pin by Daniel Plainview. Including a scene where a man shouts "I drink your milkshake!" and based on Upton Sinclair’s Oil!, name, for 10 points, this 2007 film starring Daniel Day-Lewis and directed by P.T. Anderson.;;There Will Be Blood
Religion/Mythology;;Narcissus gave one to Amenias to make him go away, while Aegeus left one of these and a pair of sandals for Theseus when he left his mother. Another one is made from a thread from the cloak of the Virgin Mary, a tooth of St. Peter, a hair of St. Denys, and a drop of St. Basil's blood. Freyr’s unnamed one can rain fire onto the world without any action on his part. Sigurd’s is named Gram, though the Nibelungenlied renames its Balmung and Wagner further renamed it Nothung. Another one is is returned by Bedyvere to the Lady of the Lake, and is usually considered distinct from the one in the stone. For 10 points, name these pointy weapons, which include Excalibur.;;sword(s)
Literature;;In one section of this work, Mr. Okeda catches the narrator having sex with Madame Miyagi while his daughter Makiko watches. In another, the reclusive novelist Silas Flannery is tempted to copy out Crime and Punishment word for word before being apprehended by a woman bearing a work from the no-longer-existent nation of Cimmoria, Outside the town of Malbork. That book had gotten caught up in another that began in a misty railway station. It ends in a library, where the two readers decide to enjoy the process of falling through ten connected novels. For 10 points, that happens in what 1979 meta-fiction novel by Italo Calvino?;;If on a winter’s night a traveler|Se una notte d’inverno un viaggiatore
World History;;In the second millennium CE, Randall Davidson was the longest-serving holder of this post, though Bertwald held it for nearly forty years in the seventh century. A third holder also served as Councilor of the Exchequer under Charles I and was infamous for his love of ceremony. Another one wrote a dialogue with Boso to explain why God became human in Cur Deus Homo, while another resisted the constitutions of Clarendon, leading to his inadvertent assassination. It is currently held by a man who made intemperate statements about Sharia law, Rowan Williams. For 10 points, name this post held by the second Saint Augustine, William Laud, and Thomas á Becket.;;Archbishop of Canterbury
Physics;;The lower-case version of this symbol can denote the ratio of heat capacity at constant pressure to that at constant temperature, the adiabatic index, while its upper-case version can denote a Christofel symbol or a namesake probability distribution governed by the parameters k and theta.  It represents a photon in a Feynman diagram, as well as the quotient of measured time over proper time in relativity equations, the Lorentz factor, and the nuclear emission that results from an annihilation.  For 10 points, name this Greek letter that names a function which is a generalization of the factorial and a ray that has a wavelength shorter than x-rays.;;gamma
Literature;;The narrator often notes that the owner of this work’s central locale was "born a Conflans, no less". In one of its subplots, a doctor raises Rousseau’s postulate of willing an old Mandarin to be killed to enrich oneself, in reference to the death of Monsieur Taillefer’s as part of a scheme by Jacques Collin. Its title character’s epitaph says that he was buried at the expense of two university students, despite being the father-in-law of the Count de Restaud and Baron de Nucingen; their cruelty keeps his daughters away from the Maison Vacquer boarding house, leaving him alone with Eugene Rastignac. For 10 points, name this entry in Balzac's The Human Comedy about a doting father.;;Pere Goriot|Old Goriot|Father Goriot
Biology;;These organisms may have evolved from Spriggina and Parvancorina, while those of the order Lichida may have had horns. Their earliest order is Redlichiida, which did not have the natant hypostome of the ensuing Ptychopariida and Harpetida types, and the Proetida were the longest-lasting.  Though the Agnostina were eyeless, other orders were among the first species to develop complex compound eyes.  Containing over 17,000 identified species, they came into existence during the Cambrian period but died off with most other marine species during the Permian-Triassic Extinction.  For 10 points, name these small arthropod fossils, named for their three-lobe structures.;;trilobite(s)
Art;;Many of the critical texts on this school were written by Reyner Banham.  Unintentional practitioners of this style include Sigurd Lerewentz and Oswald Mathias Ungers, while Stirling and Gowan abandoned the moniker for fear of losing business.  Many of the buildings at the Istituto Marchiondi Spagliardi were created by its main Italian proponent, Vittoriano Vigano.  A school at Hunstanton is one example of the "new" form of this style championed by Alison and Peter Smithson, who called it "an ethic, not an aesthetic.  For 10 points, name this school of architecture based in the barebones designs of Le Corbusier that takes its name from the French word for concrete.;;(New) Brutalism
Noncomputational Math;;This man’s "resolvent" is used to solve cubic equations, and his "spectrum," which ends at Freiman's constant, consists of his "numbers". One theory named for him states that if p is a prime number and f a polynomial of degree n, then the equation f of x = 0 mod p has at most n solutions between 0 and p. Another namesake theorem states that the size of a subgroup must divide that of any group containing it. The maximum and minimum values of a function subject to a geometric constraint can be found with his multipliers. For 10 points, identify this man who found the five spots in a two body system where a third body of negligible mass will be stationary, known as his "points".;;(Joseph)-(Louis) Lagrange
Sociology;;This sociologist posited that the origin of the self lies in the play and game stages of childhood. He also saw the self as a confluence of the "I," an innovative internal force, and the "me," the effects of other persons' responses on the subject’s actions. Impulse, perception, manipulation, and consummation are the four stages of "the act," the most basic unit of his social theory. His most famous theory held that the individual is a product of socially symbolic gestures. For 10 points, name this author of Mind, Self, and Society who influenced such people as Erving Goffman with his promotion of symbolic interactionism.;;(George) (Herbert) Mead
Literature;;One of his plays features the seductive Lorleen Mauthran and a magical black rooster known as The Mysterious Cock. This man's autobiography, written after he left his native country in 1926, was published in six parts including "Inishfallen Fare Thee Well" and "Rose and Crown," and was written in the voice of a fictional character named Johnny. He said that his "only humorless play" was the pro-Communist The Star Turns Red, and he also wrote about the Clitheroe family's involvement in an uprising and the deliberately-walking alcoholic Jack Boyle. For 10 points, name this Irish author of The Shadow of a Gunman, The Plough and the Stars, and Juno and the Paycock.;;(Sean) O'Casey|(John) Case
Chemistry;;The Sonogashira coupling uses a palladium catalyst to join one of these compounds to a vinyl halide.  Alkylated ones are formed in the Nicholas reaction, and other substituted ones can be formed in the Seyferth-Gilbert homologation.  In the Corey-Fuchs reaction, they are synthesized from aldehydes, while reacting them with dicyclohexyl borane can create aldehydes or ketones if their functional group is terminal. They can also be synthesized from dihalides by dehydro-halogenation, and they react with Lindlar’s catalyst to reduce to alkenes.  For 10 points, name this class of compounds defined by a triple bond between two carbon atoms.;;alkyne(s)
Religion/Mythology;;In Ovid’s Metamorphoses, Telethusa prays to this goddess to change the gender of her dauthger so that she could marry the maiden Ianthe. By creating a snake from a fellow god’s spit and mud, she was able to trick that god into giving her power over life and death. She was magically impregnated with a penis made out of gold and wax because her husband lost his real one when he was chopped into fourteen pieces. Like Hathor, she is sometimes depicted with a cow’s head, but is more often pictured with her son, Horus. For 10 points, name this Egyptian goddess, whose name means "woman of the throne," the wife of Osiris.;;Isis
World History;;His name in Sogdian was believed to mean "light". He was a favorite of Emperor Xuanzong’s concubine, Yang Guifei, who later adopted him as her son. Consequently, he was named governor of three frontier provinces and given an army of one hundred sixty thousand. However, after Li Linfu died, this man came into conflict with the new chancellor, Yang Guozhong. In response, he sacked the city of Luoyang and the following year, he created the so-called Yan dynasty after capturing Changan, the capital city of the Tang Dynasty. For 10 points, name this Turkic general who led a namesake rebellion in 756 CE which led to thirty-six million deaths.;;An Lushan
Music;;Bruce Broughton wrote a concerto for this instrument with Tommy Johnson in mind, and John Fletcher was the dedicatee of a concerto for this instrument composed by Edward Gregson.  It is featured as a soloist in the "Bydlo" movement of Pictures at an Exhibition, and near the end of his life, Vaughan Williams wrote an F minor concerto for it. A variety of it was invented for use in the Ring Cycle and is named for Wagner, and its first notable use in the orchestra saw it replace the ophicleide, itself a descendant of the serpent. For 10 points, name this cousin of the euphonium and basis for the sousaphone, the lowest-pitched member of the brass family.;;tuba
World History;;This gathering condemned the belief that the world had three ages corresponding with the three persons of the Trinity as proposed by Joachim of Flora. It also declared Constantinople’s primacy superior to all other patriarchies, but inferior to that of the Pope. In wake of the formation of the Franciscans, the creation of the Order of the Friars Preachers was discussed here, though this council later prohibited the establishment of new religious order to allay fears that the Church was becoming too diverse. The most important result of this meeting was establishing the doctrine of transubstantiation. For 10 points, name this 1215 council presided over by Innocent III at a palace.;;Fourth Lateran (Council);;Lateran (Council)
World History;;During his reign, this monarch pressured the Netherlands into recognizing Belgian independence and imposed repressive measures after a series of failed assassination attempts against him. He had fought at the battle of Valmy and Jemappes during the French Revolution and, with Dumouriez, defected to the Austrians as part of a plan to restore the constitution of 1791. The National Assembly chose him over Henry V, but in the face of a working-class insurrection, he abdicated the throne in favor of his grandson, ending the eighteen-year "July Monarchy". For 10 points, name this "King of the French," who ruled the country from 1830 to 1848.;;(King) Louis-Philippe
Geography;;Major cities in this country include Kankan and Labé, while the Iles de Los islands lie next to this country’s capital. The mountainous Fouta Djalon region, home of the Fula ethnic group, lies in the interior, and Mont Nimba  sits in the Nzékoré province in the southeastern part of this country. This country is roughly bisected by the Niger river, and it also contains the sources of the Gambia and the Senegal. Bordered by Sierra Leone and Liberia to the south, it has a similar name to its Portuguese-speaking neighbor to the west. For 10 points, name this West African country whose capital is at Conakry, not Bissau.;;Guinea-(Conakry)
Literature;;One author from this country wrote about how a retired business man becomes erotically enchanted with his daughter-in-law, a dancer. The Tattoer and Arrowroot were written by an author from this country, while another author from this place wrote The Spring Equinox and Beyond. Another author from this country wrote about a man who seeks revenge on women by marrying them and having flamboyant gay affairs in Forbidden Colors. The author of Some Prefer Nettles was from this country, as was the writer of "In a Grove". For 10 points, name this home country of the guy who wrote The Sea of Fertility, Yukio Mishima, and "Rashomon," Akutagawa Ryonosuke.;;Japan|Ni(h|pp){1}?on-(koku)
Miscellaneous;;One restaurant featured on this series is Klimy's, while another eatery on this show inspired the song "Big Yellow Joint". One character founded a namesake "Natural Goodtime Family-Band Solution," and dressed as the Mrs. Featherbottom. That character's daughter dated the four-years-running student body president. Another key character fathered a child by Eve Holt and had a ringtone of "The Final Countdown," which played during his magic "illusions". It features Buster, who slept with a his mother's rival, and George Michael, who dates devout Christian Ann Veal. For 10 points, name this show about the Bluth family that starred Jason Bateman and Jeffrey Tambor.;;Arrested Development
Biology;;Class III of this protein appears to aid in photo-adaptation in Drosophila, and class VI is found in the periticular necklace of sensory hair cells and is also the only of the 24 known classes directed towards the minus end of its support.  Class V is involved in vesicle transport and has a longer neck region than class II, which has alpha-helical coiled coils in its dimerized tails, as well as essential and regulatory light chains.  Binding and hydrolysis of ATP causes conformational changes to enact their main function. For 10 points, name these proteins that comprise the thick filaments of sarcomeres and provide the driving force for muscle contraction.;;myosin(s)
World History;;This duke of Sagan resigned from command after allowing Ernst von Mansfeld to escape from Dessau and later negotiated with Gábor Bethlen at Pozsony. His seat of power was in the city of Jistchin in northern Bohemia. At Eger, he was assassinated by men loyal to Ferdinand II, after it was discovered that he was secretly planning to make peace. Two years earlier, he had been routed by his rival Gustavus Adolphus at Lützen, and he was ultimately replaced by Graf von Tilly. For 10 points, name this flamboyant Catholic general of the Thirty Years War.;;(Albrecht) (Wenzel) (Eusebius) (von) Wallenstein
Art;;One of his works shows a water nymph in the lower right, holding a piece of music after lulling to sleep Rinaldo, who leans against a tree as Armida discovers him. His time in Italy resulted in portraits like Cardinal Bentivolo and George Gage, Looking at a Statuette, and he created a series of etchings and engravings depicting various colleagues known as his Iconography. At the court of the Earl of Arundel, he painted a portrait of Thomas Howard, and he executed 35 paintings of Queen Henrietta Maria, but is better known for portraits of her husband, including one ...in Hunting Dress. For 10 points, name this Flemish pupil of Rubens and portraitist of England's Charles I.;;(Anthony) van Dyck
Physics;;An important parameter of these objects can be measured with a four-point probe and slightly altered through planar weight disparity. One type is susceptible to a phenomenon known as stripes, and their behavior may be explained by particle undressing. Several "infinite layer" ones have recently been found to improve on YBCO, a prominent example of these materials whose behavior was modeled in Ginzburg-Landau theory. Copper oxides are ceramic examples of the "high temperature" kind, and their expulsion of magnetic fields is called the Meissner effect. For 10 points, name these materials which, below a critical temperature, have no electrical resistance.;;superconductor(s)
Literature;;In one of his poems, which makes frequent use of onomatopoeia, the narrator has a vision in which he encounters the witch-doctor Mumbo-Jumbo near the title location. In another one of this man’s works, the ghost of a former President haunts a small town, awaiting the day when a socialist "spirit-dawn/ Shall come". His most famous work is meant to be sung with instruments and repeats the phrase "Are you washed in the blood of the Lamb"? before Jesus greets the title character and his followers in Paradise. For 10 points, name this "Prairie Troubadour," an associate of Sandburg and Masters who wrote "The Congo" and "General William Booth Enters into Heaven".;;(Vachel) Lindsay
United States History;;One document submitted to this body predicted that "the torrent of panegyrists will roll our reputations" and promised to"disarm the parricide which points the dagger to our bosoms". The views of radical Bostonians were introduced to this meeting via the Suffolk Resolves, and it also promulgated a boycott via the Articles of Association. At this event, Joseph Galloway submitted the "Plan of Union," and it was led by Peyton Randolph. The delegates here also decided to meet again on May 10, 1775 if the colonists’ protest was not dealt with properly. For 10 points, name this 1774 meeting, which comprised the first legislative body of the Thirteen Colonies.;;First Continental Congress;;Continental Congress
Literature;;In a poem about this man, he sends a gift of one hundred horses through his lackey Minaya. He also cons the moneylender Raquel and sees his daughters abused by the Princes of Carrion before dying on Pentecost. A play about this man includes Chimene’s father, Gomez, losing a duel and King Ferdinand sending the title character on a raid. That play was faulted by Cardinal Richelieu for not demonstrating the three Unities. For 10 points, name this title character of a both a Pierre Corneille play and an anoymous eleventh-century Spanish epic.;;(El|Le) Cid|(Rodrigo) Diaz (de Vivar)
Music;;One of this composer's early successes was a setting of "Behold the Murmuring Sea," a poem by the same author who inspired his The Combat of Tancredi and Clorinda. An ascension of a patron led to the opera Licoris Who Feigned Madness, and he lost his wife around the time of writing an aria beginning "Let Me Die," the "Lamento D'Arriana". Another opera with libretto by Busenello drew heavily on events in Tacitus’ Annals, and in the Prologue of another opera, the Spirit of Music introduces the story of the title character, who is helped by Proserpina but fails his quest by looking backward. For 10 points, name this Italian composer of The Coronation of Poppea and L'Orfeo.;;(Claudio) Monteverdi
Philosophy;;His first major work, an attack on the notion of personal immortality, virtually ended this man’s academic career. Much later, he wrote Principles of the Philosophy of the Future, which marked the endpoint of his life’s development from pantheistic idealism to a concrete, anthropological approach to philosophy. Marx wrote a series of Theses about him, and Max Stirner claimed that this man’s most famous work betrayed his professed atheism. In that work, this man explains how a certain religion is man’s "outward projection of his inward nature". For 10 points, name this prominent Young Hegelian whose most famous work is The Essence of Christianity.;;(Ludwig) (Andreas) Feuerbach
Astronomy;;The namesake cliff in this region marks the point at which a large empty gap begins, and one class of objects found here, including Quaoar and Varuna, is known as the cubewanos. What is often called its largest object may actually lie in the Scattered Disk, while its second largest object is set to be explored by New Horizons. Generally considered the outer remnant of the proto-planetary disk, it is thought to be the source of objects such as Pholus and Chariklo, known as the centaurs, as well as short-period comets. For 10 points, name this ring of small objects that is home to Eris and Pluto, found beyond the orbit of Neptune.;;(Edgeworth)-Kuiper (belt|disk){1}?
Literature;;The French translation of this man's book on the legends of his native country so impressed Paul Valery that his laudatory letter was used as the book’s preface. His decade spent in Paris was later chronicled by fellow countryman Luis Aragon.  In 1933, he returned to his native country but saw one of his manuscripts suppressed by Jorge Ubico. He wrote a book in which the "Great Fleabag" is married to someone who is poisoned by the Machojons but comes back as a ghost to protect the forest, and another in which the title character breaks up the marriage of Camilla and Angel Face. For 10 points, name this Guatemalan author of Men of Maize and El Senor Presidente.;;(Miguel) (Angel) Asturias
Literature;;The speaker remembers "the sterile sands and the fields beyond", where he, as a young boy, leaves his bed and "wanders alone". This poem includes a conversation with a "bird that chanted to me", addressed as "sad brother". Originally titled "A Child's Reminiscence," this poem starts out with a recollection of the poet’s origins on the shores of Manhattan and involves hearing a bird’s "aria" as a "musical shuttle". When the speaker understands that he is to become a poet, "a thousand warbling echoes" rise within him, "never to die". For 10 points, name this poem that chronicles a dialogue with the sea and a mockingbird, written by Walt Whitman.;;Out of the Cradle Endlessly Rocking
Religion/Mythology;;According to Homer, Anteia, the queen of Argos, tried to seduce him, and after his fall from grace, he wandered the Aleian plain. He was the cousin of Melampus, and King Iobates was asked by his son-in-law to have this figure put to death, but his attempt was thwarted by the advice of the wisest man in Lycia. The son of Poseidon by Eurynome, he was told by Polyeidus to spend a night at one of Athena's altars, and when doing so he dreamed he was given a golden bridle. His fame went to his head, and when attempting to ride up Mount Olympus, he was bucked off. For 10 points, identify this tamer of Pegasus and slayer of the Chimera.;;Bellerophon
Chemistry;;These compounds can be formed in the McFadyen-Stevens reaction from the decomposition of acyl-sulfonyl-hydrazides, while asymmetric ones are formed in the Meyers synthesis from the hydrolysis of an oxazine. Reactions in which their defining functional group is introduced, such as the Sommelet reaction that uses water and hexamine, are known as formylation reactions. They can also be formed in the Rosemund reduction of an acid chloride or through oxidation of a primary alcohol. For 10 points, name these compounds detected via the formation of a silver mirror in the Tollens test, defined by the presence of a terminal carbonyl group.;;aldehyde(s)
World History;;He displaced one of his rivals by giving the Kanto domain to them, which precipitated that family's move away from the Chubu region. This man redefined class relationships based on kokudaka, or amount of agricultral production. He became so enraged at his nephew Hidetsugu that he killed thirty of Hidetsugu's female relatives, and he failed to get past Korea in an attempt to conquer China. In order to enforce an order that allowed only samurai to bear arms, this man started the Great Sword Hunt. For 10 points, name this successor of Oda Nobunaga who unified Japan before being succeeded by the namesake of a shogunate, Tokugawa Ieyasu.;;Hideyoshi (Toyotomi)|(Toyotomi) Hideyoshi
Literature;;This poem's third stanza begins "When, like committed linnets, I/ With shriller throat shall sing, The sweetness, mercy, majesty, And glories of my King" which shows the author's pro-royalist attitude. That stanza also demonstrates the setting of the poem, as "committed linnets" refers to pet birds. The rest of this poem, which first appeared along with a verse about "going to the wars" in To Lucasta, makes such statements as "When I lie tangled in her hair.../ The birds wanton in the air/ Know no such liberty". For 10 points, name this poem by Richard Lovelace, whose fourth stanza begins "Stone wall do not a prison make,/ Nor iron bars a cage;".;;To Althea(,) from Prison
Miscellaneous;;Fictional works by him include Gone Bamboo and The Bobby Gold Stories, about a ex-con who goes to work with a nightclub and restaurant owner. His book The Nasty Bits was dedicated to the Ramones and he has fed such musicians as Johnny Thunders, who was very uncomfortable in his restaurant. He once said that the most disgusting thing he has ever eaten was a Chicken McNugget, as he doesn't even know what it exactly was. In 2006, he had to be evacuated from Lebanon while shooting an episode of his TV show. For 10 points, identify this chef, a vocal critic of people on The Food Network who can't cook and host of the Travel Channel's No Reservations.;;(Anthony) Bourdain
Art;;This artist used pre-made letters known as "Letraset" to vary the surface of paintings like Sphinx—Portrait of Muriel Belcher, and he juxtaposed oil and pastel paints in his Study of the Human Body.  He began his "light" period with Van Gogh’s Painter on the Way to Tarascon, eschewing the darkness of works like Study of a Baboon.  Many of his paintings were based on photographs by Eadweard Muybridge.  The Furies are the title images of his triptych Three Figures at the Base of a Crucifixion, created shortly before a series of deconstructions of a famous portrait by Velasquez.  For 10 points, name this British artist known for his shocking depictions of Pope Innocent X.;;(Francis) Bacon
Geography;;One river of this name is found in Ontario and is the namesake of a series of Precambrian rocks that are similar to the Knife Lake Series and adjacent to the Keewatin Series. Tributaries of another river of this name form in the Morvan highlands, an extension of Massif Central. The "mascaret" is the phenomenon of tidal bore between the mouth of this river and the English Channel. Cities that lie on this river include Rouen and Troyes. It has two natural islands, Ile Saint-Louis and Ile de la Cite, both located where it passes through the largest city on its banks. For 10 points, identify this river which cuts through Paris.;;Seine (River)
World History;;Its fourth leader commanded a battle between it and a fleet under Thomas Dale and was killed during a siege by Mataram. Twelve crewmen were killed at Sidayu on one of its initial voyages, and its decline began with a 1741 defeat by Raja Marthanda Varma at the Battle of Colachel. It dissolved by 1800. The "Amboyna Massacre" saw ten Englishmen and ten Japanese arrested and executed for conspiring against it. Under Coen it expanded and changed its headquarters to Batavia. For 10 points, name this first multinational corporation in the world, also the first to issue stock, founded by chambers from Delft, Rotterdam, Amsterdam, and other cities for trading with Asia.;;(Dutch|United){1}? East India Company|Vereenigde Oost-indische Compagnie;;East India Company
Philosophy;;The introduction of this work states that there are a "certain number of essential ideas which dominate all our intellectual life...called categories of the understanding". Language is described in it as a "product of collective elaboration" containing terms expressing things "which we have never perceived". It says that festivals and ceremonies are regularly  fulfilling the need of strengthening and reaffirming one's bond to the sacred beings early man depended on. Its last section addresses "The Negative Cult and its Functions" and "Piacular Rites". For 10 points, the origins of totemic beliefs and the church are described in what last major work of Emile Durkheim?;;(The) Elementary Forms of (the) Religious Life
Astronomy;;It has been proposed to create a supercluster named for this star that would include the likes of Beta Crateris, Beta Eridani, and Beta Serpentis. Its annual heliacal rising matches the earth's solar year because it is found along the same arm of the Milky Way, and along with Procyon and Betelgeuse, it forms part of the Winter Triangle. Friedrich Bessel first discovered its wobble, which was confirmed by Clark to be the result of a companion to it that is now known to be a white dwarf, while its A star is a main sequence star of type A1V.  For 10 points, name this star system, the brightest in the night sky and a member of the constellation Canis Major, often called the "Dog Star".;;Sirius|Dog Star
Liter';;Minor characters in this work include Romola Martin and Adore Loomis, a neighborhood brat. The main character is described as man with a "whole set of personalities, one inside the other like a nest of Chinese boxes". One character paints an apocalyptic scene containing the middle-class Midwestern immigrants who "have come to California to die" and hosts a cockfight in his garage, and the painter of "The Burning of Los Angeles" gets into a fight over who will dance with Fay Greener. Following Todd Hackett and Homer Simpson, it labels its Hollywood setting "Caliphonia". For 10 points, name this novel by Nathanael West.;;(The) Day of the Locust
Music;;A controversial work on this theme added the confidante Laura and was composed by George Benda, while Berlioz, whose own opus 17 concerns this theme, considered the one by Daniel Steibelt to be the best of its kind.  Two vehement anti-Shostakovich editorials in Pravda prevented the performance in Russia of a ballet on this theme that features a notable part for tenor saxophone.  A work by Gottfried Keller provided the inspiration for one that contains the interlude "The Walk to the Paradise Garden" and is set in a village.  For 10 points, name this play that inspired an overture by Tchaikovsky and an opera by Gounod about two star-crossed lovers.;;Romeo and Juliet
Philosophy;;His last paper, Considerations on the Government of Poland, was completed, but never published. He writes about how men should rule publicly and women should rule men privately inone work, and another of his books says that man is corrupted by his want to be perfect. In addition to The New Heloise and Discourse on Inequality, he wrote about stealing from an employer and blaming the maid in his autobiography, Confessions. He also wrote about educating the titular boy, who marries Sophie, in Emile. For ten points, name this French writer who proposed obeying the "general will" because of man being everywhere in chains in his The Social Contract.;;(Jean)-(Jacques) Rousseau
Biology;;This molecule is found in high concentrations in the basal nucleus of Meynert. One class of receptors for it is antagonized by the likes of mamba toxin and gallamine and contains five different members based on the alpha subunit of their associated G proteins.  Another class of receptors for it is ionotropic and is targeted by auto-immune antibodies in myasthenia gravis. Its muscarinic receptors bind it at the end of parasympathetic nerves, while the nictonic receptors for this molecule, whose release is blocked by botulinum toxin, are found on muscle cells. For 10 points, name this neurotransmitter depleted in Alzheimer's disease, which is cleaved by its namesake –esterases.;;acetylcholine
World History;;This man’s first military campaign came against Aristobolus in Judea. Under command of his own troops at Forum Gallorum and Mutina, he lost decisive battles despite killing the two consuls he opposed. In 37 BCE, he returned to Judea and captured Jersualem, installing Herod the Great as king. His strife with Rome included an open distribution of territory among his children after conquering Armenia. It was because he gave a title to a child that was not his own, Caesarion, that his onetime confederate went to war against him. For 10 points, name this man who helped win the Battle of Philippi with Octavian and Lepidus, but was later defeated alongside Cleopatra.;;(Mark) Antony|(Marcus) Antonius
Miscellaneous;;A discussion of sex and pancakes in this work leads two characters to the Blue Ox motel.  Another character falsely laments the death of his wife Linda Cooks in a hotel restaurant, which he claims is "a Radisson, so it’s pretty good". A gunfight with Carl Showalter leads to the death of Wade, whom Jerry Lundegaard was attempting to scam out of one million dollars by having his wife kidnapped.  The protagonist later shoots Carl’s partner in the leg upon seeing him shoving Carl’s body into a wood chipper.  The trail of bodies left by Carl and Gaear Grimsrud involves pregnant deputy Marge Gunderson in, for 10 points, what Coen Brothers film, named for a city.;;Fargo
Literature;;George Bernard Shaw wrote that this character was "a besotted and disgusting old wretch", but of himself, he claims that he is "witty in not only myself, but the cause that wit is in other men". Harold Bloom calls him his author’s most original character. At one point, he hangs out with Bardolph and is threatened with a lawsuit by Justice Shallow. The hostess of Boar's Head believes that he has gone to "Arthur’s Bosom," while at another point he is called a "huge hill of flesh". He later tries to seduce Mistress Ford and Mistress Page. For 10 points, name this character from the two Henry IV plays who became the protagonist of The Merry Wives of Windsor.;;(Sir) (John) Falstaff
Physics;;The namesake suppression of this effect is designed to counteract the namesake edge, which is the highest energy at which false spectra are obtained due to incomplete detection.  A related effect can be broken down to include the Ostriker-Vishniac effect and has been used to observe dense galaxy clusters through perturbations of the CMB. That effect, the Sunyaev-Zel'dovich, is the inverse of this process, which has its differential cross section described by the Klein-Nishina formula and includes a constant known as its wavelength. For 10 points, name this effect in which the namesake shift describes the change in wavelength of a photon colliding with an electron.;;Compton (effect|scattering|shift)
World History;;These people once lost their independence following a loss at the Battle of Chernomen. Among the laws attributed to their greatest king is one forbidding the exhumation and staking of the deceased. The successors to the state of Raska, these people were ruled by the Nemanjic Dynasty and such kings as Dusan the Mighty, who promulgated the laws known as the Zakonik. An important defeat for this group involved the killing of Sultan Murad I and the death of their leader Lazar in 1389, at the Field of Blackbirds. For 10 points,  name this group of people whose namesake state is no longer in federation with Montenegro and is in danger of losing Kosovo as well.;;Serb(s|ia){1}?
Religion/Mythology;;This figure's daughter participates in the "stretching the cord" ritual and is responsible for tracking the regnal dates of kings He holds power over Renenet and Shai, or Fortune and Fate, and he is sometimes considered syncretized with a youthful moon god who has a cobra on his head, Khonsu. He questions the dead before Ma'at weighs the heart, and is sometimes associated with baboons. Worshipped at Hermopolis, he was responsible for writing and the moon. For 10 points, name this Egyptian god who became known to later Greeks as Hermes Trismegestus and had an ibis head.;;Thoth|Djehuty
Literature;;This quality is the namesake of a beggar who abuses Lazarillo de Tormes, and a Chester Himes title describes a man of this type "with a pistol". This sobriquet is given to a pianist named d'Arnault who appears in My Antonia, and this adjective is also used to describe Maurice Pervin, the title character of a D.H. Lawrence short story. People of this kind are described as "vaguely ridiculous" and asked "what do they seek in heaven" in a namesake poem from Les Fleurs du Mal. A poem about having this quality concludes "they also serve who only stand and wait". For 10 points, name this adjective which describes the man who wrote about "how my light is spent," John Milton.;;blind(ness)
Astronomy;;NGC 206 is the brightest area in this object, whose largest globular cluster is known as Mayal II or Globular One.  Ernst Hartwig observed the only supernova originating from here in 1885, and it appears to have a double nucleus and at least 14 satellites, including M110 and M32. Originally called the "little cloud" by al Sufi, it is found in its namesake constellation, which is itself near the Pegasus constellation.  Edwin Hubble used Cepheid variables to show definitively that it was not part of the Milky Way.  For 10 points, name this astronomical object, number 31 in Messier's catalogue, the nearest large spiral galaxy to the Milky Way.;;Andromeda (Galaxy);;M31 (Galaxy)
Art;;One member of this group designed the Allegonda villa at Katwik and the Café de Unie. The early works of Burgoyne Diller are often said to belong to this group, which also included the painter of Mechano-Dancer, Vilmos Huszár. A home constructed with its principles has a sub-dividable open space on the 2nd floor and a façade of protruding planes, designed by the man who did the Red and Blue Chair. With J.J.P. Oud and Bart van der Leck, Theo von Doesburg founded the journal of this group, whose work was exemplified by Rietveld's Schröder House and another artist's Broadway Boogie Woogie. For 10 points, name this Dutch art school including Piet Mondrian.;;De Stijl;;neoplasticism
Literature;;In a later essay reflecting on this work, its author described the Woodland Road Camp's use of loudspeakers under pillows and included such chapters as "The Arts of Selling" and "What Can Be Done"? One character in this novel ultimately becoms dissilusioned at the "orgyporgy," while another threatens to exile people to Iceland. The Arch-Community-Songster appears in this novel, which opens with a description of how to create clones in the Bokanovsky Process. In it, Lenina and Bernard journey to New Mexico to see John the Savage before a revolt against the use of soma causes Bernard to meet Mustapha Mond. For 10 points, name this Aldous Huxley novel.;;Brave New World
Religion/Mythology;;In one story, he slings a rock at a princess disguised as a swan, but saves her and gives her to his foster-son. After that princess is murdered, he kills the women responsible, and other murderous deeds include killing his own son by the warrior woman Aife, and killing a sorcerer who had earlier judged him the winner of Bricriu's challenge after offering his head. This son of Deichtire raided Forgall's castle to get his wife Emer and was originally named Setanta before killing a large dog. In another tale, his father Lugh gives him some aid in defeating the Morrigan and the army of Queen Maeve in "The Cattle Raid of Cooley". For 10 points, name this Irish hero from the Ulster Cycle.;;Cuchulainn|(C(ú|u)) Chulain(n|d){1}?Cuchulinn;;Setanta
Chemistry;;The phenyl type of these compounds can be reacted with a Lewis acid to form a hydroxy aryl ketone via the Fries rearrangement.  They can be made from Pinner salts and water, or in the Favorskii rearrangement by reacting an alpha-halo ketone with an alkoxide. Cyclic beta-keto ones are formed from a molecule with two of its defining functional groups in the Dieckmann cyclization, and the base-catalyzed hydrolysis of their namesake linkages, especially in fat, is known as saponification. For 10 points, name these often fruity smelling compounds formed in a process named for Fisher in which an alkyl group replaces the acidic hydrogen in carboxylic acids.;;ester(s)
World History;;One of his advisors was the younger brother of the Duke of Newcastle, whose choice as a godfather angered his own father and led him to establish residence at Leicester House. The firt Earl of Wilmington was denied a post by this man's wife Caroline, but later served as a figurehead to Lord Carteret, who pushed him into a military conflict that included his defeating the duc de Noailles at Dettingen, making him the last British monarch to lead trips in battle. His youngest surviving son, the Duke of Cumberland, beat down Bonnie Prince Charlie at Culloden Moor, and he died in the midst of the Seven Years' War. For 10 points, name this king who succeeded his father, George I.;;George (II|the Second){1}?;;George
Geography;;This mountain range is home to Sorteny National Park, found in the Ordino region. The Ordesa Valley leads to one of its highest peaks, Mount Perdu, which is obscured to one side by the Cirque of Gavarnie. A series of tall peaks runs from Carlit peak to Anie, though their highest point is found at Aneto in the Maladeta massif. On their western end, they meet up with the Cantabrian mountains, and they are traversed by the Roncevaux Pass and give rise to many tributaries of the Ebro River. For 10 points, name this chain bordered by regions such as Aquitaine and Aragon, which contains Andorra and marks the boundary between France and Spain.;;Pyrenees (Mountains)|Pirine(o|u){1}?s
World History;;His daughter, Enheduana, composed the earliest extant poetry written by a woman, and a treaty between this man’s grandson and the Elamite ruler Hita is the earliest extant Elamite document. He defeated Lugal Zaggisi of Umma in his early career, and he was succeeded by his sons Rimush and Manishtushu. One text claims his father was a gardener, while another text mentions that despite having a name which means "true king," he usurped the throne of Ur-Zababa of Kish. The grandfather of Naram-Sin, his empire was ended by an invasion of Gutian Barbarians. For 10 points, identify this founder of the Akkadian Empire.;;Sargon (I|the First|the Great){1}?|Sharru-K(i|i){1}?nu;;Sargon
Miscellaneous;;Larry Corcoran threw this club's first 3 no-hitters, and none of its players has thrown one since Milt Pappas. From 1929 to '38, this franchise won the pennant every 3 years, the last with help from Gabby Hartnett's "Homer in the Gloamin'". The single-season RBI record was set by Hack Wilson while playing for this team, which once included the combination Tinker to Evers to Chance. In the 1984 NLCS, mistakes by Leon Durham and Lee Smith knocked them out, while fan interference with a Marlins' foul ball led to their 2003 NLCS loss. For 10 points, name this team now led by Carlos Zambrano and Derek Lee, which last won the World Series in 1908.;;(Chicago) Cubs
Music;;This man’s second string quartet includes a soprano in its last two movements, and he wrote an Accompaniment to a Cinematographic Scene while trying to find work as a film composer. Unaware of Debussy’s opera, he wrote a tone poem on Pelleas and Melisande, and he composed a large setting of poems by Jens Peter Jacobsen, Gurreleide. This composer of A Survivor from Warsaw also wrote a string sextet about a woman’s revelation of infidelity and an unfinished opera based on Exodus. For 10 points, identify this composer of Moses und Aron, Transfigured Night, and Pierrot Lunaire, the leader of the Second Viennese School who developed the 12-tone scale.;;(Arnold) Schoenberg
Biology;;Two members of this family cause an infant disease also known as sixth disease, roseola. Another member of this family causes benign lymph node tumors in Castleman's disease, though it was first identified as the causative agent of blotchy lesions often found on the face of AIDS patients. Besides Kaposi's Sarcoma-associated, another member of its gamma subfamily causes Burkett's Lymphoma, while members of its alpha subfamily lie dormant in nerves between outbreaks. For 10 points, name this virus family including the Epstein-Barr virus and the chicken pox-causing Varicella zoster, whose types 1 and 2, or "simplex," cause cold sores and their namesake STD.;;Herpes(viridae)|Herpes (viruses)
Religion/Mythology;;At one point, this book's protagonist joins two sticks together to represent a reunited Israel, while earlier he is forbidden to mourn his wife after her sudden death. It is one of the few books of the Hebrew Bible to depict Ophanim, or Thrones, and its middle sections are largely concerned with oracles against Tyre and Pharaoh. Chapters 38 and 39 concern Gog and Magog, while its 47th chapter describes a stream flowing from the right side of the temple, whose description occupies its last nine chapters. Opening with a vision of God at the river Chebar, for 10 points, identify this penultimate book of the major prophets, which includes a scene in the valley of dry bones.;;(The) (Book of) Ezekiel
Literature;;One character in this novel takes a baboon to the opera and makes opportunistic use of proxy sperm to avoid paternity suits. The narrator meets an employee of "Islam Incorporated" and is told that homosexuality is a political crime after seeing the I.N.D.s created by Dr. Benway. The Factualist-Liquefactionist dispute is at the background of this book, in which the Rumpus Room serves such delicacies as "mugwump fluid" and the "Black Meat" of a giant centipede. It takes place mostly in a composite of Panama, New York, Louisiana, and Tangier called Interzone. For 10 points, name this tale of the addicted exterminator Bill Lee, written by William S. Burroughs.;;Naked Lunch
World History;;One ruler of this name succeeded his father Kresimir III and was succeeded by his son Petar Kresimir the Great, who expanded the medieval Croat state to its largest size. Another ruler of this name married Anna, the sister of Sigismund II, and led the Polish Commonwealth to victory at Pskov during the Livonian War. Yet another defeated his cousin Koppany after the death of his father Geza and was crowned king by Pope Sylvester II, while another fought The Anarchy against Empress Matilda after succeeding his uncle Henry I. For 10 points, give this name shared by the patron saint and first king of Hungary and the only British monarch from the House of Blois.;;Stephen (I|the First){1}?I;;Stjepan
Art;;In the lower left of this painting, a man in a hooded gray robe bows his head in front of a man in a hooded black robe with his right arm extended. In the lower right, a man in white partially obscures a priest while looking to the upper left, where St. Peter dangles his keys as he looks over the shoulder of Mary, who is below a white-shrouded Jesus and on one side of an opening in the clouds through which an angel flies holding a small spirit. In the center, the artist's son points at the golden sleeve of St. Stephen, who along with St. Augustine holds the title figure clad in black armor. For 10 points, name this work depicting the internment of a pious Spaniard, a work of El Greco.;;(The) Burial (of (the)) Count (of) Orgaz|(El) Entierro del Conde de Orgaz
Philosophy;;This man wrote that objects will triumph over subjects in Fatal Strategies, and he said the the counterpart to the bourgeois ideal of production is the aristocratic practice of seduction. This author of the memoirs Cool Memories. He said that a "transaesthetics," where art is everywhere, has already arrived in his The Transparency of Evil, and he analyzed the 9/11 attacks as a "spectacle" in his The Spirit of Terrorism. He also said that "the murder of reality" was the title subject of his book The Perfect Crime. For 10 points, name this critic who attacked the media construction of narratives in such books as The Gulf War Never Happened and Simulacra and Simulation.;;(Jean) Baudrillard
Physics;;In the nonlinear hyper version of this effect, otherwise forbidden silent modes are seen, and in another variant, its strength is increased by the excitation of plasmons in small metal particles.  The stimulated form of it can be used in silicon chips or fiber optics to create an eponymous kind of laser, and in biological applications of it, a 785 nanometer source is often used to minimize the competing effect of fluorescence.  Three lasers are used to gather information about the vibrational modes of chemical bonds susceptible to changes in polarizability in the coherent anti-Stokes variety of it. For 10 points, identify this type of inelastic scattering named for its Indian discoverer.;;Raman (scattering|effect|spectroscopy);;inelastic scattering
World History;;This event is represented by the second star on the flag of the area where it occurred, and Roswell Mason declared martial law and placed Philip Sheridan in charge in its aftermath. A deathbed confession by Louis Cohn indicated that a craps game may have been behind it, while a theory involving a comet is supported by a similar event occurring the same day in Peshtigo, Wisconsin. Michael Ahern admitted fabricating the cause of this event, which began on DeKoven Street and notably spared the Water Tower but destroyed the Palmer House. For 10 points, name this 1871 disaster that started at the O'Leary's place, a big conflagration in a Midwestern city.;;(The) (Great) Chicago Fire
Literature;;One character in this work says that men in undershirts are disgusting and that the word "absent" should be used in place of "dead;" she later tries to stab another character with a paper knife after explaining how she caused a man to shoot his face off in Switzerland. In its first scene, the editor of a pacifist newspaper asks for a toothbrush and is told that dark will never come and blinking is no longer possible. That character was shot on the way to Mexico, while another was a lesbian postal clerk and the third contracted pneumonia after drowing her child. For 10 points, name this play about Inez, Estelle, and Garcin which concludes that hell is other people, written by Jean-Paul Sartre.;;No Exit|Huis Clos
Literature;;This author wrote that "the hues of bliss more brightly glow/chastised by sabler tints of woe" in one poem, and he asked "Oh! Lyre divine, what daring Spirit/Wakes thee now"? in his "The Progress of Poesy". He also described "sorrow's piercing dart" in a poem which ends by noting that "where ignorance is bliss/tis folly to be wise". Another of his poems says that "pensive Selima reclined" and "purr's applause" before "she tumbled headlong in". For 10 points, name this author of "Ode on a Distant Prospect of Eton College" and "On a Favorite Cat, Drowned in a Tub of Gold Fishes," who wrote about "paths of glory" and "ignoble strife" in "Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard".;;(Thomas) Gray
World History;;This group's victory at the Battle of Lauffen restored Duke Ullrich to power, and a small faction of it defeated Eric II of Calenberg at the Battle of Drakenburg. The successor to a similar group formed at Torgau, it was first supported by Denmark, who then backed out via the Treaty of Speyer. The Treaty of Crepy eliminated French support of it. Their biggest military conflict began with Maurice of Saxony's war on John Frederick I, one of this group's founders along with Philip of Hesse. For 10 points, name this group subjected to the Augsburg Interim after their defeat by the Duke of Alba and Charles V at Mühlberg, a Protestant defense league established in 1531.;;Schmalkaldic League|Schmalkaldischer Bund
Literature;;He wrote a of knife-sharpener who charms a woman into giving him flowers so he can resell the flowerpot in "The Chrysanthemums," a story from his collection The Long Valley. His journey on the Western Flyer with Edward Ricketts was the basis for The Sea of Cortez, and one of his novels describes Mac and Jim Nolan's attempt to unionize fruit pickers. Another of his novels sees a main character shot after saying "Le's do it now" following the accidental death of Curley's wife. This author of In Dubious Battle and The Winter of Our Discontent described the Trask family in East of Eden. For 10 points, name this author of Cannery Row and The Grapes of Wrath.;;(John) Steinbeck
Music;;Charles Koechlin completed his Egyptian-themed ballet Khamma, and this composer spent thirty years vacillating over the incidental music for As You Like It. He used a woodwind solo based on an Indian elephant-charm and parodied Gounoud's "Soldier's Chorus" and Mendelssohn's "Wedding March" in a ballet written for children, The Box of Toys, and he also wrote the depiction of tennis, Jeux. Another piece, which depicts a nocturnal phenomenon, is part of his Suite Bergamesque. For 10 points, name this composer who used the sections about the "dialogue of the wind," "from dawn to noon" and "play of the waves" in his La Mer and also wrote "Clair de Lune".;;(Achille) (Claude) Debussy
Chemistry;;One equation used to calculate this quantity multiplies two terms with a sum of radii in their denominators, and is known as the Kapustinskii equation. A rough approximation of it can be found with a modified form of Coulomb's Law featuring a single distance, while a constant that is proportional to this quantity can be determined with the Evjen method or calculated by expanding cubes, and is named for Madelung.  Another method used to determine it ends with gaseous ions in the Born-Haber cycle. For 10 points, name this quantity, like internal energy symbolized U, defined as the amount of energy needed to completely ionize a solid compound.;;lattice energy
World History;;One holder of this office hired the Greek rascal Constantine Phaulkon as his prime minister, only to see Phaulkon intrigue with Louis XIV against him. In 1946, the person who held this position was found shot to death in his bed, with the killer still unknown. This title was reduced in official power by the Promoters Revolution, and another holder of this office wrote to James Buchanan to offer elephants for help in American agriculture. The current Chakri Dynasty member in this office has endorsed several military coups. For 10 points, name this post held since 1782 by nine people named Rama, who ruled the only continuously independent Southeast Asian country.;;King of (Thailand|Siam){1}?
Miscellaneous;;One of this band's songs states that "in loyalty to our kind, we cannot tolerate their obstruction". Their first hit ended by asking "Doesn't the sky look green today"? In addition to "The Ballad of You and Me and Pooneil" and "Crown of Creation," this band behind the albums After Bathing at Baxter's and Surrealistic Pillow demanded that you "go ask Alice when she's ten feet tall" and "feed your head" in a song about size-changing pills, "White Rabbit". For 10 points, name this group including Marty Balin and Grace Slick, which recorded "Somebody to Love" and was succeeded by such "spinoff" bands as Hot Tuna and a similarly named "Starship".;;(the) Jefferson Airplane
Literature;;Peter Barry compared this novel to a Henry James short story about the writer Henry St. George. One character often checks his watch on the final day of the main action, the same day that another man showed up with his hair cut like a priest. A character in this novel is accused of an unartistic "sealed play," and nearly forfeits because of a sick child. Based on the author's own experience reporting on a similar event for a newspaper, it chronicles a showdown which begins at the Koyokan Restaurant and takes 237 moves to complete. For 10 points, name this Yasunari Kawabata novel about Shusai, the titular player of a Japanese board game.;;(The) Master of Go|Meijin
Geography;;One of Europe's leading horse tracks, the Ippodromo del Gallopo, is found in this city, whose residents may relax at the manmade Lake Idroscalo near Linate airport. Suburbs such as Monza and Bollate and creeks such as the Lambro and the Nirone surround this city, whose slum is known as Brianza. This home to the International Sample Trade Fair contains the castle known as the Palazzo di Brera and the art gallery at the Pinacoteca di Brera, as well as the Pirelli Building on the Piazza della Repubblica. This capital of Lombardy is also home to La Scala. For 10 points, name this city near the Po River, a large urban area in northern Italy.;;Milan(o)
Noncomputational Math;;A consequence of it is the Boolean Prime Ideal Theorem, and Skolem used it to correct Lowenheim's Theorem on first-order models. It can be equated to one formulation of König’s theorem, which relates the cardinality of certain sums to products, and it is used to decompose a hollow unit sphere into two identical spheres in the proof of the Banach-Tarski paradox. Equivalent to saying a partially ordered set in which every chain is bounded has a maximal element, it is independent of Zermelo-Frankel set theory.  For 10 points, identify this equivalent to the well-ordering principle and Zorn’s Lemma, which states that one can pick an element from each of an infinite collection of sets.;;(The) A(xiom) ((o)f) C(hoice);;Zorn(')s Lemma|(the) well-ordering (principle)
Geography;;The right-wing historian Keith Windschuttle sparked controversy by alleging that this group's history is a "fabrication". One group of these people was deported by George Arthur and George Robinson in the 1830s, and they were also the victims of the Forest River Massacre. William Cooper founded a "league" for these people, which organized the Day of Mourning to counter nationalist holidays.  The Mabo decision overturned the "terra nullius" doctrine which said that they did not own land, and these practitioniers of "firestick farming" were also the victims of the "Stolen Generation". For 10 points, name these first inhabitants of such places as Victoria and Queensland.;;(Australian) Aborigin(e(s)|al(s))|indigenous Australians;;Tasmanian Aborigines
Music;;At one point in this work, a man refuses to return a borrowed telescope, while earlier, another character poses with a dove for a photo and asks "Can women have wishes"? It includes the much-mocked line "Pigeons on the grass, alas," and its scenery was painted by Maurice Grosser, to which Florine Stettheimer added cellophane for its premiere performance by the Friends and Enemies of Modern Music, an all-black troupe. It ends with the call-and-response couplet, "Last act…which is a fact". For 10 points, name this opera which parallels the Lost Generation of Paris and the sixteenth-century Spanish religious orders, written by Gertrude Stein and Virgil Thomson.;;Four Saints in Three Acts
Biology;;One condition affecting them can be diagnosed with a dexamethasone suppression test and results from the over-production of a molecule in its zonas fasciculata and reticularis. Another condition can be mimicked by eating too much licorice and affects their outermost zona glomerulosa. Besides Conn's and Cushing's syndromes, their inner-most portions can develop pheo-chromo-cytomas, which overproduce catecholamines. Plasma ion levels influence their production of aldosterone, while a namesake trophic hormone stimulates the production of cortisol in their cortex. For 10 points, name these glands whose medullas secrete their namesake hormone, also called epinephrine.;;adrenal (gland(s))
Literature;;One character in this play is asked "which of your hips has the most profound sciatica"? before declaring that she is "custom-shrunk". In addition to characters mentioned in passsing such as "Master Shooty" and "lusty Pudding," this play includes the servant Pompey, the bumbling policeman Elbow, and Mistress Overdone. Also appearing is the former fiancee Mariana, who secretly exchanges herself for the intended companion of a sexual rendezvous after Claudio puts Isabella in a vulnerable position. Ultimately, a gossipy friar is revealed as Duke Vincentio. For 10 points, name this Shakespeare play in which the hypocrite Angelo is appointed to reform the morals of Vienna.;;Measure for Measure
Religion/Mythology;;One prayer said on this occasion asks, "Repel the Red One in the nethermost shadow," while another says "we are not permitted to make use of them, but only to look at them". The school of Shammai taught that the central ritual of this holiday should be done in reverse of its usual order. An object inscribed with an acronym for "a great miracle happened there" is used during this holiday, which remembers the installation of a new altar following the expulsion of Antiochus IV, on the twenty-fifth day of Kislev, and the use of a single portion of olive oil for eight days. For 10 points, sufganiyot, latkes, and other fried foods might be eaten during what wintertime Jewish holiday?;;Hannukah
United States History;;One senator from this state led the Branchhead Boys, a faction which opposed the Shelby Dynasty. Earlier, groups led by Thomas Eastchurch and John Jenkins were the forces in one rebellion in what is now this state. In 1960, Franklin McCain and Ezell Blair were among the group in this state who went to a Woolworth's to conduct the first sit-in, and two hundred years earlier, an uprising in this state was defeated by the forces of Governor William Tyron at the Battle of Alamance. For 10 points, name this home to Culpeper's Rebellion and the Regulators, which was also bedeviled by Blackbeard and saw the Wright Brothers make their first powered flight.;;North Carolina
Physics;;One form of this quantity is modified by the principle of least coupling to include the product of charge and vector potential, and its operator can be defined in simple cases as the negative product of i, h bar, and the gradient.  In the relativistic four-vector of it, the first term is energy divided by the speed of light, and that form is also included in a generalization of the classical stress tensor. Noether's theorem relates the conservation of this quantity to translational invariance, and its time rate of change is related to force via Newton's Second Law. For 10 points, name this quantity that is conserved in collisions and calculated as the product of mass and velocity, symbolized p.;;(linear) momentum
Art;;One of his works shows a left-facing female with her hair in a bun looking downward and using a spoon for stirring. He was shown in his early job as a blinds-painter in a painting by Armand Guillaumin, and his son Lucien was part of Walter Sickert's Camden Town Group. He wears a black hat and coat, a long beard, and a confused expression in a late self-portrait. He presented his work under the name "Pupil of A. Melbye" for seven years, and he showed The Old Road to Ennery and Hoar Frost at the first Impressionist exhibition. For 10 points, name this creator of Peasant Girl Drinking Her Coffee, whose mentorship of other Impressionists led to his epithet "father".;;(Jacob) (Abraham) (Camille) Pissarro
Religion/Mythology;;In Shinto, a well on Fujiyama gaurded by Sengen bestowed this property.  One place where everyone had this quality forbade inhabitants from touching the soil of Ireland, lest they never return, and is ruled by Niamh in Celtic myth; that place, "Tir na Nog," is named for this property. A son of Olvaldi once caused the Norse gods to stop having this property by stealing Idunn's golden apples. This property was notably not given to a son of Laomedon who founded Susa in Ethiopia after running off with Eos. For 10 points, Tithonus turned into a cicada because he was granted eternal life, but not what useful complementary property?;;eternal youth
Economics;;One member of a group known by this name wrote Bengal Nights and The Forge and the Crucible, while the founder of that group explained his methods in The Comparative Study of Religions. In addition to the circle of Mircea Eliade and Joachim Wach, this name also denotes a group of anti-New Criticism literary scholars led by R.S. Crane. Ernest Burgess and Robert Park led a sociological group by this name, which also denotes the faculty of George Stigler and James Buchanan, who opposed the idea of market failure. For 10 points, give this common name which applies to a group of monetarist economists, such as Milton Friedman, who worked at a certain university.;;Chicago (School) (of Economics)
World History;;In response to the threat posed by this agreement, Lord Minto negotiated with Ranjit Singh at the Treaty of Amritsar, and Count Pozzo resigned his diplomatic post. It was a conseuqence of General Bennigsen's loss at Friedland, and this treaty allowed one party to conquer Finland and chip away at the Ottoman Empire. It also established both the Kingdom of Westphalia and the Grand Duchy of Warsaw while expanding the Continental System. For 10 points, name this 1807 sequence of agreements signed on a raft in the Nieman River by Alexander I of Russia and Napoleon.;;(Treaty of) Tilsit
Literature;;In one novel, this man's daughter is taught Bible stories and is horrified by the notion of beauty being a sin. This spurious father of Golden Bells appears in another work, where he is told of the infinite ways in which wood can be made into a chessboard after hearing of communication with strings in Ersilia, the size-changing Olinda, and Thekla, which is always being built. In a poem, this man orders the building of a "miracle of rare device" near a place "where Alph, the sacred river ran". For 10 points, name this ruler who appears in Italo Calvino's Invisible Cities, in a namesake opium-induced Samuel Taylor Coleridge poem, and in Donn Byrne's novel Messer Marco Polo.;;Kubla(i) (Khan)
Philosophy;;Daniel Stoljar argues against the "strong" conception of these things, while Joseph Levine's "Purple Haze" says that their possible existence is "the principal manifestation of the explanatory gap". Nigel Thomas used the example of discussing the smell of coffee to write of the "killer" of these entities, whose "Unimagined Preposterousness" was described by Daniel Dennett. They were assumed to be possible in "Armstrong on the Mind" by Thomas Nagel, and Robert Kirk has posited an example named Dan who methodically becomes one. For 10 points, name these creatures which would discredit the notion of qualia, or a unique non-physical experience of being human.;;(philosophical) zombie(s)|p-zombie(s)
World History;;He used his connection with detective Ned Broy to peruse police files on his organization and ordered the execution of the Cairo Gang, which sparked the Croke Park massacre. He was replaced by W.T. Cosgrave as provisional government head shortly after he agreed to an oath of allegiance. He had become prominent two years earlier when Arthur Griffith and Eamon de Valera were imprisoned, and later stated that he "signed his death-warrant" by agreeing to partition. For 10 points, name this intelligence director of the Irish Republican Army who negotiated for Irish independence, but whose concessions to the British led to his assassination.;;(Michael) Collins
Physics;;A kernel named for this behavior is used in the standard integral to create thermally averaged cross-sections. The non-classical form of this phenomenon is used by the Ives-Stilwell experiment and is known as the transverse form, while absorption resonances and spectral lines are given finite width due to this effect’s namesake broadening. The magnitude of the classic version of this effect is determined by the factor of v over quantity v plus or minus v s, where v s is the propagation speed and v is the observer-frame normal source speed. For 10 points, name this effect in which the frequency of waves is altered when the source is moving relative to the observer.;;Doppler (effect|shift)
Music;;This creator of octave-free teaching pieces known as Gyermekeknek is also responsible for the suite Out of Doors. One piece by this composer is best known for its andante second section, entitled "Through forest aroving, hey-yah!" In addition to Cantata profana, this composer created a piano piece with a movement called "From the Diary of a Fly," a pantomime similar to The Wooden Prince, and a work for Sacher in which a non-standard instrument draws the work to its A-major conclusion. For 10 points, name this composer of Mikrokosmos, The Miraculous Mandarin, and Music for Strings, Percussion & Celesta; a collector of Hungarian folk music.;;(B(é|e){1}?la) Bart(ó|o){1}?k
Miscellaneous;;Allegedly signed after Ed Barrow saw him throwing rocks across a river, this person was later made the subject of a Royal Rooters taunt which asked him why he hit so badly. This player put up a record six steals in the same series where, according to Ritter, he split an opposing outfielder’s lip with a tag during a steal attempt; that being the 1909 World Series in which his Pirates defeated the Tigers and Ty Cobb. The second member, after Cap Anson, of the three thousand-hit club, he won eight National League batting titles with Louisville and Pittsburgh. For For 10 points, name this Hall-of-Fame shortstop of German extraction who appears on T-206, a valuable baseball card.;;(Johannes) (Peter) (Honus) Wagner|(Hans) Wagner
Biology;;A mutation in this kind of sequence is responsible for the nondeletion form of beta-thalassemia, and one of these from the cytomegalovirus is commonly used in animal and cell culture studies because it is constitutively active. Footprinting has been used to determine which parts of them are bound to an enzyme that makes use of their -35 region and Pribnow box in prokaryotes, while in eukaryotes, a protein that then recruits its "associated factors" binds to the minor groove of their TATA box. For 10 points, name these sequences of DNA that can be silenced via hyper-methylation, which work in concert with enhancers and silencers to facilitate transcription.;;promoter(s)
Literature;;In one work by this man, a spendthrift and liar left penniless after her father’s death, Lizzie, is wed by Sir Florian. Another work by this author treats the owners of a titular estate, Lady and Lucius Mason. In addition to The Eustace Diamonds and Orley Farm, this author wrote about Charlotte Stanhope and Dr. Grantly, the archdeacon of the titular location, as well as Obadiah Slope, the chaplain, Mrs. and Bishop Proudie, Septimus Hardy, and Lady Glencora. For 10 points, identify this author of a series of novels taking place in Barsetshire county, Barchester Towers, a prolific nineteenth-century British novelist.;;(Anthony) Trollope
Geography;;Rising near the Kaline Hill, this body’s upper course is the reason for the flooding of the Barotse Floodplain. Dammed near where the Umniati joins it, this river’s other tributaries include the Kafue, Lungwebungu. Luangwa, and Shire. Notable falls on this river include Ngonye and Chavuma. Dams on it at Cabora Bassa and Karbia create major reservoir lakes. Overflow of the Okavango system runs off into this river’s system. Forming the northern border of the Caprivi Strip, this river touches Angola, Zambia, Namibia, Botswana, Zimbabwe, and Mozambique. For 10 points, name this river that contains Victoria Falls.;;(the) Zambezi (River)
United States History;;After resigning from the army, he served as minister to Mexico, and then as a member of the House from California until 1885. He first campaigned under George B. McClellan, chasing Robert E. Lee from West Virginia. Further victories under Grant at Iuka and Corinth earned him an independent command in Tennessee. He lost his sense of aggression after leading the Army of the Cumberland to a bloody stalemate at Stones River. Goaded by Lincoln, he advanced, only to be routed and become the only Union commander ever besieged. For 10 points, name this man who was replaced after losing to Bragg at Chickamauga and being chased back into Chattanooga.;;(William) (S(.)) Rosecrans
World History;;He began his career as the mayor of Stepney and was elected to Parliament from the constituency of Limehouse. He defeated Morrison and Greenwood in a party leadership election, and he later was the leader in creating the National Health Service and spearheaded the start of Britain’s atomic weapons program. One of two people who spent the entire war as a part of the War Cabinet, this participant in the Potsdam Conference won re-election in 1950. He also supervised the breakup of the British Empire and the beginning of the Cold War. For 10 points, name this Labour Prime Minister, the immediate successor to Winston Churchill.;;(Clement) (Richard) Attlee|(1st|First) (Earl) (Attlee) (of) Walthamstow|(Viscount) Prestwood
Philosophy;;Kimberly Cornish's The Jew of Linz claims that Hitler's anti-Semitism arose from an unpleasant childhood encounter with this man, and that he later secretly worked to recruit spies for the USSR. One of his works contains the "beetle-in-a-box" thought experiment and challenges the reader to define what a "game" is. Starting with a quote from Augustine's Confessions, that work by this author says, correctly, that meaning comes from use and argues against the possibility of a private language. Arguing against the formal view of language presented in an earlier work, that is his Philosophical Investigations. For 10 points, name this author of Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus.;;(Ludwig) Wittgenstein
Literature;;At one point in this work, a character is taken to a place under the command of John Thompson, Rira. After the town that serves as the setting of this novel regains its independence, Warui, Wambui, and Lieutenant Koiba prepare to unmask a traitor at a village festival. During the British occupation of Thabai, Karanja is promoted to village chief and impregnates the wife of one of the major characters. One character, Mugo, is a young farmer who betrays Kihika, which leads to his death. Another major character is taken to seven detention camps and is the husband of Mumbi. For 10 points, identify this novel about , Gikonyo, a prominent early work of Ngugi wa Thiong’o.;;(A) Grain of Wheat
Art;;The artist’s time as a douanier contributed to the unique characteristics of this work’s central figures, and it was intended as a tribute to Laval but refused by that town’s mayor. A realistic moon at the top-right of this work hangs in an otherwise clear sky over a series of low mountains in the background. One central figure stands on top of a small dune, in front of which is found a red vase carrying drinking water and a mandolin. Often cited as an example of Primitivism, its artist used dolls as the models for the woman in a multi-colored robe and the nearby lion. For 10 points, name this painting depicting a reposing traveling musician that was created by Henri Rousseau.;;(The) Sleeping Gypsy|(La) Boh(é|e){1}?mienne endormie
Noncomputaional Math;;This man names a line passing through a triangle's orthocenter, circumcenter, and centroid, while a cuboid with integer edges and face diagonals is known as his brick. A generalization of Kurrah's rule for finding amicable pairs is his rule, and his formula relates the number of vertices, edges, and faces in a convex polyhedron. His namesake method is used to solve initial value problems in ordinary differential equations, and his totient function is used in a generalization of Fermat’s Little Theorem. For 10 points, this is what namesake of a constant along with Mascheroni, a Swiss mathematician who is also the namesake of the base of the natural logarithm?;;(Leonhard) Euler
United States History;;Before this battle, one side landed at Tulagi to establish air and sea bases, losing only one destroyer and a few smaller ships. A circuitous route taken by the invading fleet invited a clash with the defenders. The day before, one side sank another destroyer and an oiler, while the other side sank the light carrier Shoho and a cruiser. It saved Port Moresby and Australia from the Japanese. For 10 points, identify this battle, which featured the crippling of the Shokaku, as well as the sinking of the Lexington and the crippling of the Yorktown near the Solomon Islands.;;(Battle of the) Coral Sea
Literature;;An emotional scene in this novel occurs when the protagonist mis-cuts a plug of tobacco, which causes her to be scolded by her husband. She talks back, and he hits her and refuses to talk to her. After that man dies, the woman leaves for Florida with a man who entertained her with checker games. At one point in this novel, the protagonist spends time "on de muck," picking beans. One character in this novel is infected with rabies by a dog, which causes him to attempt to shoot his wife. That wife was first married to Logan Killicks, who takes her from her home with Nanny, but later weds Tea Cake. For 10 points, identify this novel about Janie Stark, written by Zora Neale Hurston.;;Their Eyes Were Watching God
World History;;This event occurred primarily in the Sichuan region; about 50 years later, the related Nien arose in Shandong. The funds intended for the suppression of this rebellion were embezzled by Ho-shen, and soon after his removal, the prosecution began in earnest. The organization behind this insurgency originated in the 1200’s, and to motivate the populace, they promised the return of the Maitreya Buddha at the conclusion of their rebellion, which began to be crushed around 1799. For 10 points, identify this rebellion against the Qing dynasty, ended in 1804, which was symbolized by the flower used as a symbol by its backing religious sect.;;(the) White Lotus (Rebellion|Revolt)|Pai-lien chiao (Rebellion|Revolt)
Music;;This work’s text was strongly influenced by Gazzaniga’s Convitato di pietra, which appeared eleven years before it. One character sings "Ah, pity me, my lords" after being confused for the title character, in an incident that also leads Ottavio to sing "My Treasure" about his beloved Anna, whose father was killed at the beginning of Act I. The peasant Zerlina often has to pacify Masetto's anger at the title figure, while Donna Elvira is informed of the title character's exploits by Leporello in the "Catalogue" aria.  For 10 points, name this opera ending with the statue of Anna's father, the Commendatore, dragging the titular seducer to Hell, composed by Mozart.;;Don Giovanni
Religion/Mythology;;After conceiving the moon god with his consort, whom he was accused of raping, he fathered three gods to take the place of that moon god, Suen, in the underworld. Often depicted with a crown of horns, he holds the Tablets of Destiny which give him control over the affairs of man. According to one Sumerian myth, he separated the Earth from the sky and then created mankind by breaking the Earth with his hoe. In another myth, he attempted to rid the Earth of mankind by plague and ultimately a great flood, about which Enki warned mankind. For 10 points, identify this deity whose consort is Ninlil and who is the Sumerian god of air and wind.;;Enlil
Literature;;At the end of this work, one character becomes engaged to Hazel, who is thought to have been conceived when his supposed father was fighting the Mexican War, and one character suggests to Orin that he kill himself. Near the beginning of this work, after one character sends Captain Brant away, he sends her poison, which she gives to Ezra when he has a quarrel-induced heart attack. That character, Christine, is the mother of the woman who gets engaged to Peter, Lavinia.  For 10 points, identify this adaptation of the Orestia concerning the Mannon family, a trilogy by Eugene O’Neill which consists of Homecoming, The Hunted, and The Haunted.;;Mourning Becomes Electra;;(The) Haunted
Economics;;Arrow’s Impossibility Theorem may be strengthened by replacing the conditions of montonicity and citizen sovereignty with this. A similar theory by Kaldor and Hicks adds hypothetical compensation to this situation. One may graphically represent a set of situations that share this characteristic as an eponymous "frontier". It does not imply equity and, in an exchange-based economy, this state may be reached when competitive equilibrium is present. For 10 points, identify this important economic concept named after an Italian thinker who wrote Mind and Society; a concept which denotes an allocation to which no improvements can be made without marginal cost.;;Pareto (efficiency|optimality){1}?;;efficiency|optimality
Chemistry;;The Gatterman-Koch reaction adds carbonyl groups to derivatives of this molecule, which when substituted with a hydroxyl group can undergo the Pechmann condensation to synthesize coumarins. The ANRORC mechanism is used to describe certain types of nucleophilic substitutions in it, and reacting it with sodium and an alcohol in liquid ammonia will selectively reduce it in a reaction named for Birch. It readily undergoes the Lewis acid-catalyzed Friedel-Crafts acylation, and simple derivatives of it include aniline and toluene. For 10 points, identify this chemical compound with molecular formula C6H6, whose structure was elucidated by Kekulé.;;benzene;;C6-H6
Literature;;Critic Gary Smith has suggested that the final six words of this poem refer to a rape and to an Elizabethan euphemism for sex. This poem first appeared in a collection whose title poem refers to an "old yellow pair" who use "tin flatware," The Bean Eaters. Its author said that it was inspired by people she saw one day who seemed to be saying "Kilroy is here" and that, when reading it aloud, the first word of every sentence is to be spoken in a soft voice. It takes place at the Golden Shovel, a pool hall, where the speakers "lurk late" and "sing sin". For 10 points, "we Jazz June," "we left school," and "we die soon" in what poem by Gwendolyn Brooks?;;We Real Cool
