Pop Culture;;On April 3, 2006, Don Jantzen of KTBZ-FM played this song continuously for three hours.  The title figure is believed to be the "teenage bride with a baby inside" mentioned in a 2000 single and was described as "singing songs [...] beneath the marquee of her soul" in a 2002 hit, while in this song she's the daughter of a cop and a hippie from Mississippi who becomes a bank robber.  Allegedly plagiarized from "Mary Jane's Last Dance" by Tom Petty, the music video features the band dressed like different eras from rock history.  With a chorus calling for the title character to "rest in peace" and "show your teeth" before saying, "She's my priestess, I'm your priest", FTP, name this first single off of Stadium Arcadium, a hit for the Red Hot Chili Peppers.;;Dani California
Pop Culture;;He started as an accountant but didn't have the temperament for it, as shown by his motto, "That's close enough".  He won the Best New Artist Grammy for his stand-up comedy album that debuted at #1, The Button Down Mind of [BLANK].  Film roles include Major Major in Catch-22 and Buddy's "father" in Elf, and during the 2006 Emmys, it was said that he was placed in a box with exactly three hours worth of air.  His TV work includes a recent turn on Desperate Housewives as Morty Flickman and four eponymous series, one of which features him as a psychologist and another that was revealed in the last episode to have all been a dream.  FTP, name this low-key comedian who played Dick Loudon and Robert Hartley.;;(Bob) Newhart
Pop Culture;;Born in 1947, he and his most frequent collaborator wrote the soundtrack for the 1971 film Friends, and he performed at John Lennon's last live show after being featured on "Whatever Gets You Thru the Night".  His 2006 album, The Captain and the Kid is a sequel to his 1975 concept album, Captain Fantastic and the Brown Dirt Cowboy, which featured "Someone Saved My Life Tonight".  Still, he can't match the success of his string of ’70s hits or a song he released twice, once for Marilyn Monroe and once for Princess Diana.  FTP, name this flamboyant pianist and Bernie Taupin collaborator responsible for "Goodbye Yellow Brick Road", "Crocodile Rock", "Tiny Dancer", "Rocket Man", and "Your Song".;;(Elton) John|(Reginald) (Kenneth) Dwight
Pop Culture;;THE NAME'S THE SAME.  Monique Cooper in the Bad News Bears remake.  Victoria Davis in Welcome to the Dollhouse.  Alexis Dziena in Broken Flowers, whose mother was played by Sharon Stone.  Not actually Alyssa Milano in a 1993 made-for-TV movie, though the subtitle refers to her as the "Long Island" one.  Dominique Swain and Sue Lyon in, respectively, a 1997 made-for-TV movie and a 1962 Stanely Kubrick film telling the same story and which featured Jeremy Irons and James Mason as Humbert Humbert.  FTP, give this name, most associated with a nymphette created by Vladimir Nabokov.;;Lolita
Pop Culture;;Charles A. Wheeler is the earliest to patent ideas for one of these devices, though it was never built.  The modern design combines innovations from Jesse W. Reno and Charles Seeberger and won first prize when it was unveiled at the Paris 1900 Exposition Universelle.  Four of the five longest in the Western Hemisphere are at stops on the Washington Metro, while the fifth is at Porter Square on the Boston T.  In Mallrats, Brodie is harshly critical of parents who don't teach their children to fear and respect them, while Mitch Hedberg liked them because they could supposedly never break.  Originally manufactured by the Otis Elevator Company, FTP name these moving staircases.;;escalator(s)
Pop Culture;;In July 2005, the Royal Bank of Scotland printed over two million £5 notes with his face.  He won the Amateur Championship in 1959 and 1961, while his three tour wins in 1962 included the Portland Open Invitational and the Seattle World's Fair Open Invitational.  On the Champions Tour, he has 10 wins, including 4 wins in The Tradition, though none since 1996.  A practitioner of the "power fade", he was the first player to win all four major tournaments more than once, and ended his career with a record 18 victories in the majors.  Nicknamed "The Golden Bear", FTP name this golfer, a member of the "Big Three" with Gary Player and Arnold Palmer.;;(Jack) (William) Nicklaus
Pop Culture;;The title character was played by three actors, including Gabriel Pimental and Linden Porco.  Percy P and Calvin Sims were offered $100,000 to steal the Queen Diamond, but the heist went bad.  Concurrently, Vanessa Edwards was recently promoted to Vice President at her advertising firm, so she's less enthusiastic than Darryl to become a parent.  John Witherspoon plays Pops, the only character suspicious of the bundle of joy Vanessa and Darryl soon discover.  Name, FTP, this summer 2006 film that featured Marlon Wayans as a midget criminal.;;Little Man
Pop Culture;;He first gained power by killing Don Rigoletto, and while temporarily deposed he moved to Japan to start a spice business.  He lost his empire again after he was confronted by one of his employees, Samuel Silke, and his son Richard.  Modeled after Sydney Greenstreet's character in The Maltese Falcon, he's frequently seen with a cigar and a diamond-studded cane which sometimes contains a powerful laser.  Notably employing Bullseye and Elektra and gaining his greatest prominence during the early eighties’ issues of Daredevil, FTP name this supervillain, real name Wilson Fisk, a businessman/mafia leader in Marvel Comics.;;(The) Kingpin
Pop Culture;;She was first introduced in the episode where one character installs fake wood wallpaper and another buys a painting of triangles, and she once met Olympia Dukakis after a play.  She re-appeared in "The Foundation", where she reunited with a former lover but left when he told her that the end of his engagement was completely mutual.  Her name's not Aretha, Celeste, Bovary, Loleola, or Gipple; it's actually Delores, which Jerry shouts at her on the street.  FTP, name this woman from Seinfeld whose name rhymes with a female body part.;;Mulva
Pop Culture;;It took ten seasons for them to post a winning record, and their only playoff appearance came in 1981, when they beat the Phillies, but a Rick Monday homer off of Steve Rogers in the ninth cost them game five of the NLCS.  They had the best record in baseball at the end of the strike-shortened 1994 season on the strength of players such as Larry Walker and Marquis Grissom, but the decade was rough, and even players such as Orlando Cabrera and Vladimir Guerrero weren't enough to keep them from being threatened with contraction.  Playing their games in Olympic Stadium, FTP, name this team, which in 2005 became the Washington Nationals.;;Montreal|Expos|(Les) Expos de Montréal
Pop Culture;;Its new showrunner, David Rosenthal, was briefly committed by his father after writing a misogynistic play about his desire to sleep with Heidi Klum.  Rosenthal is replacing show creator Amy Sherman-Palladino, who last season helped craft such plotlines as the town's troubadour being hired to open for Neil Young, Zach and Lane's engagement and wedding, Logan's injury in a Life and Death Brigade stunt, and Luke's discovery that he has a twelve-year-old daughter.  FTP, name this CW show about the mother-daughter team of Rory and Lorelei.;;Gilmore Girls
Pop Culture;;Tracks 6 and 11 of this album are untitled instrumental excerpts from "The Swamp Song", which was released as the most famous single's B-side.  The first track borrows from Gary Glitter's "Hello, Hello, I'm Back Again", while that most famous single takes its name from a George Harrison album.  An aborted attempt by John Lennon to record his memoirs gave this album the lyrics, "So I start a revolution in my bed/'Cause you said the brains I have went to my head," though the lines, "Slowly walking down the hall/Faster than a cannonball/Where were you when we were getting high"? come purely from Noel Gallagher.  Featuring "Champagne Supernova", "Don't Look Back In Anger", and "Wonderwall", FTP name this Oasis release.;;(What's) (The) (Story) Morning Glory
Pop Culture;;Often referring to herself as the modern-day Queen Esther, one of this woman's campaign ads showed a picture of her talking to Alan Colmes with the caption "Tested by fire".  Her campaign, already in crisis after undergoing multiple staff shake-ups, has not been helped by her ties to defense contractor MZM's bribery scandal, and she's stated that "God is the one who chooses our rulers" and that voting for non-Christians is equivalent to legislating sin.  Despite polls showing her over 30 points behind Ben Nelson, she refused to drop out of the race, perhaps because she feels that the GOP owes her for her actions in 2000.  FTP, name this heavily made-up Congresswoman involved in a disastrous Senate campaign, the former secretary of state of Florida.;;(Katherine) Harris
Pop Culture;;Supposedly she planned to become a nun until she discovered her brother was gay, and next year she's scheduled to play Jane Austen.  Sharing a name with Shakespeare's wife, her first major role was as Meghan Green on Get Real.  She's been taking on more adult roles, including nude scenes in the direct-to-DVD Havoc and in Brokeback Mountain, after by her admission she accidentally cornered the princess genre by starring in Ella Enchanted and the two Princess Diaries.  FTP, name this actress, who this summer starred in The Devil Wears Prada.;;(Anne) (Whitney) Hathaway
Pop Culture;;According to this book, the Earth was created on October 21, 4004 BC, around 9 AM, because God likes to get work done early in the morning, any tape left in a car will within a few weeks transform into Best of Queen, and the only true witch to ever live was Agnes Nutter.  Due to a mix-up, the son of the American cultural attaché, Warlock Dowling, is not the Antichrist; rather, Adam Young is.  Anthony Crowley and Aziraphale work against the Four Horsemen to avert the apocalypse in, FTP, what comic novel, a collaboration between Terry Pratchett and Neil Gaiman?;;Good Omens
Pop Culture;;His 1996 debut was produced by Randy Edwards and had a minor hit with "Six of One, Half a Dozen (Of the Other)".  The most successful single off of his second album on Universal South, Revelation, was "What's A Guy Gotta Do".  Featured on Toby Keith's "Throwdown" and "Hookin' Up and Hanging Out" tours, 2002's Man Without A Memory earned Grammy nominations for the song "The Impossible" and the follow-up single hit #1.  In 2005 he topped the charts again with a song about a girl who's going to kick off her shoes, lose an earring in her drink, leave her jacket in the bathroom stall, and drop a contact down the sink.  FTP, name this country singer responsible for "Brokenheartsville" and "Tequila Makes Her Clothes Fall Off".;;(Joe) Nichols
Pop Culture;;His first agent was childhood friend Jorge Cyterszpiller, who recommended that he charge for interviews, while his second agent, Guillermo Coppola, oversaw his signing with SSC Napoli but also his 15-month ban starting in 1991 after he tested positive for cocaine.  In 1994 he played two games before being disqualified after testing positive for ephedrine; four years earlier he lead his team to a 1-0 loss to West Germany in the final, and four years before that he won the Golden Ball.  Best remembered for his two goals in the 1986 quarter-final against England, one of which was named the Goal of the Century, FTP name this Argentinean soccer player also responsible for the Hand of God goal.;;(Diego) (Armando) Maradona
Pop Culture;;First and last name are pronounced the same.  One is based on his creator, Mark Brazill, and had a brief rivalry with Mitch Miller, played by Seth Green.  The other is a former carjacker and used to break into houses, which has been helpful in his current profession.  The first, a big Star Wars fan, moved to Africa to teach to earn money for college, leaving his friends in Point Place.  The other recently stole a peer's idea for a medical article and later told her that they weren't friends, though he recanted not long before receiving a brain biopsy.  FTP, give the shared name of Topher Grace's character on That '70s Show and Omar Epps' on House.;;Eric|For(e)man
Pop Culture;;For years, Universal Studios would offer discounts if visitors asked for Babs in a reference to this film.  One character claims to be Fawn Leibowitz's fiancé in order to get dates for him and his friends, but a more emotionally meaningful plot line concerns the romance between Katy and Boon, who married in 1964 and divorced in 1969.  It ends at the Homecoming Parade, where the heroes "cut the cake" to reveal the Deathmobile; at that point they had already been expelled from Faber College after a period on double secret probation.  Featuring D-Day, Otter, Flounder, and Bluto, FTP, name this film, which introduced mainstream America to toga parties.;;(National) (Lampoon's) Animal House
Pop Culture;;It was founded in 1971 in Union, New Jersey, by Warren Eisenberg and Leonard Feinstein, though the current CEO is Steven Temares.  The owners of the Christmas Tree Shops and Harmon brand names, in 2006 they teamed with MasterCard in a promotion to give $100,000 to a randomly-selected college student.  The origin of the remote control in Click, FTP name this alliterative chain which competes with Linens 'n Things to be the number one home furnishings store in the country.;;Bed Bath & Beyond|Bed Bath and Beyond
Pop Culture;;He grew up in Chattanooga, Tennessee and once inadvertently held Martin Luther King, Sr. hostage in a protest at Morehouse College.  A stand-in for Bill Cosby on The Cosby Show, his next film will be Home of the Brave, a war drama also starring 50 Cent and Jessica Biel.  He will narrate the upcoming Farce of the Penguins, and has starred in Die Hard With a Vengeance and Deep Blue Sea, and was featured this past summer for a role in which he played a larger-than-life version of himself, Neville Flynn.  FTP, identify this actor who has had it with these motherfucking snakes on this motherfucking plane!!;;(Samuel) (Fuckin’) (L.) Jackson
Pop Culture;;It was revealed in 2004 that he is a "romanticist, a feminist, and a self-professed gentleman".  He has an IQ of 300, although he is immature and quite vain; most of his creations feature his face as does his production logo.  Voiced by blues singer Long John Baldry in an ABC Cartoon series, his first base was the Scrap Brain and he is fond of flying fortresses, such as Sky Base and Flying Battery.  FTP, identify this comically obese villain of the Sonic the Hedgehog Series.;;(Dr.) (Ivo) Robotnik|(Dr.) Eggman
Pop Culture;;As a youth, he was a member of Harlem’s 127th Street Ensemble.  The leader of Strictly Dope, he got his start as a roadie and background dancer for Digital Underground and released his first solo album in 1991, an album which featured lyrics that a Texas youth used as inspiration to murder a state trooper.  His final album, All Eyez on Me, is considered one of the most influential hip-hop albums of all time; sadly, he never got to follow it up as he was shot seven months after its release.  FTP, identify this rapper whose biggest hit was "California Love," the subject of the 2003 documentary Resurrection.;;Tupac (Shakur)|(Lesane) (Parish) Crooks
Pop Culture;;She began playing tennis at the age of 4 and won the 1996 Junior Wimbledon Title.  She broke on the scene in the 1999 Australian Open, when she reached the final as an unranked player before being defeated by Martina Hingis.  She was defeated by Justine Henin-Hardenne in the 2004 Women’s Singles Final at the Athens Olympics, but beat Henin-Hardenne in 2006 in the final of the Australian Open to capture her first Grand Slam Title.  FTP, identify the current Women’s Singles champion at Wimbledon, who has held the #1 spot on the Women’s tour rankings since March.;;(Amelie) Mauresmo
Pop Culture;;One of the first albums to prominently feature a Moog Synthesizer, this 1969 project featured a young Alan Parsons as an engineer.  Originally titled Everest with a cover shot of the Himalayas, it was changed to the now-timeless image featuring one member of the band shoeless.  The final melody, "Her Majesty," was not listed on the LP cover as it plays after 20 seconds of silence after "The End".  Notable tracks include "Maxwell’s Silver Hammer" and "Octopus’s Garden".  FTP, identify this final Beatles album to be recorded, featuring "Something" and "Come Together" and named after a recording studio.;;Abbey Road
Pop Culture;;Twice engaged to Pamela Anderson, this actor had a recurring role on Arrested Development, as a lawyer whose commercials asked "Why should you go to jail for a crime someone else noticed"?  Starring as the landlord on Baby Talk, he earlier starred with Willie Aames in Zapped!, as a boy with the "magical power" to "zap" women’s clothes off.  He parlayed his success in such afterschool specials such as "The Boy Who Drank Too Much" and "Stoned" into a starring role in a mid to late 80s sitcom, where he played a male nanny.  Also featured on Diagnosis: Murder as Jack Stewart, FTP identify this actor known for playing titular characters in Bugsy Malone, Joanie Loves Chachi and Charles in Charge.;;(Scott) Baio
Pop Culture;;It broke ground on October 16, 1992, and opened to the public on April 26, 1995.  The only no-hitter ever thrown here was by the Dodgers’ Hideo Nomo in 1996, and it was the home of the 1998 MLB All-Star Game.  It has hosted four 1-0 games, three of which occurred in 2006, and balls are placed in a humidor to reduce the number of home runs hit in it.  With a section of center field bleachers known as the "The Rockpile," and known as a hitter-friendly ballpark, FTP identify this Denver home of the National League’s Colorado Rockies.;;Coors Field
Pop Culture;;A North Dakota native, this writer has had his columns featured on espn.com’s Page 2 since November 2005, as well as his week-long Super Bowl Blog published on that site.  A former Senior Writer for Spin Magazine whose columns included "My Back Pages" and "Rant and Roll," he currently writes for Esquire and the Washington Post.  Known as a pop culture essayist and critic, his first book, Fargo Rock City, was a humorous memoir on hair metal, and his most recent book is the collection A Decade of Curious People and Dangerous Ideas.  FTP, identify this writer whose other works include Killing Yourself to Live and Sex, Drugs, and Cocoa Puffs.;;(Chuck) Klosterman
Pop Culture;;The director’s second adaptation of a Daphne du Maurier work, its screenplay was penned by crime novelist Ed McBain and it features no soundtrack other than incidental music and sound effects.  A sequel to this film, 1994’s Lands’ End, was produced for cable television and features its lead actress, Tippi Hedren, in a small role.  In the film, the titular attackers’ victims include children at a birthday party, a gas station attendant, and Suzanne Pleshette.  FTP, identify this 1963 Alfred Hitchcock film with a final scene where Rod Taylor is not attacked by the titular avian protagonists.;;(The) Birds
Pop Culture;;In the board game Puerto Rico, this can be grown on eight land tiles, fewer than any other shippable commodity.  In the final scene of Fast Times at Ridgemont High and the final episode of the first season of 24 it is used as a weapon.  In 1992, 79-year-old Stella Liebeck filed suit after suffering third-degree burns from spilling this substance, which McDonald's served at 180 degrees Fahrenheit.  FTP, name this hot beverage also available at Peet's and Starbucks.;;coffee
Pop Culture;;A U.K. network by this name features the late-night program Headfuck.  The U.S. version aired WWE Monday Night Raw on August 28th, as well as the Emmy-winning miniseries Steven Spielberg Presents: Taken in 2003.  It has picked up two canceled series from other networks, Stargate SG-1 and Mystery Science Theater 3000, and this summer aired the popular reality show Who Wants to be a Superhero?  FTP, identify this NBC Universal owned cable channel which currently airs new episodes of Battlestar Galactica.;;Sci-Fi (Network)
Pop Culture;;After this film’s closing credits is a scene of two children analyzing Faulkner's The Bear.   The second part of the "Mediocre American Man Trilogy" (both films released so far have protagonists with initials "R.B".), it includes a sex scene in the "Unfriendly Possum" bar with Amy Adams and the titular protagonist, as well as a scene in which that protagonist’s father, played by Gary Cole, is thrown out of an Applebee’s Restaurant.  Featuring a hero whose motto is "If you’re not first, you’re last," and co-starring Jane Lynch, John C. Reilly, and Sacha Baron Cohen as French driver Jean Girard, FTP, identify this 2006 film starring Will Ferrell as the dimwitted hero who "wants to go fast!!!";;Talladega Nights(:) (The) (Legend) (of) (Ricky) (Bobby)
Pop Culture;;A native of West Plains, Missouri, he made his acting debut on an episode of The Phil Silvers Show and won a Tony for a role in Bye Bye Birdie opposite Chita Rivera.  He played a murdering judge on the first episode of Matlock and Rose’s lawyer turned circus clown boyfriend on The Golden Girls before returning to a successful TV career 25 years after his Emmy winning show featuring Morey Amsterdam and Rose Marie went off the air.  FTP, identify this star of Diagnosis: Murder and Mary Poppins.;;D(ick) Van Dyke
Pop Culture;;Invented in modern form in 1979 in Indianapolis by Howard Garns, it is also known as "Nanpure" in Japan.    The method of scanning can be used alone to complete "easy" varieties of it, but harder versions require the use of logical and contingency analysis.  An NP-Complete problem, it was once called "Number Place" in the U.S. but had its name changed by Wayne Gould when he submitted it to The Times in 2004; within a year, it had spread across Great Britain and become a popular pastime in America.  FTP, identify this puzzle based on constrained latin squares that is often printed next to the crossword in your local newspaper.;;Sudoku
Pop Culture;;A trademark of both Kraft Foods and Yum! Brands, in the film Demolition Man this company has won the fast-food wars, so every restaurant in the world is a franchise of this chain. On the website of its latest ad campaign, you can choose a male or female persona, dress them, and make combinations for your consumption as your "Fourthmeal".  FTP, identify this American fast food chain whose menu also includes Cinnamon Twists, Nacho Cheese Gorditas, and the Crunchwrap Supreme, an item which is "good to go".;;Taco Bell
Pop Culture;;It was released as a single on April 27, 2006 with a demo for "Nails for Breakfast, Tacks for Snacks" as a b-side.  The first single from its artist to be made into a video, it won Video of the Year at the VMAs despite not winning anything else as it lost Best Rock Video and Best Group Video.  The video appears to take place at a circus-themed wedding, where the bride argues with the groom and then kisses one of the guests.  Edited for TV to not include the words "whore" and "goddamn," FTP identify this 2006 top 10 hit for Panic! At the Disco.;;I Write Sins not Tragedies
Pop Culture;;He received a scholarship to play defensive back in college; he managed to claw his way to starting quarterback by the third game of his freshman year.  Drafted in the Second Round by the Falcons in 1991, he was traded to the team he is most identified with in exchange for a first round pick used to draft Tony Smith in one of the most lopsided trades in NFL history.  The NFL’s only three-time MVP winner, he led his team to victory over New England in Super Bowl XXXI and currently holds the longest consecutive starts streak of all time.  FTP, identify this quarterback featured in There’s Something About Mary, the current starter for the Green Bay Packers.;;(Brett) Favre
Pop Culture;;Founded by employees of Paypal in February 2005, it was given 3.5 million dollars in seed money by Sequoia Capital and has grown steadily ever since, outpacing similar websites such as GoFish and Veoh.  It has been used to distribute U.S. Government produced Anti-Drug Public Service Announcements, as well as the "Lazy Sunday" video, virtually every music video ever made, and the chronicles of "lonelygirl15".  Recently purchased by Google for 1.6 Billion Dollars, FTP, identify this popular website that allows users to upload videos for public consumption.;;Youtube(.com)
Pop Culture;;Months before his 1981 death, he was baptized into the Ethiopian Orthodox Church and took the name Berhane Selassie.  Doctors discovered melanoma on his right big toe in 1977, but he refused to have it amputated because he thought it would impair his dancing.  A 1994 Inductee into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, his first two singles were "Judge Not" and "One Cup of Coffee," both later released on his "Songs of Freedom" album.  His final album, "Uprising," featured "Forever Loving Jah" and "Redemption Song".  FTP, identify this Rastafarian singer of "Jamming" who once led the Wailers on their album, Exodus.;;(Bob) Marley
Pop Culture;;The number 32 film on Bravo’s "100 Funniest Films of All Time" list, its central concept was referenced by R. Nicholas Burns in a statement made about the current Israel/Lebanon conflict.  Shot in Woodstock, Illinois and not actually in Pennsylvania, it features Brian Doyle-Murray and Chris Elliott in supporting roles.  While the actual time span specified by its title is unspecified, it is enough time for Phil Connors to learn to play jazz piano, speak French, and to get Andie MacDowell into bed. FTP, identify this film in which the titular holiday is repeated until Bill Murray learns his lesson.;;Groundhog Day
Pop Culture;;Game night and an Old '97s concert are the settings of two major events in this film.  One of the characters works for Three Brothers Bus Tours, which plans to take Chicago tourism by land, air, and sea.  Ann-Margret plays the other main character's mother and Jason Bateman plays their realtor; they're both billed before Jon Favreau, who most critics praised for his chemistry with his former Swingers costar.  Neither Brooke nor Gary want to give up their prized apartment despite hating each other in, FTP, what summer film starring Jennifer Aniston and Vince Vaughn?;;(The) Break-Up
Pop Culture;;This man is the oldest player to ever get a hit in the All-Star Game and hit a record 72 homeruns after the age of 40.  Spending his 24 year career with just two teams, the closest he ever got to an MVP was in 1983, when he finished third behind Cal Ripken and Eddie Murray, though he won Rookie of the Year in 1972, the same season he became the only player at his position to ever lead the league in triples.  Now the namesake of the left field foul pole in Fenway Park, FTP name this long-time White Sox and Red Sox catcher, best remembered for his Englished home run in game 6 of the 1975 World Series.;;(Carlton) (Ernest) Fisk
Pop Culture;;The foreign language lyrics at the start of this song translate to "Until we meet again", "I want to know your secret", and "Thank you very much".  Its speaker is Robert Orin Charles Kilroy, who escapes from prison disguised as the title character, hence his description of himself as "just a man who needed someone, and somewhere to hide".  He later observes that, "The problem's plain to see: Too much technology," but still tells the title character, "Domo arigato".  FTP, name this song by Styx.;;(Mr(.)|Mister){1}? Roboto
Pop Culture;;On Earth-9997 this man was transformed into a donkey.  His father was a decorated Army veteran who beat him and his mother, instilling in him a distrust of heroes.  He was present for the first appearances of Jim Hammond and Namor McKenzie, and during World War II he was a war correspondent in Europe, where he covered a mission undertaken by Nick Fury.  After his role in the creation of Scorpion became public, he stepped down as the Editor-in-Chief of the Daily Bugle.  FTP, name this newsman who employed Peter Parker.;;(J.) Jonah|(J.) Jameson
Pop Culture;;He once embarrassed himself by attempting to buy one "art" for $300.  A fan of anchovies, he conspired to fraudulently award an Oscar to a soap opera actor, but instead gave it to his uncle, a washed-up silent film star.  Possessing degrees in muderology and murderonomy, he lives in the Professor's Maternifuge after his foray into home ownership was ended by an errant cigar despite being underwater.  At first simply ignorant of human anatomy, this Decapodian evolved into being poor and despised by Hermes and Bender.  FTP, name this crustacean physician on Futurama.;;(Dr.) (John) Zoidberg
Pop Culture;;They were signed by Elektra after opening for Oasis at a 1996 show in San Francisco.  Their 2003 album Out of the Vein included the track "Blinded" supposedly inspired the lead singer's relationship with Charlize Theron but barely sold 250,000 copies, while 1999's Blue sold well on the strength of the single "Never Let You Go" but still didn't live up to the success of the band's eponymous debut.  Frontman Stephan Jenkins has denied that their name is a reference to a penis and lamented that many casual fans don't realize their biggest hit is actually about crystal meth.  FTP, name this band that released "Jumper" and "Semi-Charmed Life".;;Third Eye Blind
Pop Culture;;Their worst season was 1992, when they went 2 and 14 and were last in the league in both points and yards gained, the first of three seasons with Tom Flores as head coach, though defensive tackle Cortez Kennedy was named Defensive Player of the Year.  Their first season also saw them win only two games, including one against the other expansion team that year, the Tampa Bay Buccaneers.  Vinny Testaverde's "Phantom Touchdown" kept them from the playoffs in 1998, which was during their 20 year draught of playoff victories that was ended in 2005.  Playing in Qwest Field, FTP, name this team, that with coach Mike Holmgren and stars Matt Hasselbeck and Shaun Alexander lost Super Bowl XL to the Pittsburgh Steelers.;;Seattle|Seahawks
Pop Culture;;In the book he is introduced at a nude beach, but in the 1999 film he's first seen on an airplane, where he has the same briefcase as the narrator.  Some of his jobs include working as a projectionist and as a caterer at a ritzy hotel, but his more famous profession involves breaking into a liposuction clinic.  He brands his followers with his lip-print on the back of their hands, and he was willing to let cops cut his balls off in order for Project Mayhem to go forward.  FTP, name this soap-maker, played by Brad Pitt in Fight Club.;;Tyler|Durden
Pop Culture;;In his first appearance, an optimist mistook him for a hat.  He implemented "cafeteria-style" health benefits and recommends "yarn therapy" for those with dysfunctional network access.  He was originally unnamed, but his creator received a number of E-mails referring to the character by his current moniker, following naming conventions established for the rat and dog characters.  FTP, name this evil manager of human resources in Dilbert who happens to be feline.;;Catbert
Pop Culture;;Ira Glass described this band as "living catnip" after they served as the house band for This American Life's fifth anniversary tour, and they contributed a cover of "Letterbox" to a tribute album for They Might Be Giants, with whom they share a manager.  They had moderate success in 2002 with their first single, which declared, "Everything's a chore/and what's more/it's all somebody's fault," "Get Over It", but they broke through after releasing a pair of unconventional videos choreographed by the sister of the frontman, Damien Kulash.  FTP, name this band responsible for "A Million Ways" and the not-actually-treadmill-related "Here It Goes Again".;;OK Go
Pop Culture;;It's earliest incarnation was in 1891, but it wasn't opened to foreign players until 1925, when Suzanne Lenglen defeated Kitty McKane and Jean Borotra lost to René Lacoste, and the current grounds weren't constructed until 1928 for the Davis Cup.  The winningest woman in its history is Margaret Smith Court, but players such as Martina Hingis, Lindsay Davenport, Pete Sampras, and Roger Federer have all been denied career Grand Slams due to the difficulty of playing on its red clay courts.  Björn Borg won six consecutive and Rafael Nadal is the defending champion of the Men’s Singles portion of, FTP, what tennis tournament, played at Roland Garros?;;French Open
Pop Culture;;WARNING: Two answers required.  The man was told he'd meet his love soon and its color would be orange, but in fact they met after the woman's boyfriend revealed he was engaged to an American woman and the man quit his doorman job after allowing a poor man into the hotel so his son could use a bathroom.  Despite being a fisherman's son, he convinced her businessman father to allow them to marry on the condition that the man come to work as his enforcer.  However, after a night when he came home covered in blood she decided to run away and even secretly learned English, but at the last minute had a change of heart and instead joined him on Oceanic Flight 815.  FTP, name this Korean couple on Lost.;;Jin(-Soo) (Kwon) (and) Sun (Kwon) (Paik)|Sun (Kwon) (Paik) (and) Jin(-Soo) (Kwon)
Pop Culture;;He contributed the lyrics "Well we're good friends", "I got fresh jams", and "I never agreed to that," to The Two-o Duo's only release, and he spiked the punch at the Entrapment All Up On the Moon dance with Listerine despite being a chaperone.  He called Theo Huxtable the greatest rappers of our time, and other Halloween costumes have included Humpty Hump, Flavor Flav, and Tupac.  He's more recognizable for his accent, which can turn "job" into "jorb" or "jaerb" and "The Cheat" into "The Chort".  FTP, name this Homestar Runner character who's not as cool as his Canadian counterpart, Coach Zed.;;Coach Z
Pop Culture;;He's not Barry White, but he's one of the only real celebrities to appear on Springfield Squares, while his directorial breakthrough was 1982’s Night Shift.  He gives his children middle names based on where they're conceived—a son on Cross Street, twins in the Hotel Carlyle, and a daughter in Dallas—and he tries to cast his brother Clint in all of his films.  FTP, name this man, who played Opie on The Andy Griffith Show, Richie Cunningham on Happy Days, and won an Oscar for directing A Beautiful Mind.;;R(on) Howard
Pop Culture;;She claims that she hates Portugal but loves the Portuguese.  The owner of a "30-minute workout gym", she tangles with the "meanie moms" at her son Ritchie's school.  Living with her brother Matthew, she's on good terms with her ex-husband Richard, so much so that they made out in the season finale, which caused him to break up with his girlfriend, who happens to share her name.  FTP, name this character played by Julia Louis-Dreyfus.;;(Old) Christine|Christine (Campbell)
Pop Culture;;The first CD manufactured in the United States was a copy of this album.  One of the singles was meant to be a dance track for Donna Summer, while its first video was directed by Brian De Palma and featured Courtney Cox.  The follow-up to Nebraska, its title track supposedly was played at the 1984 Republican National Convention despite being meant as a denunciation of the government's treatment of Vietnam veterans.  Featuring among its seven top 10 singles "My Hometown", "Glory Days", and "Dancing in the Dark", FTP, name this wildly successful Bruce Springsteen album.;;Born in the U.S.A.
Pop Culture;;In its first appearance, it's found in the Flooded Palace.  One can be found in Catfish Maw, where it's used to defeat Slime Eel and later learn Frog's Song of Soul.  It can be obtained by shooting a beehive with an arrow to scare the Gerudo, and beating Dampe in the graveyard race is another way to get it.  In the latest incarnation, it’s found in the Wind Temple and is necessary to reach the top of Ganon's Tower.  FTP, name this item from The Legend of Zelda series, which can stun enemies but is more useful for crossing large gaps.;;hookshot
Pop Culture;;(MB) WARNING: Two answers required.  One wrote Teddy Riley's part of the 1992 hit "Rump Shaker"; the other does impressions of Janet Reno and Robert Goulet [gool-AY].  One worked with Chad Hugo to produce the Britney Spears single "I'm A Slave 4 U" and Nelly's "Hot in Herre"; the other shared a 2005 "Worst Screen Couple" Razzie with Nicole Kidman.  One got help from Kanye West to record the 2006 rap hit "Number One"; the other starred with Christina Applegate in a 2004 comedy.  FTP, name both this member of the Neptunes and this star of Anchorman.;;Pharrell (Williams)|(John) (William) Ferrell
Pop Culture;;Oddly, this show's heralded 100th episode in 1999 was actually the 85th to be produced.  Created as a replacement for the failed My Brother and Me by Mike Tollin and Head of the Class veterans Brian Robbins and Dan Schneider, its longest running cast member was Kevin Kopelow, who played Kevin the Stage Manager.  Skits such as Ask Ashley, Everyday French with Pierre Escargot, and Vital Information, hosted by Lori Beth Denberg and Danny Tamberelli, helped establish it as a worthy successor to You Can't Do That On Television.  FTP, name this Nickelodeon sketch comedy series, which helped launch the careers of Nick Cannon, Amanda Bynes, and Kenan and Kel.;;All That
Pop Culture;;His brother Farid is currently the coach for Nouvelle Vague.  He started with AS Cannes at age 16 before moving to Bordeaux in 1992.  In 1994 he made his first appearance with his national team when he was brought in after 63 minutes of a game against the Czech Republic and scored two goals to tie the game.  In 1998 he was named European Footballer of the Year while he was playing with Juventus F.C. as well as FIFA World Player of the Year, in part for his role in his country's win in that year's World Cup.  The son of Algerian immigrants, his 73 million Euro fee for signing with Real Madrid remains a record.  FTP, name this French player who achieved still more prominence during the 2006 World Cup when he headbutted Marco Materazzi.;;(Zinedine) (Yazid) Zidane
Pop Culture;;In his original incarnation, he was a friend of the Wizard of Fries and used his magic to confound the Duke of Doubt.  In his modern form, he's been seen staring down Darth Vader, receiving a lateral from Randy Moss, performing the Lambeau Leap, at a press conference held by his agent, Drew Rosenhaus, and is said to have had an affair with Brooke Burke, who was seen swinging at his Tendercrisp Bacon Cheddar Ranch.  FTP, name this fast food spokesperson who wants you to have it your way, the analogue to Ronald McDonald.;;(The) Burger King
Pop Culture;;The competitors in this televised event hail from Kansas City, the "Far East," Brooklyn’s Marcy Projects, and "a little place called none of your god-damned business".  Ashy Larry is eliminated first, followed by Grits ‘N Gravy, who once rolled 77 sevens in a row; unfortunately, he throws snake eyes on an "all in" roll.  The final between Leonard Washington and Phyuck Yiu is interrupted by Rodney "Quills" Dinkins, who orders everyone to strip at gunpoint.  ESPN broadcasted, FTP, what late-night contest, a parody of programs such as "World Series of Poker" on Chappelle’s Show.;;(2004) World Series of Dice
Pop Culture;;She was directed by her father, Stephen, in her first three films: Waterland, A Dangerous Woman, and Homegrown.  The voice of Elizabeth in Monster House, in 2006 she could also be seen in World Trade Center and Trust the Man in supporting roles.  She had roles in Riding in Cars with Boys, Criminal and Cecil B. Demented and she was nominated for a Golden Globe for her titular role in Secretary.  Appearing alongside Julia Roberts, Kirsten Dunst, Julia Stiles and Ginnifer Goodwin in 2003’s Mona Lisa Smile, she is still less well-known than her brother, with whom she appeared in Donnie Darko and Jarhead.  FTP, identify this actress and sister of Jake Gyllenhall.;;M(aggie) Gyllenhall
Pop Culture;;He lives with his parents, brother Kevin, younger sister, and several aunts, uncles, and cousins; this is taken as evidence that "poor people tend to live in clusters".  Despite his poverty, he is able to obtain an ED-209 Halloween costume and a Sony PSP, which he uses to defeat Satan in the episode "Best Friends Forever".  He disguised himself, sans parka, as Mr. Jefferson’s son Blanket; he is then thrown into the ceiling, causing Stan and Kyle to respond with their usual catchphrase.  FTP, identify this character who died "for good" at the end of season 5 but returned for season 7, a resident of South Park, Colorado.;;Kenny|McCormick
Pop Culture;;The 2003 recipient of the Socrates Award, which recognizes student athletes for excellence in academics, athletics, and citizenship, he played high school ball in New Orleans before following new head coach David Cutliffe to his father’s alma mater.  He was the top prospect in the 2004 NFL Draft, but he had repeatedly stated that he would not play for the team with the top pick, the San Diego Chargers, so they eventually traded him for the draft rights to Philip Rivers.  A backup to Kurt Warner for one season, he led his team to the playoffs in 2005 and to a huge fourth quarter comeback against Philadelphia this season.  FTP, identify this New York Giants quarterback, son of Archie and little brother to Peyton.;;E(li) Manning
Pop Culture;;Next week’s episode will be titled "The Elbow Incident" and will concern Jeffrey hurting his elbow in a two-on-two basketball game against younger players, then refusing medical care because he is afraid of hospitals.  The pilot featured Judith Light in a supporting role and introduced the story of the two main characters, a surgeon and a judge, who decide that they’ve wasted most of their lives and realize that the titular quantity is "about all we’ve got left!"  FTP, identify this new NBC sitcom about a pair of 60 year olds who want to make the most of the next portion of their lives that stars Jeffrey Tambor and John Lithgow.;;Twenty Good Years
Pop Culture;;Part I did not feature any drums, and its lyrics told of the protagonist’s father dying in the Anzio Campaign of World War II.  In Part III, the singer claims not to need "no arms around me" or "drugs to calm me;" in the next track, "Goodbye Cruel World," he has finally disassociated himself completely from society.  However, Part II is by far the most famous, as it follows "The Happiest Days of Our Lives" and features an Islington Green children’s choir.  FTP, identify this song cycle on Pink Floyd’s The Wall, whose second part proclaims "we don’t need no education".;;Another Brick in the Wall
Pop Culture;;Born in Hyde Park, Massachusetts in 1924, she moved to Los Angeles in 1943 where she worked in an Air Force Base.  While living in Florida, she met and became engaged to Major Matthew M. Gordon, Jr., who died in a plane crash in 1945; his family denies any connection to her.  She moved back to L.A. in 1946, spending the last months of her life living with friends and in hotels, until she was last seen alive in the lobby of the Biltmore hotel in 1947; the next morning she was found cut in half at the waist and her face mutilated.  FTP, identify this murder victim, whose story was told in a 1987 James Ellroy novel and a 2006 film starring Josh Hartnett and Hilary Swank.;;(Elizabeth) Short|(The) Black Dahlia
Pop Culture;;Songs by this name include track 7 on Kevin Federline’s upcoming Playing with Fire album and a famous Willie Nelson track that was itself a Patsy Cline cover.  Supertramp, Seal, Simple Plan, and Aerosmith have also released songs with this title, as did a popular DJ act this past summer.  That track, whose B-sides included "Go-Go Gadget Gospel" and whose video is reminiscent of a Rorschach ink blot test, was inspired by film scores of spaghetti Westerns.  The first song to hit #1 on the UK chart based solely on downloads, FTP identify this song whose singer can "remember when (he) lost his mind," a hit for Gnarls Barkley.;;Crazy
Pop Culture;;Born in Brussels, Belgium, she was ranked as the third greatest female film star of all time by the American Film Institute, after Katharine Hepburn and Bette Davis.  Her first role came as a hotel receptionist in the British film One Wild Oat, and she did all of her own ballet dancing in The Secret People. Other notable films she has appeared in include Roman Holiday alongside Gregory Peck, Funny Face, in which she got to dance with Fred Astaire, and Charade.  FTP, identify this actress, most identified today with her roles as Holly Golightly in Breakfast at Tiffany’s and as Eliza Doolittle in My Fair Lady.;;A(udrey) Hepburn
Pop Culture;;During his rookie season, he backed up Brad Sellers but later earned the starting position due to his tenacious play in the playoffs.  A graduate of Central Arkansas University, he was drafted 5th overall by Seattle in 1987 but was traded on draft night for Olden Polynice.  He played 4 years in Portland for the end of his career, but was traded back to the team with which he won 6 championships in 2003; his number 33 is now retired by them.  FTP, identify this small forward, a member of the Dream Team in 1992 and 1996, who helped lead the Chicago Bulls in the 1990s alongside Michael Jordan.;;(Scottie) Pippen
Pop Culture;;It opened on October 1, 1982 and was originally to be a sort of utopia with no slums and where everyone is employed; this may have been the downfall of that plan as the surrounding area is mostly populated by retirees.  The largest construction project on earth at the time, it consists of two sections: Future World and World Showcase, and its current attractions include "Spaceship Earth" and "Ellen’s Energy Adventure," starring Ellen DeGeneres and Bill Nye.  FTP, identify this Disney theme park at the Walt Disney World Resort in Orlando.;;Epcot|Experimental Prototype Community of Tomorrow
Pop Culture;;Its name was inspired by the Comstock Lode, and it was the most watched show in America from 1964 to 1967.  The oldest two sons of Lorne Greene’s character were played by Pernell Roberts and Dan Blocker, who died during the show’s final season.  Hop Sing was the Cartwright family’s Chinese chef, and Michael Landon launched his career by directing several episodes as well as starring as youngest son "Little Joe".  FTP, identify this western set on the Ponderosa Ranch.;;Bonanza
Pop Culture;;He has been played on television by Danny Wells and voiced by Tony Rosato.  A stronger jumper than his more famous sibling, he claims to be an accomplished author who has penned a series of novels which tell how he saved Princess Éclair of the Waffle Kingdom.  His in-game voices are provided by Charles Martinet, and he has starred in games including a 1991 edutainment game where his brother is missing and a 2001 Gamecube game in which he must rid a mansion of ghosts.  FTP, identify this Nintendo character, portrayed in film by John Leguizamo, the brother of Mario.;;Luigi
Pop Culture;;The melody of its chorus is based on "Turkey in the Straw," prompting hip-hop blogger Byron Crawford to declare it an example of "minstrel show rap".  Featured in a 2006 episode of Entourage, ringtones based on this song sold more than 20,000 in two weeks, and it was the most popular rap download on iTunes in August 2006.  Its video features adolescents doing the "snap dance" and its chorus asks "Could you throw it over ya shoulda" and declares "if it hot, it make ya cold".  FTP, identify this track by Jibbs with very similar lyrics to the children’s song "Do Your Ears Hang Low".;;Chain Hang Low
Pop Culture;;YEAR AND TEAM REQUIRED.  A total lunar eclipse ended just eleven minutes after this team’s final out, which occurred 18 years to the day after their last World Series game.  They got Doug Mientkiewicz (mint-KAY-vich) from Minnesota at midseason, then won 22 of their last 25 games and made it into the playoffs as a wildcard.  They swept the Anaheim Angels, then lost their next three games to their most bitter rival; luckily, with the help of Dave Roberts and Curt Schilling, they were able to win the last four, marking the greatest comeback in a series in MLB history.  FTP, identify this team that finally broke the Curse of the Bambino, a team that played its home games at Fenway Park and featured Pedro Martinez and Manny Ramirez.;;2004 Boston (Red Sox)|2004 (Boston) Red Sox
Pop Culture;;Bryan Adams was approached to have his song "Only The Strong Survive" included on this film’s soundtrack; he refused because he believed the film promoted war.  Tracks included on its Expanded Edition soundtrack include "(Sittin’ On) The Dock of the Bay" and "Great Balls of Fire," while its original cut included Miami Sound Machine’s "Hot Summer Nights" and "Take My Breath Away" by Berlin, which won an Oscar for Best Song in 1987.  FTP, identify this film, whose soundtrack also featured Kenny Loggins’ "Danger Zone," a film starring Kelly McGillis and Tom Cruise.;;Top Gun
Pop Culture;;After his 1993 death, his body was laid in state at the Virginia Governor’s Mansion; the last time this had been done was for Stonewall Jackson.  A successful high school football player, he decided to attend UCLA on a tennis scholarship before turning pro in 1969.  In 1970, he won the Australian Open but was not allowed to play in the South Africa Open due to apartheid policies.  He stunned Jimmy Connors in the 1975 Wimbledon title, becoming one of only two men of Black African descent to win a men’s Grand Slam tennis title.  FTP, identify this player, the namesake of the main stadium at the U.S. Open.;;(Arthur) Ashe
Pop Culture;;(JK) On the final track of this album, the speaker has to figure out why people ask him "where the hell [he's] going at a 1000 feet per second," a statement written by the song's author based on experiences watching tourists in France.  Earlier, the lines "pragmatism not idealism" and "a pig in a cage on antibiotics" are spoken by a computer-synthesized voice on the song "Fitter Happier".  The track "Let Down" was recorded in the ballroom of Jane Seymour's mansion in the wee hours of the morning while an animated video accompanied one of this album's more popular songs, "Paranoid Android".  Also featuring "Karma Police," the album's highest charting single, for ten points, name this 1997 Radiohead album with a title that would seem to imply an acceptance of technology.;;OK Computer
Pop Culture;;A native Kentuckian and avid fisherman, he first appeared regularly on TV as Mr. Dingle on The New Zoo Review.  His worst fear is "being attacked by a large Calico cat named Skippy," and he has provided the voiceover for Game Show Network’s between-show bumper ads since April 2005.  The subject of the reality program Naturally Stoned, he was the original host of Wheel of Fortune and has also hosted Scrabble and Greed.  FTP, identify this game show host most famous for Lingo and Love Connection.;;(Chuck) Woolery
Pop Culture;;Founded by Tim Keck and Christopher Johnson, two juniors at the University of Wisconsin – Madison, in 1988, its appeal did not stretch beyond Wisconsin until its website was founded in 1996.  Regular contributors to it include Larry Groznic, Jim Anchower, and Smoove B, and its coverage of the 9/11 attacks was advertised under the journalistic headline "Holy Fucking Shit".  FTP, identify this satirical newspaper which features the pop cultural review section "The A.V. Club" and which inspired the book "Our Dumb Century".;;(The) Onion
Pop Culture;;Their most recent album is 2004’s Everybody Loves a Happy Ending, which included the single "Closest Thing to Heaven".  Taking a name inspired by Arthur Janov’s Primal Therapy, their debut album featured "Pale Shelter" and "Mad World," the latter covered by Gary Jules for the Donnie Darko soundtrack.  They then released two multiplatinum albums, The Seeds of Love and Songs from the Big Chair.  FTP, identify this new wave band famous for the singles "Sowing the Seeds of Love," "Woman in Chains," "Head over Heels," "Shout," and "Everybody Wants to Rule the World".;;Tears for Fears
Pop Culture;;THE NAME’S THE SAME, FIRST AND LAST NAME REQUIRED.  Oddly enough, both of these men lived in Scranton, Pennsylvania in 2005, one as a minor league baseball player in April and May and the other as a business school student who won the "Hottest in the Office" award at that year’s Dundie Awards.  The latter started a fire by burning a pita in the toaster, has dated Kelly Kapoor for several months, and recently inherited Jim’s old desk when Jim was promoted and moved to Stamford.  The former became the eighth player in history to his 58 home runs in a season in a game against division rival Florida.  FTP, identify the shared name of the former temp on NBC’s The Office and the current Philadelphia Phillies star, winner of the 2005 NL Rookie of the Year award and current Sporting News Player of the Year.;;Ryan Howard
Pop Culture;;Last Wednesday, Jimmy James’ "Jamestown" was given a prerelease listening party at this city’s Oil Can Harry’s gay bar.  Films produced here include Man of The House, Dazed and Confused, Waking Life, and A Scanner Darkly; the last two were helmed by lifelong resident Richard Linklater.  The largest (by population) U.S. city not to have a big 4 professional sport team, their biggest pro teams are the CHL’s Ice Bats and the  AFL’s Wranglers but most fans content themselves with the successes of the sports program of one of the largest universities in the world.  Known almost as much for its Sixth Street entertainment district as for Mustache Pete’s Pizzeria, FTP, identify this city that is both the "Live Music Capital of the World" and the capital of Texas.;;Austin(,) (Texas)
Pop Culture;;The voice of Winston Zeddemore in The Real Ghostbusters, he got his start as a television host when Frank Zappa had to back out of a guest hosting gig on The Tonight Show with Johnny Carson.  In a 2004 Chappelle’s Show skit, Dave wonders what he is doing now; he imagines that he is at a wine and cheese party, saying "Damn! That’s Some Good-ass Cheese!"  He costarred in the CBS drama Martial Law for one season in 1999 and hosted the 2003 Star Search revival, and his most famous film role was in Coming to America, but he is most famous for his eponymous late-night talk show in the early nineties.  FTP, identify this host on whose show Bill Clinton displayed his saxophone skills and whose signature was waving his fist in the air while screaming "Whoop Whoop Whoop!!!";;Arsenio (Hall)|(Arsenio) Hall
Pop Culture;;He modeled his swing after Tom Weiskopf’s, and was taught golf by his father, an immigrant airplane technician.  He encountered controversy in 1985 when he was suspended from the Asian Tour for doctoring his scorecard; he returned in 1988, winning the Nigerian Open, and won his first PGA tour event, the Buick Classic, in 1993, a year in which he also won PGA Rookie of the Year honors.  His victory in the 1998 PGA Championship was a milestone, as he became the first black man to win a PGA major.  Identify this winner of the 2000 Masters who is considered the second best golfer in the world after Tiger Woods, a golfer from Fiji.;;(Vijay) Singh
Pop Culture;;Their name was inspired by the misheard name of a character from "Peabody’s Improbable History," as the lead singer, a former child star on Coronation Street, resembled this character.  That singer, Peter Noone, left the group in 1971, and competing factions of the remaining members continue to tour under their name.  In their prime, they sold over fifty million records, including "There’s a Kind of Hush (All over the World)" and "I’m Henry the Eighth, I Am".  FTP, identify this sixties British invasion band whose other hits included "Mrs. Brown, You’ve got a Lovely Daughter" and "I’m Into Something Good".;;Herman’s Hermits
Pop Culture;;A Maryland native, this author attempted to buy the Minnesota Vikings in 1998, but lacked the funds due to a messy divorce.  He appeared on CNN on September 11, 2001, as a defender of Islam; this surprised many due to the conservative tone of books such as The Bear and the Dragon and Executive Orders.  His most recent book, The Teeth of the Tiger, introduces the son of his most famous character as an intelligence analyst and field consultant, while his Rainbow Six was developed as a multiplatform shooter in 1999.  FTP, identify this author of Patriot Games and Clear and Present Danger, the creator of Jack Ryan.;;(Tom) Clancy
Pop Culture;;Before he became nationally known, he released two albums, In Your Time and Under the Radar; the former was controversially released to iTunes without his permission.  People Magazine’s "Hottest Bachelor" in 2006, he will release his debut album on Clive Davis’s "19 Recordings Unlimited" label, and he was seen on a summer 2006 Ford commercial singing the new song "Possibilities," but he has the unfortunate distinction of having the only US Single to fall from number one to off the Hot 100 chart in less than ten weeks.  FTP, identify this gray-haired singer of "Do I Make You Proud"? the winner of the most recent edition of American Idol.;;Taylor (Hicks)|(Taylor) Hicks
Pop Culture;;The first expansion team in league history to win consecutive season openers, they had a chance to finish .500 at the end of their third season, but was stymied by the Cleveland Browns in the season closer.  In December 2005, they were 1-12 when they hired Dan Reeves as a consultant; it didn’t help much as they finished 2-14 with the worst record in the league, losing to San Francisco in the season finale.  This team has never appeared in either the playoffs or a Monday Night Football game, and that isn’t likely to change soon as they are off to a 1-4 start in 2006.  FTP, identify this NFL team who plays its home games at Reliant Stadium and who passed on Reggie Bush with the first pick of the 2006 draft to select Mario Williams.;;Houston (Texans)|(Houston)Texans
Pop Culture;;The first album to reach platinum status with absolutely no mainstream radio airplay, its artists claimed that its lyrics inspired persecution from Senators and the FBI.  Its title track sampled "You’d Like It Too" by Funkadelic, and tracks such as "Gangsta, Gangsta" and "Parental Discretion Iz Advised" were also featured in this album.  Its most famous track, attacked by Dan Quayle among other political figures, sampled Fancy’s "Feel Good" and "Funky President" by James Brown, and claims that "Ice Cube will swarm/ On any mothafucka in a blue uniform".  FTP, identify this N.W.A. album that featured "Fuck tha Police," whose name indicates the California city that the group hailed from.;;Straight Outta Compton
Pop Culture;;It was founded by programmer Pierre Omidyar in 1995, and one of the first items sold on it was one of Omidyar’s broken laser pointers.  In Latin America, it is known as "MercadoLibre" and it owns rent.com, half.com and Paypal, which replaced Billpoint in 2002 to become its preferred method of payment.  While it does not allow people to sell kidneys or Nazi paraphernalia, it has allowed people to sell individual cornflakes, an air guitar, and water remaining in a cup that Elvis Presley reportedly drank from in 1977.  FTP, identify this online auction site, originally a product of Echo Bay Technology Group.;;eBay
Pop Culture;;.  Both of this films’ leads played exterminators in separate summer 2006 animated films.  Featuring a reading of A Separate Peace in one of its final scenes, this 2004 film follows two friends, one a failed author and one a struggling actor who is to be married a week later.  Based on a Rex Pickett novel and featuring Sandra Oh and Virginia Madsen in supporting roles, it is famous for a scene where Miles emphatically refuses to drink Merlot.  FTP, identify this film featuring Thomas Haden Church and Paul Giamatti that increased interest in several California wineries.;;Sideways
Pop Culture;;This University of Maryland – College Park graduate was once a writer for Saturday Night Live; according to him, the only sketch of his shown was played as the last of the telecast.  His cinematic directorial debut was 1998’s Sour Grapes, but he wrote a screenplay in the 1980s called Prognosis: Negative.  Considered for the titular role in Bad Santa, he is better known for co-creating one of the most popular sitcoms of the 1990s and starring in an HBO sitcom where he plays himself, neuroses and all.  FTP, identify this writer/actor, famous for Seinfeld and Curb Your Enthusiasm.;;(Larry) David
Pop Culture;;This Chicago native lived with his stepfather in California as a youth after his parents were divorced; confusion over the identity of his biological and stepfathers inspired his decision to change his last name from Seversen to his mother’s maiden name.  According to a 1999 song, "Weird Al" Yankovic’s "Baby’s in Love with" this man, who on an MTV Unplugged appearance once took out a Sharpie and wrote "Pro-Choice" on his arm, a stance he later confirmed with his song "Whipping" on his band’s third album, Vitalogy.  FTP, identify this vocalist, who has penned and sung such tracks as "Rearviewmirror," "Spin the Black Circle," "World Wide Suicide," and "Jeremy" as lead singer of Pearl Jam.;;(Eddie) Vedder
Pop Culture;;Lee Katkin, one of this series’ directors, once answered criticism by stating that "The show is written for an MTV audience, which is more interested in images, emotion and energy than plot or character".  It was notable for its use of music, including an iconic scene in the premiere set to Phil Collins’s "In The Air Tonight" and its original theme song, the first to hit #1 on the U.S. Billboard charts since "Theme from Peter Gunn".  It starred Edward James Olmos as Lt. Castillo, the commander of Ricardo Tubbs and James Crockett.  FTP, identify this 1980s NBC cop show that featured the music of Jan Hammer and starred Don Johnson, remade into a 2006 film starring Jamie Foxx and Colin Farrell.;;Miami Vice
Pop Culture;;It is made in two distinct versions, one for France and one for everywhere else; the French version is lower in calories and caffeine but higher in sodium.  The French version also comes in a long aluminum can, and includes sugar, while the other version comes in a glass bottle with a resealable plastic cap and contains high fructose corn syrup for sweetening purposes.  According to Consumer Reports, the French version is less sweet but contains more of the advertised coffee flavor.  FTP, identify this "Carbonated Fusion Beverage," a coffee-flavored Soda offered starting in 2006 by Coca-Cola.;;(Coca-Cola) Blak|(Coke) Blak
Pop Culture;;His tombstone reads "Back to Silence," and he is buried in Glendale, California alongside one of his wives, Carole Lombard.  He left a career as a Portland, Oregon tie salesman to move to Hollywood; shortly thereafter he got his first starring role in the western The Painted Desert.  He starred opposite Jean Harlow in Red Dust and Saratoga, and was featured in Marilyn Monroe’s last film, The Misfits, but was best known for a 1939 adaptation of a famed Southern novel.  FTP, identify this actor who won an Academy Award for Best Actor for It Happened One Night but remains best known as Rhett Butler.;;(Clark) Gable
Pop Culture;;She has one big meal a day, with lost of vegetables and fresh fruits, and never junk food, and walks uphill on a treadmill for two hours a day to stay in shape.  She once out-ate NFL player Randy Thomas, who weighs more than twice what she does, in a shrimp-eating contest; she had 6.5 pounds in 10 minutes to 1.5 pounds.  She discovered her gastronomic prowess while working in a Burger King in Alexandria, Virginia, and is currently the number three professional eater in the world, behind only Joey Chestnutt and Takeru Kobayashi.  FTP, identify this woman nicknamed "The Black Widow" who in 2005 set an American record by eating 37 hot dogs in 12 minutes at the Nathan’s Famous contest in New York,;;(Sonya) Thomas
Pop Culture;;The first non-U.S. team to win it was from Monterey, Mexico, in 1957, and teams from Taiwan won all but three of them from 1969 to 1981.  In 2006, Columbus, Georgia defeated Kawaguchi City, Japan 2-1 in the final.  Each country has their own playoff system to determine their representative; in the U.S. each state has a tournament consisting of each town’s all-star team with the overall winner representing the country in August in South Williamsport, Virginia.  With a recent rule change forcing eligible players to be younger than 13 on May 1 (and not August 1), this is, FTP, what tournament that honors the best baseball team made up of male preteens in the world?;;Little League World Series
Pop Culture;;Their pets included Spot, a fire-breathing dinosaur who lived under the stairs, and the Mel Blanc-voiced Charlie, a talking raven who lives in the cuckoo clock.  Beverly Owen and Pat Priest portrayed Marilyn, the conventionally attractive member of the family who was seen as hideous by her relatives, and Butch Patrick played her brother Eddie.  The main female character, played by Yvonne De Carlo, had the maiden name of Dracula, and her father, played by Al Lewis, lived in the cellar and performs various typical "mad scientist" experiments with his assistant Igor.  With a house at 1313 Mockingbird Lane, FTP identify this TV show also featuring Fred Gwynne as Herman, a show that depicts the home life of a family of horror movie monsters not to be confused with The Addams Family.;;(The) Munsters
Pop Culture;;In 1969, Canadian animator Marv Newland created a famous short cartoon where this film’s title character "meets Godzilla," in which he is simply crushed by a giant green foot at the conclusion of the opening credits.  Based on a novel by Felix Salten, this 1942 film spawned a 2006 direct-to-DVD "midquel" that brought back recurring characters The Great Prince, Flower and Thumper.  The American Film Institute has deemed its off-screen villain, "Man," to be one of the fifty greatest villains of all time, as he is responsible for the death of the protagonist’s mother.  FTP, identify this Disney film about a young deer.;;Bambi
Pop Culture;;Started by John Kilcullen in 1991 with a book about DOS, this series branched beyond personal computing in 1993 with a book written by Eric Tyson about Personal Finance.  Other subjects have included World History, Spirituality, Sex, Home Buying, Kakuro, and Robot Building.  FTP, identify this series that uses basic language to explain often complex topics easily, a "reference for the rest of us!";;(the) For Dummies (series)
Pop Culture;;(MB) One receiver on this team had been a basketball star at North Carolina; another came to the team from Jacksonville.  Both Ronald Curry and Alvis Whitted have seen bigger roles at the expense of the teammate who not only parked in the team owner's spot but also was seen pumping his fist just after the sack of Aaron Brooks.  FTP, Jerry Porter and Randy Moss round out the receiving corps of what AFC West team that wears silver and black, a regional rival of the San Francisco 49ers.;;Oakland (Raiders)|(Oakland) Raiders
Pop Culture;;It will feature an ATI "Hollywood" GPU made with a 90 nm CMOS process and an IBM PowerPC processor codenamed "Broadway", stand approximately 4.5 centimeters by 15 centimeters by 20 centimeters, and feature the Opera web browser.  The winner of the Game Critics Award for Best of Show at E3 2006, it's been praised for its backwards compatibility and unique controller.  Developed under the codename Revolution, it's current name is meant to imply togetherness, not urine.  Featuring launch titles Metroid Prime 3: Corruption and The Legend of ZeldANSWER: Twilight Princess, FTP, name this next-generation Nintendo console.;;(Nintendo) Wii
Pop Culture;;Fans have speculated that he used to be a monk, based on his attire.  His schemes have included hiding inside a magic mirror, using giggle glitter to induce fits of laughter, and creating a magnet which only attracts objects of a certain color.  The ogre Bigmouth frequently steals his food, and his rich godfather Balthazar disdains him.  In later seasons he was aided by a more competent assistant Scruple, though it was never entirely clear if he wanted to eat his nemeses or turn them into gold.  Accompanied by his cat Azrael, FTP, name this sorcerer, the sworn enemy of the Smurfs.;;Gargamel
Pop Culture;;Along with "Take Me With U", "The Glamorous Life", and "17 Days", it was originally written by Prince for the Apollonia 6 album, but it was cut at the last minute, and the famous version by a different artist debuted two years later.  According to the closing lines, the speaker's problems were caused by her lover "pick[ing] last night to get down," while the song opens at six o'clock, moments after the speaker had been "kissin' Valentino by a crystral blue Italian stream," and she soons notes that even with a plane she wouldn't make it to work on time.  FTP, name this song where the Bangles "wish it was Sunday/'Cause that's [their] fun day/[Their] 'I don't have to run' day".;;Manic Monday
Pop Culture;;It ends with Tim Conway dressed as the world's oldest living vaudevillian, who falls asleep while trying to perform.  Also featured are scenes from the Friars' Club Roast of Hugh Hefner, cameos by Billy the Mime and the South Park kids, and the revelation that Joe Franklin raped Sarah Silverman.  The brainchild of Penn Jilette, this film’s true focus is on what happens after a man walks into a talent agent and says he has a family act.  FTP, name this 2005 documentary devoted to a legendary filthy joke.;;The Aristocrats
Pop Culture;;Contrary to popular belief, it's not technically the first of its type, as Contest of Champions was released two years earlier in 1982 though was much smaller scale.  Developed partially as an excuse for Mattel to sell toys, its primary setting was constructed from fragments of many planets, including Denver, Colorado.  Introducing Titania, Volcana, and Julia Carpenter as Spider-Woman, the events of this series lead to She-Hulk temporarily replacing the Thing in the Fantastic Four as well as the first appearance of Spider-Man's black suit.  The Beyonder gathered over 30 heroes and villains and made them fight in, FTP, what landmark Marvel crossover?;;(Marvel) (Super) (Heroes) Secret Wars
Pop Culture;;Arthur Dales was the first person to actually work on them, though the original was started by J. Edgar Hoover in 1946.  One inspired the novel From Outer Space by Jose Chung, while other notable ones include the cases of reluctant psychic Clyde Bruckman, Eugene Victor Tooms, who could stretch and contort his body, and the mysterious black oil aliens.  They were originally classified under "U" for "Unsolved", but were quickly moved to a more spacious filing cabinet.  FTP, name these FBI investigations into supernatural or paranormal phenomena, most notably associated with Dana Scully and Fox Mulder.;;(The) X-Files
Pop Culture;;According to Peppermint Patty, Marcie looks just like this athlete when mad.  The first tennis player named Sports Illustrated Sportsman of The Year and longstanding commissioner of World TeamTennis, with Karen Hantze Susman she won the women's doubles title at Wimbledon in 1961 while still using her maiden name Moffitt.  The new namesake of the USTA National Tennis Center and a strong proponent of equal prize money for men and women, over her career she won 20 titles at Wimbledon.  FTP, name this female tennis player, who in 1973 beat Bobby Riggs in the Battle of the Sexes.;;(Billie) (Jean) King
Pop Culture;;In 2004, he placed third in a German television contest to win a new record deal, though this August he released an album produced by Giovanni Giorgilli.  He performed on Ain't a Damn Thang Changed, the debut album of WC and the Maad Circle, and was briefly a member of 40 Thevz, which lead to him signing with Tommy Boy Records.  In 1998, he teamed with Kenny Rogers to record an updated version of "The Gambler", though it wasn't released until 2003's El Cool Magnifico.  The performer of the Kenan & Kel theme song, his debut album It Takes a Thief included the hit "Fantasic Voyage", but he's best known for his contribution to a 1995 soundtrack.  FTP, name this rapper, who gave the Dangerous Minds soundtrack "Gangsta's Paradise".;;Coolio
Pop Culture;;Their patron saint is Saint Apollonia and Alan Rudolph directed a film about their "secret lives".  Fictional examples include John Patterson in For Better or For Worse, Jerry Robinson on The Bob Newhart Show, Christian Szell in Marathon Man, Tim Whatley on Seinfeld, and Hermey at the end of Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer.  Steve Martin has played them onscreen twice, once in Little Shop of Horrors, where the profession is suggested as an outlet for his natural sadism, and once in the comic thriller Novocaine.  FTP, name these tooth doctors.;;dentists
Pop Culture;;The Star Trek: Deep Space Nine episode "Prophet Motive" was based on a spec script Ira Steven Behr wrote for this series.  Some of the characters include an unsuccessful boxer and a receptionist at an art gallery.  ABC cancelled it after four seasons, but NBC picked it up, pairing it with Cheers on Thursday for the 1982-83 season.  The biggest star's hatred of the show lead to his character being given multiple personality disorder and to multiple appearances from Tony Clifton.  Featuring Judd Hirsch, Christopher Lloyd, Danny DeVito, and Andy Kaufman, FTP name this lauded sit-com about the workers at the Sunshine Cab Company.;;Taxi
Pop Culture;;"The Muslim religion allows for few accidents" says Louis Bernard early in this film, not long before his death.  A fight at a taxidermist's results when Ben McKenna doesn't realize the instruction to "try Ambrose Chapel" referred to a place, not a person.  A remake of a 1934 movie by the same director, Jo screams in Albert Hall to save the Prime Minister and later sings "Que Sera Sera" to locate her kidnapped son.  Starring Doris Day and Jimmy Stewart, FTP, name this Hitchcock film, not to be confused with a similarly-titled Bill Murray farce.;;The Man Who Knew Too Much
Pop Culture;;It takes its name from an entity that opened in 1838, filed for bankruptcy protection in 1971, and closed completely in 1976; the name was later applied to an Amtrak trip in October, 2003, from Chicago to Atlantic City.  In Australia it's known as Perth Station and it England it's replaced by Kings Cross.  It's notable in that three different cards will advance the token here, making it better to own than Pennsylvania despite being further from Free Parking.  FTP, name this railroad, located five spaces after Go in Monopoly.;;Reading Railroad
Pop Culture;;After two years at the University of Arizona, he was taken in the second round by the Golden State Warriors, with whom he won the 2003 Most Improved Player Award, though he left for his current team before the 2004 season.  In 2006 he competed in the Three-point Shootout after Raja Bell dropped out, finishing second, and replaced an injured Jermaine O'Neal in the All-Star Game.  He also scored 2,346 points that season, fourth overall, though he did the lead the league in turnovers.  Also known for his bizarre behavior, which includes attempting a free-throw by bouncing the shot off the floor, attempting to convert his home to "Colorado altitude", and allegedly playing online poker at half-time, FTP name this Washington Wizard and practitioner of Gilbertology.;;(Gilbert) (Jay) Arenas
Pop Culture;;In the music video for this song, Peter Buck uses a Jag-Stang originally owned by Kurt Cobain.  The first song to debut at number one on the Billboard Modern Rock chart, the lyrics describe someone who "smile[s] like the cartoon, tooth for a tooth" and "said that irony was the shackles of youth" and claims that the title phrase is "your Benzedrine".  On The Late Show with David Letterman, the band was joined in a performance of the song by Dan Rather, as it was inspired by an incident where Rather was beaten by an unknown assailant shouting an odd phrase.  FTP, name this R.E.M. single, the answer to whose title query should be given in hertz.;;What's The Frequency, Kenneth
Pop Culture;;Robert Patrick Benedict plays Calvin, who once cried while masturbating, using the tears as a lubricant, and developed a shy bladder after observing someone staring at him while at a urinal.  Chi McBride is the calm and somewhat mystic Bishop.  Luis Guzman plays Raddimus, who introduced the game of showing one's genitals to the other employees when they're not expecting it.  Max Kasch and Andy Milonakis are wigger busboys.  David Koechner is Floyd, who offers Justin Long's character the assistant manager position at ShenaniganZ.  Anna Faris and Ryan Reynolds's characters used to date in, FTP, what 2005 comedy about the food service industry?;;Waiting
Pop Culture;;He converted to Mormonism after talking with Mr. Harrison and, though a geologist, won a Nobel prize for his investigation into spontaneous combustion.  Mickey Goldmill appeared to him while he was fighting Bat Dad, and a bleeding statue of the Virgin Mary briefly cured his alcoholism.  As a young man he was a member of a boy band, which is why he didn't want his son involved with Fingerbang.  FTP, name this father of Stan on South Park.;;Randy (Marsh)|R(andall) Marsh
Pop Culture;;This author wrote romance novels such as The Burden and Unfinished Portrait using the penname Mary Westmacott.  Born in 1890, the last novel she wrote was 1973's Postern of Fate, though two books that were written in the 1940s were published later, intended to be the final adventures of her two most famous characters.  She was played on film by Vanessa Redgrave in a 1979 movie about a real-life incident where she disappeared for several days in December 1926.  The author of the longest running play in London theater history, The Mousetrap, her work as a pharmacists inspired the many poisonings in her books.  Often called the best-selling novelist of all time, FTP, name this author of The ABC Murders, And Then There Were None, and Murder on the Orient Express, the creator of Miss Marple and Hercule Poirot.;;(Dame) (Agatha) Christie|(Agatha) (Mary) Clarissa(,) (Lady) (Mallowan)
Pop Culture;;He says that he was hit by a car when he was 22 and that he wears his ubiquitous hat to cover the scar.  The first track on his eponymous debut is titled "Song 6", and his international singles include "Lie To Me", "Jimmy Gets High", and "Free Loop".  Named New Artist of the Year at the 2006 Junos, Coca-Cola chose to use his first single in a European ad campaign, though it got its largest exposure in this country from its use on a television show also featuring strong ties to Coke.  Also responsible for "Love You Lately", FTP, name this Canadian artist whose "Bad Day" was played every time a contestant was eliminated from American Idol.;;(Daniel) (Richard) Powter
Pop Culture;;Before becoming an actor, John Wayne played as offensive lineman at this school, which in the 40s was coached by Jeff Cravath.  Supposedly, the success of Sam Cunningham here convinced Bear Bryant to integrate his team.  In the 90s they faltered, and their 37-35 record from 1996 to 2001 is the second-worst over any five-year span in their history, but they've bounced back.  Linebackers who have worn #55 here include Chris Claiborne, Junior Seau, and Willie McGinest, while diverse talent such as Ricky Bell, O.J. Simpson, and Marcus Allen have lead it to be nicknamed "Tailback U".  Currently coached by Pete Carroll, their 11 national titles include back-to-back in 2003 and 2004, though in 2005 they lost the Rose Bowl to Texas.  FTP, name this school, whose stars last season included Matt Leinart and Reggie Bush.;;U(niversity) (of) S(outhern) C(alifornia)
Pop Culture;;This website claims that it's "been America's #1 online choice going on 10 years" and offers $50,000 Identity Theft Insurance from Virginia Surety Company if you sign up.  It's owned by Experian, which also runs LowerMyBills.com and ConsumerInfo.com and which in 2005 settled with the FTC after earning over $950,000 by not disclosing that the site's nominally costless service would in fact charge the consumer $79.99 if they didn't cancel within 30 days.  Advertised with commercials featuring a man saying, "I'm thinking of a number between 450 and 850.  Do you know what it is"? FTP name this website that supposedly lets you check your credit score without paying.;;(www.)FreeCreditReport.com
Pop Culture;;Cy Young threw the first perfect game in the modern era on it and Pete Rose recorded his 3000th hit on this date. If the system date is changed to it, the loading screen in Rise of the Triad: Dark War changes. Wolfenstein 3D was released on it, and in 2006 International No Pants Day fell on this date.  It is also the date of an annual celebration of General Ignacio Zaragoza’s defeat of the numerically superior army of Napoleon III.  Corona advertising tends to increase prior to, FTP, what Mexican holiday commemorating the Battle of Puebla celebrated in the U.S. with drinking and partying.;;Cinco de Mayo|May 5(th)
Pop Culture;;Their earliest incarnation recorded a version of "Knockin' on Heaven's Door" in the drummer's garage, while their guitarist lost at MTV's StareMaster to Phantom Planet's Sam Ferrar.  Originating from Los Angeles, they were formerly known by names such as the Edible Nuns and Mostly Men before assuming their current name. Winner of the 2005 Best New Artist Grammy, Matt Flynn recently replaced their drummer, Ryan Dusick, due to joint and nerve injuries. FTP, name this group responsible for the album Flowers For Jane and hits such as "She Will Be Loved" and "This Love".;;Maroon 5
Pop Culture;;One serving of it supplies 100 calories and 10 grams of fat. Its precise recipe is a heavily guarded secret, although many have compared it to tartar sauce and thousand island dressing.  In The Whole Nine Yards Jimmy The Tulip speculates that it’s ketchup mixed with mayonnaise, while in Harold & Kumar Go to White Castle the Burger Shack employee says it contains animal semen.  FTP, name the mysterious condiment featured between "two all beef patties" and "lettuce" in the popular Big Mac Jingle.;;Special Sauce
Pop Culture;;He was voiced by David Herman in a Fall 2004 NBC animated series.  Born in Germany in 1944, his claim to fame started when as a waiter on an ocean liner he met an aspiring magician. Together, they took Las Vegas by storm, appearing in over 5,000 shows, but their run ended abruptly when he was mauled by one of his animals in 2003. FTP, name this tiger trainer who created one of the most successful shows in Vegas with Siegfried Fischbacher.;;Roy (Uwe) (Ludwig) (Horn)
Pop Culture;;(NB) This American television series is notable for having Australians as its two top-billed actors, and reruns of it currently air weeknights at 7:00 P.M. on TNT.  Season two subplots included Jack’s messy divorce and his obligation to take care of his Alzheimic father, portrayed by Martin Landau.  In season four, Roselyn Sanchez was added to the cast as Agent Elena Delgado, who brought a needed "streetwise" perspective to the unit.  Ending each show with either pertinent hotline phone numbers or information on real missing people, FTP identify this CBS drama starring Anthony LaPaglia and Poppy Montgomery whose title refers to the manner in which people disappear.;;Without a Trace
Pop Culture;;He was an immigrant from Cuba in 1980. An upcoming video-game attempts to construct an alternative ending to his life, by having him dodge his assassination and rising once again to glory. After arriving, he became a prominent drug lord, turned on his mentor and married his mentor’s wife. He saw his demise on the same day as killing his sister’s husband. Famous for such lines as "You know what capitalism is? Getting’ fucked" and "Say hello to my little friend," FTP name this Miami drug lord portrayed by Al Pacino in Scarface.;;Tony Montana
Pop Culture;;(NB) In the 1998 film Practical Magic, this song is proclaimed "a good song to get drunk to," and it appears as a bonus track on Dannii Minogue’s 1997 album Girl.  It was the third single from Nilsson Schmillson and features the artist portraying three distinct parts, each with its own voice: the narrator, his sister, and his doctor, whose advice is sought to relieve a "belly ache;"  He prescribes the titular object as one half of the stated cure.  Also featured in the film Reservoir Dogs and commercials for Coca-Cola with Lime, FTP identify this Harry Nilsson single, whose titular object must be consumed after "de lime" has been put into it.;;Coconut
Pop Culture;;WARNING: Year and team required. Their oldest player was 38-year-old Lenny Harris, who came to the team from Chicago at midseason and him .286 over 13 games, while their second baseman and center fielder both broke the franchise record for single-season hits.  Featuring both the Manager of the Year and the NL rookie of the year, they won the NLCS after trailing three games to 1, notable for an 8-run eighth inning in game 6 that kept their season alive, thanks in part to Steve Bartman.  They then won their second world series in seven years, beating the New York Yankees in six games. FTP, name this team who saw the emergence of Dontrelle Willis and pitcher Josh Beckett named World Series MVP.;;2003 Florida (Marlins)|2003 (Florida) Marlins
Pop Culture;;They first appeared in The Brave and the Bold #28. The earliest account of their origin involves them fighting back a group of invading Appelaxians and then deciding to subsequently pool their resources when confronted with similar threats. Their official team mascot and sidekick is Snapper Carr. In the 1980s they briefly moved to Detroit, when the focus shifted to characters like Vixen and Steel, while one future version includes Hourman and Resurrection Man, who will replace the Martian Manhunter.  FTP, name this group of superheroes in the DC comics universe that includes Wonder Woman, Superman, and Batman.;;Justice League (of) (America)
Pop Culture;;A 3 time Emmy winner, his first TV roles were minor parts as a voice actor for several shows, including Transformers, 2 Stupid Dogs, and as Hulk Hogan in the Rock 'N Wrestling series. He got his start doing stand up comedy and was the first $100,000 winner of Star Search’s comedy category. The winner of the fifth season of Celebrity Poker Showdown, his big break came in 1996, when he was cast as an NYPD officer who is perpetually jealous of the title character, his brother. FTP, name the 6 ft, 8.5 inch actor who currently stars in his own sitcom Til’ Death and who played Robert Barone on Everybody Loves Raymond.;;(Brad) Garrett
Pop Culture;;Based on a series of books, it lasted a total of 52 episodes through the mid 1990s. Its title song was performed by Little Richard and all of its episode titles begin with the name of the show. With Lily Tomlin voicing the lead adult in the series and Malcolm-Jamal Warner voicing the "Producer Says" segments at the end of the show, FTP name this animated TV show created by Joanna Cole and Bruce Degan meant to introduce kids to the world of science with the help of Ms. Frizzle and the titular vehicle.;;(The) Magic School Bus
Pop Culture;;The sikha of a Vaishnava devotee is often mistaken for one. It is common among wrestlers and many European soccer players. It is extremely popular is the Pittsburgh area, as when Jaromir Jagr cut his it was reported on the local news. Barry Melrose is considered to have a golden one. Others to have had it at some time include Tony Blair, Steven Seagal, and David Bowie. Known in Canada as hockey hair, FTP, name this distinctive hair style that is short in the front, top, and sides, but party in the back.;;Mullet
Pop Culture;;His best season as a batter was 1972, when he six hits, including one homerun, over 19 at bats.  His career included the 1974 World Series MVP which he earned with 2 saves and a win, 4-time Rolaids Relief Man of the Year, and the Cy Young Award and AL MVP with the Brewers in 1981. He is noted for his handlebar mustache, which he grew to get a $300 bonus from owner Charles O. Finley.  Admitted to the Hall of Fame in 1992, five years after teammate Catfish Hunter.  FTP, name this reliever who did his best work with Oakland.;;(Rollie) Fingers
Pop Culture;;The 1980 horror comedy movie of this name starred Robert Forster and Robin Riker. A 2005 album of the same name featured the song "Mr. November" and was the third album released by The National. The same year, a real-life one of these creatures was eaten whole by a Burmese python in the Everglades, causing the snake to explode. FTP, name this kind creature that according to an urban legend, was brought back to New York from Florida by tourists as babies but eventually flushed down the toilet and thus inhabit the sewers below.;;Alligator
Pop Culture;;This Oklahoma-based band is part of an alternate reality game promoting Lego’s Bionicle toy line.  Part of the 2006 Black Clouds and Underdogs tour and Tournado, this band experienced tragedy in 2005 when keyboardist Tim Jordan committed suicide while the band toured Europe.  Their self-titled debut featured tracks like "The Last Song," "Time Stands Still," and "My Paper Heart," but they’re better known for a pair of TRL hit singles.  FTP, identify this power pop band behind the album Move Along and the singles "Swing, Swing" and "Dirty Little Secret".;;(The) All-American Rejects
Pop Culture;;One team by this name won its school’s only national championship in 2003 when they beat Stanford in the College World Series. Other schools to use the nickname include the University of Maine at Presque Isle and Bryn Mawr. The most storied school to use it as their athletic nickname adopted the name in its early days when the school was a night school. That school made fifteen appearances in the NCAA tournament under hall of fame coach John Chaney. FTP, name the common nickname used by both Rice and Temple University.;;Owls
Pop Culture;;Its protagonist’s father was an inventor looking for a process to recycle used sneakers.  When that protagonist, whose first name is the same as his last name spelled backwards, is wrongfully accused of stealing a pair of those sneakers, he is sentenced to community service, where he meets X-Ray, Armpit, Squid, and Zigzag.  He and his new juvenile delinquent companions must spend their days making the titular objects in an attempt to discover treasure placed underground by the protagonist’s Great-grandfather.  FTP, identify this 1999 Newbury Award winning novel by Louis Sachar.;;Holes
Pop Culture;;He had cameo roles in movies such as Repo Man and Hook and was also ejected from a Miami Heat/New York Knicks game for yelling profanities at a referee. His prolific music career started with the 1970 album Down to Earth. An album entitled Parakeets featured his songs sung by children, and in 2003 he recorded a duet with Alan Jackson, "It’s Five O’Clock Somewhere". His most recent album, License to Chill, was extremely successful, and he co-owns restaurant chains named after two of his biggest hits. FTP, name this singer/songwriter whose hits include "Cheeseburger in Paradise" and "Margaritaville".;;(Jimmy) Buffett
Pop Culture;;Before turning to acting, he was a track-and-field star in his Texas high school and Occidental College. His rise to acting prominence started when he starred in a short film written by his brother that in 1996 became a full-length picture. He would later in two films across from his then-girlfriend, Drew Barrymore. His major break occurred when he played the supporting role of Carlson in 1999’s Blue Streak. FTP, name this frat-pack actor who would go on to star in Legally Blonde, My Super Ex-Girlfriend, and Old School, the brother of Owen.;;L(uke) Wilson
Pop Culture;;Released on Cinco de Mayo, its soundtrack includes songs from Maroon 5 and G. Love & Special Sauce. It follows the story of Roy, an 8th grader at Trace Middle School who recently moved from Montana to Coconut Cove, Florida when his dad, an employee of the Justice Department, gets transferred there. He is able to make friends with a kid named Garrett and then, after getting his head smashed into a school bus, meets Mullet Fingers, who goes to great lengths, including throwing alligators into port-a-podies on a construction site, to keep a Mother Paula’s All-American Pancake House from opening in the town and destroying the habitat of owls that burrow through holes in the ground. FTP, name the 2006 movie directed by Wil Shriner, produced by Jimmy Buffett, and starring Luke Wilson based on a book by Carl Hiaasen.;;Hoot
Pop Culture;;It was held 40 miles southwest of its namesake town. Originally scheduled to last for 3 days, heavy rains postponed the events of the final day, pushing the festival to 4 days. Although it began as a profit-making venture, but crowds greater than anticipated showed up, forcing the organizers t make admission free. A Joni Mitchell song commemorates the event, which later became a hit for Crosby, Stills, Nash & Young. FTP, identify this 1969 rock music festival held in Upstate New York that saw perfomances from The Who and Jimi Hendrix.;;Woodstock
Pop Culture;;He is quoted as saying that "out of 88 episodes that I did we were on time and on budget never, not once" when describing his role in his most successful TV show. He started as a playwright, writing on Broadway. His play A Few Good Men was three years later turned into a Hollywood film. The idea for the TV show for which he received his Emmy was conceived from leftover dialogue from the screenplay to The American President. FTP, name this creater of Sports Night and The West Wing, now writing a new show Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip.;;(Aaron) Sorkin
Pop Culture;;Although songs like Sufjan Stevens’ "No Man's Land" and "Chicago" make appearances in the film, the majority of its soundtrack was created by Mychael Danna and Denver-based band DeVotchKa.  In addition to discussing the pros and cons of ice cream, this film also introduces characters such as an academic who competes with Larry Sugarman to be the most prolific scholar of Proust and a teenager who takes but eventually breaks a vow of silence.  These two are among the group that travels with Olive to California in, for ten points, what 2006 indie film starring Alan Arkin, Steve Carell, Toni Collette, and Greg Kinnear about the road trip taken by a family to the title beauty pageant?;;Little Miss Sunshine
Pop Culture;;During the first six weeks of the 2006 NFL season, this team has placed rookie linebacker Jamar Williams on injured reserve and lost their first preseason game to the woeful San Francisco 49ers.  While that preseason ended with a 2-2 record, highlights so far during the regular season include their kicker Robbie Gould nailing all 17 of his field goal attempts and the emergence of wide receiver Bernard Berrian.  Coached by Lovie Smith and led by quarterback Rex Grossman, for ten points, name this team that the Arizona Cardinals recently blew a Monday Night Football game to, allowing them remain the only undefeated team in the NFC.;;Chicago (Bears)|(Chicago) Bears
Pop Culture;;In the spring of 2001, Richard Hill and David Hughes created a program to simulate this activity and later created a company around it.  Mark Twain once compared analyzing jokes to doing this, claiming that "the subject always dies in the process".  In the film E.T., Elliot causes chaos in the classroom before the students embark on this activity, but he might have tried alternate tactics had he called the special PETA hotline for information on how to respond to such an assignment.  Often done in high school biology classrooms, for ten points, name this practice done in order to examine the innards of a certain amphibian.;;frog dissection
Pop Culture;;This song was originally intended as a tune about soldiers who went to Vietnam, an intention evidenced by its original title that mentions G.I. Joe.  Featuring a guitar riff inspired by Bruce Springsteen's "Kitty's Back," part of this song's lyrics recall memories of a "chick who used to dance a lot" who once "slapped Johnny's face".  The lyrics of this song, the first single off the 1976 album Jailbreak, also predict that a rowdy time will happen Friday night at Dino's Bar and Grill. "Spread the word around," because, for ten points, "guess who just got back today" according to the title of the biggest hit for the Irish rock band Thin Lizzy?;;The Boys Are Back In Town
Pop Culture;;On one of this show's many specials, "Don't Touch That Box," Luther Vandross guest starred as himself while Goosebumps author R.L. Stine served as a head writer for the show.  Among the straight-to-home-video episodes created include a sing-along and another which sees two of the show's characters attempt to stay up all night.  Among the characters on the show include the "Blankateers," Mr. Knack, Batty, twins Bog and Quagmire, the dragon Magellan, and a young sorceress.  For ten points, name this Nick Jr. show featuring puppets at the giant-owned title location.;;Eureeka's Castle
Pop Culture;;As a youngster, he played for both the Quebec Jr. Aces and the Quebec Ramparts before turning pro in 1971.  After scoring only 2 goals in the first 19 games of the 1984-85 season, he decided to retire for the first time.  Possibly his greatest goal occurred in a playoff game against Boston in 1979 when he one-timed into the net on a power play off the pass of Jacques Lemaire.  Helping the Montreal Canadians win five Stanley Cups in the 1970's, for ten points, identify this legendary right-winger who was enduringly known as The Flower.;;(Guy) Lafleur
Pop Culture;;It was invented by Johan Vaaler in 1899, but it was a British company who popularized its current shape and William Middlebrook who took that design across the pond to America.  Recent non-standard uses of one include Canadian Kyle MacDonald managing to trade his way up from a red one of them to a house and a project where the students of a Whitwell, Tennessee school collected millions of them to try and come to terms with the number of victims in the Holocaust.  For ten points, identify this office supply that you’ll also find in an annoying anthropomorphized form as a Microsoft Office Assistant.;;paper clip
Pop Culture;;This album opens with a statement by the fictitious frustrated method actor Larry Oliviae.  On one track, the speaker suffers from "Chronomentrophobia," or the fear of clocks, while the influence of Cab Calloway's "Minnie the Moocher" is clearly seen on "Mighty O".  The Marching Wolverines from Morris Brown College contribute to this album's appropriately-named "Morris Brown".  Another track, "PJ & Rooster," gets its name from the characters Big Boi and André 3000 play in the film of the same name.  For ten points, name this album and companion to a 2006 film, the most recent release by OutKast.;;Idlewild
Pop Culture;;4. (MD) In 2006, it was adapted into a Broadway musical starring comedic songwriter Stephen Lynch as the leading player.  The suggested title of "I Got Punched In the Nose For Sticking My face In Other People's Business" was fortunately ditched in favor of the one it is better known by.  There are a number of classic hits from the 1980s on the soundtrack, including "White Wedding" and "Love Stinks" as well as the original songs "Somebody Kill Me Please" and "Grow Old With You". FTP, Robbie Hart and Julia Sullivan are the main characters in what 1998 Adam Sandler movie?;;(The) Wedding Singer
Pop Culture;;(NB) Following in his father’s footsteps, this left-handed athlete vandalized Isle Delfino with a magical paintbrush developed by Professor E. Gadd and tried to frame another character for his mischief.  Voiced by Delores Rogers, this character who lives at 48 Lava Cul-De-Sac, Magma Manor often covers up his single-fanged mouth with a cloth drawing of sharp teeth.  The younger brother of Larry, Wendy O., Morton, Roy, Iggy, Lemmy, and Ludwig von, he appeared as the main boss and kidnapper of Peach in the Nintendo DS game "New Super Mario Brothers".  FTP, identify this Nintendo villain who is not to be confused with Baby Bowser.;;Bowser (Koopa) Junior|Bowser (Koopa) Jr(.)
Pop Culture;;During a 1957 interview with Truman Capote, he told Capote that he was going to write and direct a western entitled A Burst of Vermilion, a film that was to be the first one released through the production company founded and named after his mother's maiden name, Pennebaker Productions.  He spent a month in a veteran's hospital to prepare for his first film role, 1950's The Men.  Controversial moments in his career include calling Frank Oz "Miss Piggy" on the set of 2001's The Score, his last on-screen appearance, and having a 1972 Best Actor Oscar accepted by a woman named Sacheen Littlefeather.  For ten points, name this legendary actor whose memorable roles include Jor-El, Terry Malloy, Stanley Kowalski, and Don Vito Corleone.;;(Marlon) Brando
Pop Culture;;Among his guest starring roles on sitcoms include Mike Flaherty's stockbroker Parker on Spin City and Matthew's twin brother Andrew in an episode of NewsRadio.  Before that, he hosted an early 1990's talk show that didn't last very long in syndication but came in second only to Beavis & Butthead in the ratings while it was on MTV.  In addition to authoring such books as Naked Pictures of Famous People, he also uttered the memorable line "for those keeping score: Three 6 Mafia: 1; Martin Scorsese: 0" while hosting the 2006 Oscars.  He rose to national prominence after taking over for Craig Kilborn as host of a Comedy Central show in 1999.  For ten points, name this host of The Daily Show.;;(Jon) Stewart
Pop Culture;;During the 2006 season, he was put on the 15-day DL on July 29 and headed to double A Mississippi for rehab on August 8, but not before tying Paul Waner's record of 14 consecutive games with an extra base hit.   The top pick of the 1990 MLB draft, he made his Major League debut in 1993 but didn’t play his first full season until 1995 when he replaced Terry Pendleton on the field to help lead his team to a World Series title.  He played left field in 2002 and 2003 in order to make room for Vinny Castilla, but he won the 1999 NL MVP at his natural position.  For ten points, name this longtime Atlanta Brave third baseman.;;(Chipper) Jones|(Larry) (Wayne) Jones
Pop Culture;;(JB)  In the fourth episode, an airplane beverage cart falls through Dean and Celia's roof, and in the seventh episode someone throws dozens of pennies at Nancy's car.  Shane made a fake terrorist beheading video and bit another child in the foot at a karate competition, while Silas is dating a deaf girl.  In the second season, the opening theme "Little Boxes" was performed by a different artist each episode.  The lead actress beat out the four Desperate Housewives stars to win a 2006 Golden Globe, while Kevin Nealon was nominated for High Times' 2006 "Stoner of the Year".  A suburban widow starts selling marijuana in, FTP, what Showtime series starring Mary-Louise Parker?;;Weeds
Pop Culture;;His pets Bentley and Cow once got into what he calls an "existential crisis" when he and his significant other were on opposite sides of the room.  His upcoming work has already been optioned by Universal while his debut book, Sellevision, is his only work of fiction.  His essay collections include the bestsellers Magical Thinking and Possible Side Effects.  He is best known for a pair of memoirs, one of which talks of his time fighting alcoholism and another that describes his experiences as a child living with his mother's psychiatrist.  For ten points, name this author of the books Dry and Running with Scissors.;;(Augusten) Burroughs
Pop Culture;;(NB) Their debut was 2000’s "Origin," which was released in Christian music stores, but the band protested and future albums were only sold through traditional outlets. Founded by Arkansas natives Ben Moody and Amy Lee, in 2004 they released a live album, "Anywhere But Home," and in 2006 they released "The Open Door" which includes the single "Call Me When You’re Sober".   FTP, identify this band most notable for their 2003 album "Fallen" and singles "Bring Me To Life" and "My Immortal".;;Evanescence
Pop Culture;;(NB) It is based on a Dutch television program hosted by Caroline Tensen and sponsored by the National Postcode Lottery.  In the U.K. Version hosted by Dermot O’Leary, players have two weapons at their disposal;’ the "dodge," which allows then to skip a question, and the "double," which allows them to double their earnings for that question; the player’s exact earnings on a particular question is based on how many opponents got it wrong.  The U.S. version, which premiered on October 13th following "Deal or No Deal," featured groups of valedictorians, teachers, surfers, and "Jeopardy!" champion Ken Jennings in its "mob".  FTP, identify this new NBC game show hosted by Bob Saget that features one contestant facing a group of over eight dozen players.;;One (Versus|v(s)(.)){1}? One Hundred|1 (Versus|v(s)(.)){1}? 100
Pop Culture;;The video for this song won the award for Best Stage Performance Video at the very first MTV Music Video Awards.  About half-way through the song, the singer asks "who said that" and "baby, how you been," while earlier the advice "to roll with the punches to get to what's real" is given.  The aspect of this song that made it stand out and become the band's only number one on the Billboard Hot 100 was probably not the lyrics but the use of the Oberheim OB-Xa synthesizer that is played throughout the tune, including its memorable opening.  Also including a chorus that intensely asks "so can't ya see me standing here / I got my back against the record machine," for ten points, name this second track on the album 1984 in which Van Halen says that the listener "might as well" perform the title action.;;Jump
Pop Culture;;The first one to win this award was Harry Gallatin.  Johnny Kerr took the award in 1967 after Chicago made it to the postseason in their inaugural campaign.  The namesake of the trophy its recipient gets was also honored with this award in 1965 while with Boston.  More recent winners include Doug Moe, Cotton Fitzsimmons, and Don Chaney while those currently active to win it include Mike Fratello, Mike Dunleavy, and Doc Rivers.  For ten points, name this annual award whose only three-time recipients include Don Nelson and Pat Riley, an award that distinguishes those who have led their NBA team to success.;;(NBA) Coach of the Year|("Red) Auerbach (Trophy) (winners)
Pop Culture;;(NB) In 2005 he wrote, directed, and starred along with his wife and two children in the independent film Loverboy.  He has played characters referred to as "Smiling Jack" in Quicksilver and A Few Good Men, and he is billed as an executive producer in The Woodsmen and Wild Things, films in which he also appears.  He has never been nominated for an Oscar, although he was nominated for a Teen Choice Award for "Choice Movie Sleazebag" for his role in Beauty Shop and a 1995 Golden Globe for The River Wild.  Also famous for singing in a duo with brother Michael, FTP identify this husband of Kyra Sedgwick and star of Hollow Man, Mystic River, Tremors, and Footloose, who supposedly can be connected with anyone in Hollywood within six steps.;;K(evin) Bacon
Pop Culture;;In a letter from their President George Le Mener that is available on their web site, he says that they attempt to differentiate themselves from the competition by allowing pets and never using bait-and-switch tactics by always posting rates in their offices. Started in 1962 in Santa Barbara, California, they promise the best price of any national chain and also run a Studio version of their chain that functions as an extended stay.  Guests who ask for wake-up calls in their rooms get a "good morning" message from Tom Bodett, the company's spokesperson.  For ten points, name this Accor hotel that will "leave the light on for you" whose name refers to the original price of renting one of their rooms.;;Motel 6
Pop Culture;;This song is the title track to a 2005 album that also features "All at Once," "Look After You," and "She Is".  Featured on episodes of Scrubs, The Hills, and One Tree Hill, it was inspired by lead singer Isaac Slade’s experiencing of confronting a friend with a crack cocaine addiction at summer camp.  It became a minor hot 100 hit when it was featured on a popular ABC hospital drama, but when it was used in promo ads this fall it shot up to #3 on the charts.  With lyrics detailing the steps of the titular directive, including listing step one as telling him "we need to talk," FTP identify this song by The Fray, featured prominently in the third season of Grey’s Anatomy.;;How to Save a Life
Pop Culture;;Her first appearance came on a 1957 episode of Captain Kangaroo and her creator described her as "a 6 year old girl, very intuitive and very feisty…you know how they say fools rush in where wise men fear to tread?  Well, she would rush in, then scream for help".  Her friends on her popular PBS show included Hush Puppy, a lover of fast-paced music, and Charlie Horse, who sings "The Song that Never Ends" over the closing credits of each episode.  Voiced by Mallory Lewis since her mother’s 1998 death, she is likely popular culture’s most recognizable ovine sock puppet.  FTP, identify this creation of Shari Lewis, whose eponymous "Play Along" program aired from 1992 to 1998.;;Lamb Chop
Pop Culture;;It was introduced on September 27, 1990, and the first feature to utilize it was Henry and June.  Developed because works like 1985’s  Day of the Dead and Re-Animator were found to not be suitable for any existing classification, it differentiated between films with developed plots and characters from purely violent and sexually pornographic films.  2000’s Requiem for a Dream chose to be released unrated rather than face the stigma associated with it, largely earned due to the utter failure of the first film to be wide-released with it, Showgirls.  FTP, identify this MPAA rating that indicates films to which no one under seventeen should be admitted.;;NC-17
Pop Culture;;758 episodes of this show that replaced Child’s Play on the CBS schedule were produced between 1983 and 1986.  A reworked version of the failed ABC show "Second Chance," notable contestants on it included Dennis Haskins and Jenny Jones and it has been revived in 2002 on Game Show Network (in a version hosted by Todd Newton) and as part of Gameshow Marathon in 2006.  Its most famous contestant was Michael Larson, who studied tapes of the show to discover the pattern of its big board; he managed to land on "$5000 Plus a Spin" enough times to win over $110,000.   FTP, identify this Peter Tomarken hosted game show whose title represented the risk present on every spin, as players would lose all of their earned money it they landed on a Whammy.;;Press Your Luck
Pop Culture;;(MB) Its colors are green and silver and its hand-picked members display a certain linguistic skill along with resourcefulness, determination, disregard for the rules, and--ideally--blood purity.  Its common room is long, low, and underground; notable members include Pansy Parkinson, Tom Riddle, Gregory Goyle, Vincent Crabbe, and Lucius and Draco Malfoy.  FTP, in the Harry Potter series Severus Snape belongs to what Hogwarts house, archrivals of Gryffindor?;;Slytherin
Pop Culture;;They briefly considered calling themselves "The Genius Sex Poets" but decided on a name inspired by New Order’s video for "Crystal". Partially formed due to a mutual love of Oasis between the band’s lead singer and guitarist David Keuning, this band’s first album included tracks such as "Believe Me Natalie" and "On Top" as well as the single "All These Things That I’ve Done".  Their second album Sam’s Town was released on October 3, 2006; lead singer Brandon Flowers has declared it "the best album of the last twenty years".  FTP, identify this Las Vegas based rock group whose singles include "When You Were Young," "Smile Like You Mean It," "Somebody Told Me," and "Mr. Brightside" off of their album Hot Fuss.;;(The) Killers
Pop Culture;;THE NAME’S THE SAME:  In chess, this is the term for an informal game played without a clock.  It was the nickname of Catherine Walters, "The Last Victorian Courtesan," as well as a slang term for Coricidin when used recreationally.  It names a popular pub sport in England and Wales from which tenpin bowling is descended, but in the U.S. this word is best known as a small candy commonly used by high school math teachers to illustrate probability distribution.  Now available in sour, ice cream, Wild Berry, and Smoothie Mix varieties, this is FTP what candy, which outwardly looks like an M&M except for the "S" printed on its fruity candy shell?;;Skittles
Pop Culture;;Fans posted the first trailer for this 2006 film hours after it was first seen in front of The Descent.  Dedicated to Gregg Hoffman, it concerns the kidnapping of Dr. Lynn Donlon by Amanda (portrayed by Shawnee Smith); she must keep John Kramer alive so that he can see his other victims, played by Dina Meyer and Debra McCabe among others, be tortured in devices such as the Ice Shower, the Twisting Crucifix, and the Reverse bear trap.  FTP, identify this upcoming film, third in a series of horror films starring Tobin Bell as Jigsaw that will premiere on October 31st.;;Saw III
Pop Culture;;The first player in league history to score more than 40 points in his first playoff road game, in 2006 he led the league in completed three point plays and averaged over two steals a game but has never been included on an All-Defensive Team.  In his freshman year of high school at St. Vincent – St. Mary’s, he led his team to a 27-0 record, and in his senior year he participated in three high school all-star games, stripping him of his NCAA eligibility. That didn’t bother him much, as he was the first pick in the 2003 NBA Draft for his home state team, and he currently pulls in $20 million a year as the biggest star in Cleveland Cavaliers history.  FTP, identify this Sprite and Nike Spokesman nicknamed "King James".;;LeBron (James)|(LeBron) James
Pop Culture;;Founded in 1980 by John Mackey in Austin, Texas, it entered the Fortune 500 for the first time in 2005 after opening seven locations in the U.K. the previous year.  The most popular location of this store is in Union Square in New York City, and it is known for a high percentage of certified organic foods, although it has prices significantly higher than its chief national competitor, Trader Joe’s.  FTP, identify this grocery store originally known as "SaferWay" that is endorsed by the American Humane Society and the ASPCA for its high quality and humanely prepared offerings.;;Whole Foods (Market)
Pop Culture;;LAST NAME'S THE SAME.  Charles was a movie star of the 1940s and 50s whose most famous role came in The Narrow Margin.  Feathers is a mute yet sinister penguin from the Wallace and Gromit film The Wrong Trousers.  Eloise won Newbury Awards for The Moorchild and The Golden Goblet.  It is also the last name of a Hanna-Barbera horse, a television psychiatrist and the singer of "Live Like You were Dying".  FTP, give the common last name of Tim, Dr. Phil, and Quick Draw.;;McGraw
Pop Culture;;In 1991, she and her sister Karen began training with Frank Carroll; after just one year of formal training, she placed 9th at the Junior U.S. Nationals and at the age of 14 finished second to Tonya Harding in the 1994 U.S. Championships, but she did not get to go to the Winter Olympics because Nancy Kerrigan was given the other spot due to her injury keeping her from competing.  She went to the 1998 Olympics but lost the gold to Tara Lipinski, and in 2002 won the Bronze after being beat out in the finals by a perfect performance by Sarah Hughes.  Her dropping out of the 2006 Olympics due to a groin injury now casts serious doubt on her ability to finally win an elusive gold medal.  FTP, identify this American figure skater of Hong Kong descent, who with 9 U.S. Championships and 5 world championships is the most decorated skater in U.S. history.;;(Michelle) Kwan
Pop Culture;;A 1918 graduate of what is now CalTech, where he earned a B.S. in Chemical Engineering, he began his more famous career directing silent films such as the Our Gang series.  His final film was 1961’s "Pocketful of Miracles," and he produced the "Why We Fight" series of political propaganda films.  He had a string of Oscar-nominated films such as Lost Horizon, You Can’t Take it With You, Mr. Deeds Goes to Town and Mr. Smith Goes to Washington, but he is likely best known for a 1946 film that has become a Christmas classic.  FTP, identify the director of It’s A Wonderful Life.;;(Frank) Capra
Pop Culture;;In 1993’s True Romance he portrayed Virgil, a brutal mob enforcer, and in 1994’s Terminal Velocity he played Ben Pinkwater, a nice guy turned Russian mafia leader.  In 1995’s Crimson Tide he played Lt. Bobby Dougherty opposite Denzel Washington and Gene Hackman, and his breakout film role is likely as Bobby Poole in 8mm, but he is better known as a waste management consultant on an HBO show which he has starred in since 1999 and won three Emmys for.  FTP, identify this actor who portrays Tony Soprano.;;(James) Gandolfini
Pop Culture;;He was the first artist to incorporate stage diving as a fixture of his live show, during the performance of his band's song "The Knife", but his stint with that band produced only one top 40 hit, "I Know What I Like".  As a solo artist, he penned "Burn You Up, Burn You Down" for Uru: Ages Beyond Myst, as well as composing the soundtracks to Birdy, Rabbit-Proof Fence, and The Last Temptation of Christ.  More conventional solo fare include his singles "I Don't Remember" and "Games Without Frontiers" off his third of four self-titled albums, and "Digging in the Dirt" off of 1992's Us.  Most famous for his 1986 album So and its associated videos, FTP identify this former lead singer of Genesis and artist behind "Shock the Monkey," "Big Time," and "Sledgehammer".;;(Peter) Gabriel
Pop Culture;;A native of Newton, Massachusetts, at the age of 20 this man started a restaurant with his mother called "The Lettuce Patch".  He was elected to the U.S. House in 1994, and reelected for each of the next 5 election years.  A former member of the House Ways and Means Committee and co-chair of the House Caucus on Missing and Exploited Children, he has been one of the harshest critics of child pornography but he will not be running against Tim Mahoney this November as it came out in September that he has sent sexually explicit messages to former underage Congressional pages.  FTP, identify this Florida Congressman who resigned on September 29, 2006.;;(Mark) Foley
Pop Culture;;Born Hermes Cochran, he was the lead singer of Feedback and Hot Daddy and the Monkey Puppets and once owned the Smash Club, who featured acts such as Girl Talk (an Ace of Base Cover band) and R.E.M. (three elderly women who had nothing to do with Michael Stipe’s band).  Originally an exterminator, he later becomes father to twins played by Blake and Dylan Tuomy-Wilhoit and husband to Lori Laughlin’s Becky.  Brought in after the death of Pamela Tanner to help take care of D.J., Stephanie, and Michelle, FTP identify this Full House character played by John Stamos.;;(Uncle) Jesse (Katsopolis)|(Uncle) (Jesse) Katsopolis
Pop Culture;;His first job was as a floor sweeper at the General Mills plant where his mom worked, and he moved to New York in the late 1990s to become a model.  He starred in the number one and two films of the weekend of September 29th, one in which he voiced a deer named Elliot opposite Martin Lawrence and another in which he portrays a Coast Guard swimmer opposite Kevin Costner.  He played a self-obsessed actor in Cheaper by the Dozen, and his first major dramatic role came in The Butterfly Effect.  FTP, identify this comic actor known for roles in Guess Who, Just Married, and Dude, Where’s My Car?, who is also famous for his relationship with Demi Moore.;;(Ashton) Kutcher
Pop Culture;;Born in 1975 into a conservative Mennonite family in Pennsylvania, his religion did not allow him to wear shorts, a handicap that did not impede him from dominating events at Conestoga High School.  After becoming the U.S. Junior National Champion in 1993, he moved to Southern California and joined the U.S. Postal Team, on which he served a supporting role in major victories in 2002, 2003, 2004.  Defecting to Phonak in 2005, he seemed a long shot to win his sport’s most prestigious event in 2006, but after Ivan Basso and Jan Ullrich withdrew due to doping allegations, he appeared poised to become the next Lance Armstrong; unfortunately for him, he had his own doping controversy.  FTP, identify this man who finished first at the 2006 Tour de France, but whose victory has not been officially recognized since he was found with a higher-than-allowable level of testosterone.;;(Floyd) Landis
Pop Culture;;He was told by Nintendo that, if there ever was a live-action Pokemon film, he would be their only choice to play Professor Oak, and he named his daughter Zelda in honor of The Legend of Zelda series.  A classmate of Christopher Reeve at Julliard, he starred in 2004’s The Final Cut and as Pappas in that year’s House of D.  Nominated for an Academy Award for 1992’s The Fisher King, early roles came as the titular characters in Popeye and The World According to Garp, and he won his first and only Oscar for portraying a professor who helps Matt Damon reach his full potential. FTP, identify this comedian and star of RV, Man of the Year, Dead Poets’ Society and Good Will Hunting.;;(Robin) Williams
Pop Culture;;It traces its roots back to The Daily Advertiser, a 1813 newspaper founded by Nathan Hale.  The Daily Advertiser ended up being merged with William Randolph Hearst’s The American, and in 1972 after a couple of more mergers it took its current name.  The winner of four Pulitzer Prizes for Editorial Writing (but none since 1954), its current columnists include Howie Carr, Brett Arends, and Gerry Callahan, and controversial columnist Mike Barnicle left in 2005 due to downsizing as the paper has been steadily losing profits this decade, perhaps due to its trashy presentation and conservative stances in a mostly liberal area.  FTP, identify this daily newspaper, a tabloid that is second in circulation to the Globe in Massachusetts’ capital city.;;(The) Boston Herald
Pop Culture;;While a student at New York University, he borrowed money from family and friends to direct the semiautobiographical drama Praying with Anger and in 1998 wrote the screenplay for Stuart Little.  His 1995 film Wide Awake is to date the only film he directed that he has not made a cameo in, and he appeared in an American Express commercial that debuted during the 2006 Oscars which featured him saying "My Life is About Finding Time to Dream".  He has declared that his favorite of his films is Unbreakable, and his most recent project was this past summer’s Lady in the Water, but he remains most famous for writing and directing in a 1999 film featuring the line "I See Dead People". FTP, identify the director of The Village, Signs, and The Sixth Sense.;;(M.) (Night) Shyamalan
Pop Culture;;After losing part of a finger on his left hand to an oil rig accident, he joined The New Commitments in the early 1990s before releasing his debut album, Dreamin’ Out Loud, which featured the hits "Every Light in the House" and "(This Ain’t) No Thinkin’ Thing". Followups Big Time and More failed to yield similar success, but 2001’s Chrome garnered him a hit in "I’m Tryin’" and 2005’s Songs About Me featured his biggest hit since 1996 whose video featured a bizarre juxtaposition of traditional country music motifs and crunk themes.  FTP, identify this ardent Republican supporter and country musician, whose most recent hit was "Honky Tonk Badonkadonk".;;(Trace) Adkins
Pop Culture;;The original nickname for this university’s athletic teams was the "Sunblazers," which was changed in 1987.  The only national titles it has received are the 1982 and 1984 Division II Men’s Soccer championships, and its football team annually competes in the "Shula Bowl".  That team, coached by Virginia Tech Alumnus Don Strock, dismissed two of its players, Chris Smith and Marshall McDuffie, after a recent brawl against a school that it had never played before; the fight exploited regional tensions, as many of its opponent’s students are from outside of Broward and Dade county while this school’s team is almost exclusively local South Florida players.  FTP, identify this team, nicknamed the Golden Panthers, a crosstown rival of the University of Miami.;;Florida International (University)|FIU
Pop Culture;;(MD) In 2006, it was adapted into a Broadway musical starring comedic songwriter Stephen Lynch as the leading player.  The suggested title of "I Got Punched In the Nose For Sticking My Face In Other People's Business" was fortunately ditched in favor of the one it is better known by.  There are a number of classic hits from the 1980s on the soundtrack, including "White Wedding" and "Love Stinks" as well as the original songs "Somebody Kill Me Please" and "Grow Old With You". FTP, Robbie Hart and Julia Sullivan are the main characters in what 1998 Adam Sandler movie?;;(The) Wedding Singer
Pop Culture;;(MB) Lobs and skips are among the most effective shots in this sport, whose last two men's Olympic gold medals were won by Hungary.  The eight schools that have won its NCAA championships are all from California.  Visiting players typically wear white caps and both goalies wear red caps.  Maneuvers include the "egg beater," the scissor-kick, and of course freestyle swimming.  FTP, name this sport that unlike its land version is not played with horses.;;water polo
Pop Culture;;It is the preferred beverage of the Biker Mice From Mars, and gave its name to a 2000 EP by Jimmy Somerville.  Brands of it currently being sold in the U.S. include Fitz’s, Henry Weinhard’s, and Triple XXX, and one of its main ingredients which comes from the sassafras tree was banned in the U.S. in 1960 due to its being mildly carcinogenic.  Originally an herbal medicine, the first commercial version of it was developed by Charles Elmer Hires in 1866, and it gained popularity during prohibition, outselling traditional colas until the late 1960s.  FTP, identify this beverage, similar to sarsaparilla, sold under the brand names Mug, A&W, and Barq’s.;;Root Beer
Pop Culture;;In 2004, he married model Steffiana De La Cruz, who once portrayed a manicurist in the show with which he is most identified.  His brother is comedian Gary Valentine and in 2001 he starred in his own comedy special, "Sweat the Small Stuff".  In 2007, he will star opposite Adam Sandler in I Now Pronounce You Chuck and Larry, and his highest profile film role to date in opposite Will Smith in 2005’s Hitch.  However, he is likely best known for a spinoff of Everybody Loves Raymond in which he has starred for eight seasons.  FTP, identify this actor who portrays Doug Heffernan on The King of Queens.;;K(evin) James
Pop Culture;;"Alone At Last" features a character referred to as "blond boy" working up the courage to ask coworker Lisa out to dinner.  "The Beast Within" includes a performance that inspires the series’ host to proclaim "That stomach studied in London!"  The protagonist of the edgy "On My Own" is confronted with the unsavory choices of Pizza, Burgers, and Tofu, while "Flying High," the tale of a woman who "runs a department, works out, volunteers" but forgets about dinner for her family causes the host to fall asleep.  "Terror at Five O’Clock" ‘s female protagonist makes the host anxious, while "The Unfed" causes him to "smell a blockbuster" before launching into his promotion of the titular restaurant’s line of deli sandwiches.  FTP, identify this series of commercials hosted by Jon Lovitz, all of which end with him issuing the command "eat fresh!";;Subway Dinner Theatre
Pop Culture;;It lifts the background arrangement from The Supremes’ "Someday We’ll Be Together," features an interpolation of that group’s "Ain’t No Mountain High Enough," and bears a strong resemblance to Madonna’s "Holiday".  The single precedes "I Belong to Me" in the artist’s discography, and it can be bought through Yahoo! Music for $1.99 with the option to personalize the song with the name of your choice.  Notable for its Brett Ratner-directed video which features Ryan Seacrest, Eva Longoria, Christina Applegate, Andy Dick, and Reshad Strik, who was selected due to his resemblance to Nick Lachey, FTP, identify this 2006 single by Jessica Simpson.;;A Public Affair
Pop Culture;;She was born in 1976 to an Academy-Award winning cinematographer father and Mary Jo Weir, a film actress who appeared in The Right Stuff.  Her first film role came in 1994 as a "Paint Throwing Fur Activist" in the Nicolas Cage vehicle It Could Happen to You, and she appeared in Spider-Man 2 as a receptionist and in Boogeyman as Kate Houghton.  She is more famous for her television roles, however, as she received critical acclaim for guest spots on Crossing Jordan and Law and Order: Special Victims Unit and in 2005 began playing Temperance Brennan in a FOX drama.  FTP identify this Boston University alumna and star of Bones, the sister of Zooey and namesake of this tournament.;;E(mily) Deschanel
Pop Culture;;A direct descendant of the sixth president of Princeton University, she left Stanford after one semester as a literature major to pursue an acting career.  Her first role came in the 1991 made-for-TV movie Wildflower, and she garnered critical praise for her role as Vanessa Lutz in Freeway.  The voice of Greta Wolfcastle in a 2002 episode of The Simpsons, she played Becky Sharp in 2004’s Vanity Fair and Elizabeth Masterson in 2005’s Just Like Heaven.  Her resume also includes a Golden Globe nomination and MTV Movie Award for her portrayal of Elle Woods, and an Oscar for Best Actress for a 2005 biopic.  FTP, identify this star of Sweet Home Alabama, Walk the Line, and two editions of Legally Blonde.;;(Reese) Witherspoon
Pop Culture;;Highlights from this country’s performance at the 2004 Summer Olympics include Mariel Zagunis defeating Xue Tan in Individual Sabre Fencing and Steven Lopez’s gold in Under 80 kilogram taekwondo.  Bands from this country include Morphine, Squirrel Nut Zippers, and The Shins, and its culinary contributions to the world include clam chowder, barbecue, salt water taffy and baked beans.  Major cities include Memphis, Las Vegas, and Detroit, and it is separated into fifty regions, each with its own capital.  FTP, identify this nation, the birthplace of Elvis Presley, apple pie and baseball, whose capital is Washington, D.C.;;(The) United States (of) (America)|U.S.A.|USA|US|U.S.
Pop Culture;;While league president John Heydler offered the first serious support for it in 1928, it was first proposed in 1906 by Connie Mack.  Though the International League abandoned after a one-year trial in 1969, Charlie Finley led the successful push for a three-year trial beginning in 1973.  For ten points, name this oft-loathed rule peculiar to the American League.;;(The) D(esignated) H(itter)
Pop Culture;;The original UK release of this album included an album cover with a gloved hand touching a nude woman's backside and the song "NYC Cops," which was pulled from the American release due to September 11.  Although the band's debut full-length, it includes songs from the previous EP This Modern Age as well as the singles "Hard to Explain," "Last Night," and "Someday". For ten points, name this 2001 album by the Strokes.;;Is This It
Pop Culture;;He was beaten out by Judd when he tried out for ~Real World 3~ in San Francisco, the city that is home to his 826 Valencia, an independent pirate supply store which is home to a writing workshop.  The founding editor of the magazine Might, he was once a "poorly paid Salon editor" who has returned to Salon.com to serialize a novel about the "American political circus".  For ten points, editor of McSweeney's and author of the novel You Shall Know Our Velocity and the memoir A Heartbreaking Work of Staggering Genius.;;(David) Eggers
Pop Culture;;A former clockmaker with the last name Oddbody, he is told by his superior Joseph what he must do to be able to "see" what is going on.  Played by Henry Travers, he gives a tour of the negative world created by Henry Potter in the town of Bedford Falls after being sent to help the suicide-contemplating George Bailey.  For ten points, name this angel from It's a Wonderful Life.;;Clarence (Oddbody) (A-S-2) (angel,) (second-class)
Pop Culture;;As a student at Temple, he directed the award-winning short Through Adam's Eyes.  His feature film directorial debut was Norm Macdonald's Dirty Work.  He returned to series television with Raising Dad, which failed to recapture the magic of playing a widower with daughters.  For ten points, name this comedian most famous as Danny Tanner on Full House.;;(Bob) Saget
Pop Culture;;One would think that the movie is about Frank, played by Nick Stahl, an architecture student who has a fling with a married woman while working a summer job lobstering.  But the movie is really about Frank's parents and their lack of communication and inability to handle the death of their son at the hands of his lover's husband.  For ten points, name this movie starring Marisa Tomei, Tom Wilkinson, and Sissy Spacek, which was co-written and directed by Todd Field.;;In the Bedroom
Pop Culture;;In Mean Girls, Lindsay Lohan's character skips out on going with her parents to see this act.  Although they featured guest spots by Lou Rawls, Bonnie Raitt, and Dolly Parton on their 1997 album Heavenly, their most prominent collaboration has been on songs such as "Homeless" and "Diamonds on the Soles of Her Shoes" on Paul Simon's Graceland album.  For ten points, what group is perhaps the most prominent musical act to come out of South Africa?;;Ladysmith Black Mambazo
Pop Culture;;Set in a town founded by lesbians and named after one of them, this series featured a gay wedding between hotel proprietors Ron and Erick.  The addition of Phil and Michelle Capra, played by Paul Provenza and Teri Polo, was unsuccessful, perhaps because they wanted to be there.  For ten points, name this quirky Emmy-winning series whose original premise was Rob Morrow as a "fish out of water" New York City Jewish doctor in Alaska.;;Northern Exposure
Pop Culture;;A favorite food of Edward VII, Wallis Simpson took great pride in her ability to prepare this dish.  Though no specific origins can be traced to it, its name might stem from its purported appearance on the menu at the restaurant at the Saratoga, the birthplace of the potato chip, while others believed that its two-layer nature drew comparisons to rail cars of a similar name.  For ten points, name this sandwich, usually made from chicken, ham, and bacon on several slices of toasted bread.;;Club Sandwich
Pop Culture;;Their last bowl game win came in the 1991 Copper Bowl and they haven't had a Heisman top 5 since 1989 when Anthony Thompson was a finalist.  They haven't had a winning football season since 1994, but three former quarterbacks were on NFL rosters last year Gibran Hamdan, Trent Green, and Antwaan Randle El.  For ten points, name the only Big 10 team without a Rose Bowl win, which plays annually for the Old Oaken Bucket against in-state rival, Purdue.;;Indiana (University)
Pop Culture;;For their final two studio albums before this band's first retirement, Kenny Jones replaced their long-time drummer, Keith Moon, who had died from a drug overdose.  Solo projects from band members include Ride a Rock Horse and Under a Raging Moon by lead singer Roger Daltrey and Psychoderelict and Empty Glass by lead singer and songwriter Pete Townshend.  For 10 points--name this British band responsible for hits including "My Generation" and "Won't Get Fooled Again".;;(The) Who
Pop Culture;;Additions to the cast in 2004 include recurring roles for Daphne Zuniga as a new neighbor, Michael Rodgers as an associate producer, and Jeff Fahey as an operative in Vietnam.  The first episode of the new season covered JJ's recovery following the Viet Cong attack and Meg's arrest causing problems for her father's city council bid.  The Pryor family's issues in the '60s form the nucleus of, for ten points, what series whose gimmick is guest stars playing famous musicians on Bandstand?;;American Dreams
Pop Culture;;Reportedly 1500 years old, she was formerly married to Atilla the Hun.  Although she has given up smoking cigars, she still maintains a gruff manner as she is generally seen in a surrealistic forest, usually in the company of a dumb and shaggy creature and a cultured, vain, vulture.  The friend of Irwin Troll and Gaylord Buzzard, this is, for ten points, what Russell Myers creature, a green-skinned witch from the funny pages?;;Broom-Hilda
Pop Culture;;After being taken under the wing by French coach Tarik Benhabiles, he lost in the first round of the three U.S. Futures events that he entered in 1999, but the next year won the junior championships at Wimbledon and the U.S. Open.  Turning pro in 2001, he reached the Top 20 before the end of the year and was gaining press for his good looks and relationship with Mandy Moore.  For ten points, name this 2003 U.S. Open winner.;;(Andy) Roddick
Pop Culture;;The broker Stacy played by Rebecca Cross, the cop Daphne played by Jennifer Esposito, the opera singer Ilana played by Mariah Carey, and the beautiful Buckley played by Brooke Shields all say no to Jimmy Shannon.  His photographer girlfriend Anne has also turned him down and gone to Africa, but he needs to get hitched to inherit millions in, for 10 points, what comedy starring Renee Zellweger and Chris O'Donnell that shares its name with a reality show?;;(The) Bachelor
Pop Culture;;This city's football team is the Mambas, whose former stars include tight end B.J. Jones, while sports venues include Hyman Memorial Stadium and the Leaf Links golf course.  Its not certain whether it has a baseball team, although local politician Alex Shrub cites baseball as the national pastime when interviewed by Maurice Chavez, you'd think the Cubans in Little Havana might be baseball fans, and you get to wield a baseball bat.  For ten points, name this location roamed by Tommy Vercetti in a Grand Theft Auto game.;;Vice City
Pop Culture;;A person in this position will often endeavor to "attack the off stump".  Though he may run, he must have at least part of his front foot behind the popping crease and part of his back foot inside the return creases during his release, otherwise there will be a call of "no ball" and a penalty run.  If his delivery knocks the bail off of the wicket, he gets the batsman out.  For ten points, name this individual who throws the ball in cricket.;;bowler
Pop Culture;;On The Larry Sanders Show, he had a recurring role as Larry's heir apparent.  A sometimes guest host for Tom Snyder on The Late Late Show, he signed a development deal with Worldwide Pants, but the post-Letterman slot went to Craig Kilborn instead.  Although his attempt at syndicating his MTV talk show failed, he has since found his niche as, for ten points, what comedian is the current host of The Daily Show?;;(Jon) Stewart
Pop Culture;;This act began as Atbann Klann, who were signed by Eazy-E to Ruthless Records, but never released an album because their message was too positive for the label.  They changed their name, added Taboo and singer Kim Hill, and released the critically-acclaimed album Behind the Front, but didn't hit popular success until the addition of singer Fergie and the album Elephunk.  For ten points, name this alternative hip-hop act which pushed an anti-war message in "Where Is the Love"?;;Black-Eyed Peas
Pop Culture;;Although tuberculosis ended his hopes of becoming a pro rugby player, he was Oscar nominated for playing a rugby player in This Sporting Life.  His second nomination came almost three decades later when he played a farmer in The Field.  His later supporting roles include the gunfighter English Bob in Unforgiven, Abbé Faria in The Count of Monte Cristo, and Marcus Aurelius in Gladiator.  For ten points, what actor went from playing King Arthur in Camelot to Dumbledore in Harry Potter?;;(Richard) Harris
Pop Culture;;Among the claims made are that we would know John Hinckley's name if Ronald Reagan had died and that a bet between Aristotle Onassis and Howard Hughes led to the Vietnam War.  Oliver Stone's movies are really part of a disinformation campaign.  These are among the beliefs of cabbie Jerry Fletcher, who publishes them in a newsletter.  One item may be true, which brings him into the grasp of Dr. Jonas, played by Patrick Stewart in, for ten points, what thriller starring Julia Roberts and Mel Gibson?;;Conspiracy Theory
Pop Culture;;The Spongebob Squarepants Movie, Tropicana Twister, Diamond Hill Plywood Co., Goody's Headache Powder, and Hershey's Kisses are some of the sponsors.  Stacy Compton, Robert Pressley, David Green, Jason Keller, Martin Treaux, Jr., Greg Biffle, and Kyle Busch are some of the competitors.  Generally using rules that limit tire usages, this is, for ten points, what NASCAR series of races that is lower than the Nextel Cup?;;Busch (Series|League)
Pop Culture;;He was replaced by Buster Jones as the voice of Winston Zeddmore in the cartoon version of Ghostbusters, perhaps because he was busy taking over after Joan Rivers was fired from The Late Show.  His film career includes the man attacked in his apartment at the beginning of Amazon Women on the Moon and Semmi, the sidekick of Prince Akeem in Coming to America.  Most recently appearing on Martial Law, this is, for ten points, what one-time host of an eponymous show that tried to go against Johnny Carson?;;(Arsenio) Hall
Pop Culture;;Rapper Eminem has considered suing to prevent the release of his contribution to this product line.  Florida State business major Becky Lynn Gritzke settled a lawsuit claiming that this product line led to her suffering and embarrassment.  Mantra Films owner Joe Francis and Snoop Dog also settled a lawsuit from two teenage girls who said they were enticed with marijuana and alcohol.  For ten points, name this video series that captures public nudity.;;Girls Gone Wild
Pop Culture;;After his initial play as an 18-year-old rookie was lackluster, his team traded for center Jiri Hrdina specifically to improve his play, and he responded with 57 points in the 1990-91 season, making the All-Rookie Team.  Taken 5th overall in the NHL Entry Draft, this right wing has most recently been traded for Anson Carter, although he still retains the #68 that he wears to honor the Prague Spring.  The first European player to win the Art Ross Trophy, this is, for ten points, what current Ranger and former Capital and Penguin who was once overshadowed by teammate Mario Lemieux?;;(Jaromir) Jagr
Pop Culture;;The original version of this song appeared on the 1998 album Don't Play With Matches by Tabitha's Secret.  Inspired by the singer's childhood experience of his mother's bout with cancer.  It relates claims that the moon doesn't hang as high as it used to and that she only sleeps when it's raining.  For ten points, name this song by matchbox twenty whose title gives when Rob Thomas' mother must be lonely.;;3 AM
Pop Culture;;The second game includes episodes with titles like "Bloomsday," "Coach Fussell's Lament," "Ants in Pants!," "Grandpa Wore Tights," and "Armless But Not Harmless".  The first season's episodes all took the form of the title character vs. someone, whether it be The Uncommon Cold, Brainchild, Mr. Mental, Pineapple Pokopo, El Seed, Dinosaur Neil, or Arthur's Bank Account.  For ten points, name this animated 'toon based on a comic book about a nigh invulnerable superhero.;;(The) Tick
Pop Culture;;This author has used the pseudonym A.N. Roquelaure in a group of erotic novels that include The Claiming of Sleeping Beauty.  Though The Witching Hour began her trilogy about a clan of witches, she is better known for a different dark subject matter.  For ten points, whose The Tale of the Body Thief and Memnoch the Devil are part of her "Vampire Chronicles" that began with Interview with the Vampire?;;(Anne) Rice
Pop Culture;;Although one key membered died in 1995 after contracting spinal meningitis, several albums were released under this act's name, including 1996's In the Groove.  Less successful with their 1994 album Anything Goes!, which included contributions by Trilogy, their hits include "Here We Go, Let's Rock & Roll".  Zelma Davis, Martha Wash, and Freedom Williams were cogs in, for ten points, what outfit put together by produces Robert Civilles and David Cole, which debuted with the album Gonna Make You Sweat?;;C+C Music Factory
Pop Culture;;Expelled from what is now Carnegie-Mellon for riding a motorcycle through the hallways, he was the star of the '50s horror flick The Blob.  Although he garnered an Oscar nomination for The Sand Pebbles, he is better known as the title character of The Thomas Crown Affair and The Cincinnati Kid and as the fire chief in The Towering Inferno.  For ten points, name this actor honored by a Sheryl Crow song.;;(Steve) McQueen
Pop Culture;;After the New Musical Express published his letter defending the Sex Pistols, he wrote music reviews for several magazines, while Babylon Books published his books on James Dean and the New York Dolls.  Though his solo output includes Viva Hate, Bona Drag, and Southpaw Grammar, he is most known for a band formed with a guy he met at a Patti Smith concert.  "Hand in Glove" and "Heaven Knows I'm Miserable Now" are, for ten points, songs featuring the voice of what partner of Johnny Marr in the Smiths?;;(Stephen) (Patrick) Morrissey
Pop Culture;;This line comes in response to a desk sergeant played by Bruce Kerner suggesting that the speaker wait on a bench.  The punchline comes when a stolen car is rammed through the police station, keeping the promise and the speaker decimates the precinct and continues chasing after Kyle and Sarah, although it was not originally in James Cameron's script.  For ten points, give these famous three works spoken by Arnold Schwarzenegger in The Terminator.;;I'll be back
Pop Culture;;His namesake company, founded with Barry Schwartz, first gained notice for women's coats, before branching out into sportswear.  The first person to win the Fashion Design of the Year Award for outstanding design in both men's and women's wear in the same year, he also created a unisex fragrance, unleashing One in 1993.  For ten points, name this fashion designer known for his jeans, underwear, and scents such as Escape and Obsession.;;(Calvin) Klein
Pop Culture;;Her father, Russ, played Dr. Lawrence Jacoby in Twin Peaks.  She originated the role of orphan Emily Bowen-Quartermaine on General Hospital and played Dawn's trouble-making friend Janice on an episode of Buffy the Vampire Slayer.  After playing Katie, the dead niece of Naomi Watts in The Ring, she got a shot at series television.  For ten points, who plays the title character of Joan of Arcadia.;;(Amber) Tamblyn
Pop Culture;;The title character, Marisa Ventura, hopes to be promoted to assistant manager.  She gets confused for the rich Caroline, played by Natasha Richardson, when she tries on a dress and is seen by a Republican Senate candidate played by Ralph Fiennes, who has just checked in next-door to Caroline.  For ten points, name this romantic comedy in which a Puerto Rican hotel worker is played by Jennifer Lopez.;;Maid in Manhattan
Pop Culture;;Its 98-83 loss in UCLA's first championship season was its first runner-up finish in the NCAA men's basketball tournament.  In 1978, it lost to Kentucky, while in 1986 it lost by three points to Louisville.  It also fell short to Arkansas in 1994 and Connecticut in 1999.  For ten points, what school lost by 30 points in 1990 to UNLV, before winning the next two years?;;Duke (University)
Pop Culture;;First gaining notice for her role as Beth Brennan on the soap opera Neighbors, she moved to London to pursue music.  Married to the lead singer of Silver Chair, her most recent acting gig has been as Interpol agent Lorna Campbell, who helps Rowan Atkinson in Johnny English.  For ten points, name this Aussie pop singer, best known for the album Left Of Middle and the song "Torn".;;(Natalie) Imbruglia
Pop Culture;;The character of Megan Donner lasted only ten episodes.  Yelina Salas became a full-time character at the beginning of season three in the same episode that was the last for Rory Cochrane.  Underwater recovery specialist Eric Delko, ballistics expert Calleigh Duquesne, and coroner Alexx Woods remain on the team of Horatio Caine in, for ten points, what spin-off of a police procedural set in Las Vegas?;;CSI: Miami
Pop Culture;;The original surface which spawned the phrase was sold off in 2000 to fans in order to raise money to pay for renovation of the facility.  The origins stem back to NFL Films narrator John Facenda's description of conditions during the 1967 NFL Championship game where temperatures were well below zero.  Brought back to popularity by Chris Berman, for ten points, name this two-word phrase, used to describe the wintry playing surface of the Green Bay Packers' Lambeau Field.;;frozen tundra (of) (Lambeau) (Field)
Pop Culture;;While working at General Electric, he occasionally published work in magazines such as Colliers and The Saturday Evening Post.  A suggestion by one of his co-workers led to the creation of characters such as Peter, Thor, the Fat Broad, and Wiley, while other characters such as The Spook, Sir Rodney, and the king came from a collaboration with Brant Parker.  For ten points, name this creator of The Wizard of Id and B.C.;;(Johnny) Hart
Pop Culture;;His first gig was as a writer on The Smothers Brothers Comedy Hour.  He branched out into comedy albums, beginning with Let's Get Small.  He started acting with the Oscar-nominated short The Absent-Minded Waiter, and appeared in movies as the title character of The Man with Two Brains and The Jerk.  For ten points, name this comedian whose recent films include Cheaper by the Dozen and Bringing Down the House.;;(Steve) Martin
Pop Culture;;He was ejected in his first game with the Grand Rapids Griffins and played 14 games before retiring.  Since then, he has served as head coach of the Springfield Falcons.  The injury-plagued tail end of his career included stops in New York, San Jose, Edmonton, and Boston, a far cry from his time with the Oilers and Kings as the bodyguard of Wayne Gretzsky.  For ten points, name this enforcer whose legacy will be his 2000 assault on Donald Brashear.;;(Marty) McSorley
Pop Culture;;For some reason, this band performed on Madonna's "Virgin" tour, where they were routinely booed during performances of the song "She's On It".  Signed to Def Jam, they sampled AC/DC for the title track of the EP Rock Hard and would break through with an album that included the song "No Sleep Til Brooklyn" and became the first rap album to top the U.S. charts.  "Girls" and "Brass Monkey" were other songs off, for ten points, what act's debut, Licensed to Ill, which includes "Fight for Your Right (to Party)"?;;Beastie Boys
Pop Culture;;Before 2004, the last time you saw her on-screen was in a film cameo where she played a trucker named Schultzy, the nickname of the Emmy-winning character she played on Love That Bob in the '50s.  More recently, she was brought of her Episcopalian religious community by a Swiffer commercial that brought together television domestic helpers.  For ten points, name this actress, most famous as Alice Nelson, the housekeeper on The Brady Bunch.;;(Ann) (Bradford) Davis
Pop Culture;;After drawing cartoons for the Army during World War II, he attended the Chicago Art Institute and the University of Illinois, drawing cartoons for the Daily Illinois and editing the humor magazine Shaft.  After a job as a copywriter at Esquire, he decided to start his own magazine, whose first issue had no cover date because he was unsure if there would be a second issue.  For ten points, who acquired photos of Marilyn Monroe for the first issue of Playboy?;;(Hugh) Hefner
Pop Culture;;The explanation for the titular location of this movie is that the protagonist does not want his wife Kelly, played by Rhada Mitchell, to find out about his mistress, an actress named Pamela who is played by Katie Holmes.  Forest Whitaker plays the cop who comes to 53rd and 8th to deal with the hostage situation created by a character voiced by Keifer Sutherland.  For ten points, name this movie in which Colin Farrell is trapped in the titular object by a sniper.;;Phone Booth
Pop Culture;;After its announced end on December 5, 2004, it will be replaced by Q & A, which will have a wider focus.  Richard Nixon, Jimmy Carter, Bill Clinton, and Michael Gorbachev have all appeared on it.  It began on April 2, 1989 with Zbigniew Brzezinski, who discussed Grand Failure.  For ten points, name this Sunday interview show in which Brian Lamb talked to non-fiction authors on C-SPAN.;;Booknotes
Pop Culture;;Like the Marsalis brothers a one-time performer with Art Blakey and the Jazz Messengers, he won a Grammy for his score for Children of Sanchez and an Emmy for his music for the 1980 Winter Olympics, while his songs "Chase the Clouds Away" and "Feels So Good" are examples of his jazz-pop style.  For ten points, name this bearded flugelhorn player made famous to a new generation by his animated appearance on King of the Hill.;;(Chuck) Mangione
Pop Culture;;In May 2004, Richland, New Jersey temporarily changed its name to this beverage.  According to a Bacardi spokesperson, it makes sense because the town's Dalponte Farms produce the mint that can be mixed with lime, sugar, club soda, and rum in, for ten points, what now-trendy Cuban rum cocktail once favored by Ernest Hemingway?;;mojito
Pop Culture;;After her parents separated when she was 11, she and her brother Davon went to live with her grandmother June in Queens.  She attended Christ the King High School, which she led to four straight state championships.  She failed to do the same in college, winning only three titles and losing in the NCAA tournament her senior year, before turning pro and becoming WNBA Rookie of the Year.  For ten points, name this Washington Mystic who made her mark in college as a Tennessee Volunteer.;;(Chamique) Holdsclaw
Pop Culture;;After dropping out of SUNY Binghamton, he worked in the art department for the bubble-gum company Topps, working on things like Garbage Pail Kids.  But works like "Ace Hole, Midget Detective" pointed the way toward his best known genre, most recently explored with his collection inspired by the aftermath of September 11, In the Shadow of No Towers, his first major work since he used frogs, dogs, cats, and rodents as stand-ins for human beings.  For ten points, name this Pulitzer Prize winner for the graphic novel Maus.;;(Art) Spiegelman
Pop Culture;;Contrary to its name, the third week included the Canada Masters, while week four had the Rogers Cup in Montreal.  Week one had the women in Stanford, California at the Bank of the West Classic, while the men were in Los Angeles at the Mercedes-Benz Cup.  In all, ten events were linked together by bonus prize money at the final event in New York.  For ten points, name this series of ten summer hardcourt tournaments over six weeks that will culminated in a namesake major at Flushing Meadows.;;U.S. Open (Series)
Pop Culture;;The title character is raised by wolves and seeks to defend the forest against Lady Eboshi.  In the meantime, a prince seeks the cure for a curse related to a bullet and a board-god.  Ashitaka falls in love with the title character, San, who was dubbed by Claire Danes in the American release of, for ten points, what Miyazaki Hayao animated film that has been interpreted as an environmentalist story?;;Princess Mononoke|Mononoke Hime
Pop Culture;;Rufus Wainwright provides harmony vocals on "American Triangle" while Stevie Wonder plays harmonica and clavinet on "Dark Diamond" on this album.  Although it included the singles "I Want Love" and "Original Sin," it is best known for a music video that featured Paul Reubens and Justin Timberlake.  For ten points, name this Elton John album including the song "This Train Don't Stop Anymore".;;Songs from the West Coast
Pop Culture;;Actress Jazz Raycole was replaced on this series by Jennifer Freeman, because Raycole's mother disapproved of the pregnancy of Charmaine, who was played by Raven-Symone.  Charmaine was a friend of Claire, now played by Freeman, whose siblings are Kady and Michael Jr. in the Kyle household.  For ten points, name this family comedy starring Tisha Campbell and Damon Wayans.;;My Wife and Kids
Pop Culture;;It was the idea of Richard Meyer, who played the referee and helped with the choreography.  MPI Home Video is releasing a 20th anniversary edition, which features outtakes of participants such as Richard Dent messing up the steps.  The lip-synching and dancing were done after the players were coming off their only loss of the season in, for ten points, what music video featuring the Chicago Bears?;;Super Bowl Shuffle
Pop Culture;;His historical roles include assassination witness Bill Newman in both JFK and Malcolm X, Orson Welles in Ed Wood, and Abbie Hoffman in Steal This Movie.  He gained 45 pounds to play the drug dealer Pooh-Bear in The Salton Sea, a minor feat considering he gained 70 to play Private Pyle in Full Metal Jacket.  Also the villain Edgar in Men in Black, for ten points, name this actor currently playing Detective Bobby Goren on Law & Order: Criminal Intent.;;(Vincent) D'Onofrio
Pop Culture;;Directed by Tim Blake Nelson, this film was put on the shelf for three years due to the incident at Columbine.  That Martin Sheen professes to love the main character like his own son is one of the things kindling the jealousies of Hugo, played by Josh Hartnett, who uses an antique scarf to manufacture false evidence of the infidelity of Desi, played by Julia Styles.  Mekhi Phifer plays a basketball high school star in, for ten points, what teen movie based on a Shakespearean tragedy?;;O
Pop Culture;;The AFL's career leader was Boston's Gino Cappeleti, whose mark has seen been surpassed by several NFL players, including Willie Jackson, Todd Heap, Marcus Polard, and Cris Carter.  Brett Perriman was the first to do it twice in a game, in 1994, while the career leader coming into the 2004 season is Terance Mathis with 6.  For ten points, name this scoring option available to NFL coaches since 1994.;;two-point conversion
Pop Culture;;Originally named Seymour, this act started out in the Baggy genre with its first album, Leisure, featuring the song "She's So High".  Their next album, taking its title from graffiti seen by the band, was Modern Life Is Rubbish and included the song "Girls and Boys,"  while Noel Gallagher wished AIDS upon the band when the Parklife cut "Country House" did better than an Oasis single released at the same time.  For ten points, what English act finally had U.S. success with "Song 2"?;;Blur
Pop Culture;;After three seasons and 40 starts with the Granby Bisons, he was taken in the third round of the 1984 NHL Entry Draft.  He played exactly 20 garbage minutes in his first NHL season and so was shocked to be named a starter before the 1985-86 season, but proved worthy by becoming the youngest player to win the Conn Smythe Trophy.  For ten points, name this Montreal Canadiens goalie who later led the Avalanche to the Stanley Cup.;;(Patrick) Roy
Pop Culture;;A second version of this team had members named Amazon, Harrier, and Blackheath and were encountered after the original version was transported to Counter-Earth.  Its original membership, including Techno, Atlas, and the leader, Citizen V, came together after Earth's heroes disappeared following the battle against Onslaught.  For ten points, name this team which was the Masters of Evil in disguise, but which eventually turned into heroes.;;Thunderbolts
Pop Culture;;It stymied after the 1986 cancer death of one of its stars, James Marcelino, although its earlier episodes would be replayed.  Adding a third member, Skip, whose specialty was computers, it featured Marcelino as Ricardo, a magician and photographer, and Nan-Lyn Nelson as Vikki, the leader of a Kenilworth, New Jersey-based group who solved mysteries.  For ten points, name this 3-2-1 Contact segment that shares its name with the band behind Hooray for Boobies.;;(The) Bloodhound Gang
Pop Culture;;In 1985, she won the Miss Teen USA pageant, representing Hawaii.  After an acting career whose highlight may have been getting killed by Jason in the eighth Friday the 13th flick, she again represented Hawaii in the Miss USA pageant in 1993.  She returned to acting, playing two TV cops, Michelle Chan on Nash Bridges and Grace Chen on Martial Law.  For ten points, name this actress who has jumped to the big screen with roles in Cradle 2 the Grave, The Scorpion King, and X2.;;(Kelly) Hu
Pop Culture;;Featuring drumming that rips off Iggy Pop's "Lust for Life," this song references both O.J. Simpson and Marion Barry, claiming "there's no such thing as 25 to life / As long as you've got the cash to pay for Cochran". and ". . . . you were smoking crack. / McDonald's wouldn't even wanna take you back. / You could always just run for mayor of D.C".  For ten points, name this song from The Young and the Hopeless by Good Charlotte.;;Lifestyles of the Rich and Famous
Pop Culture;;He first became interested in racing as his father Bud built and drove drag racers.  In 2002, he finished second in his debut at Michigan as he drove in the final five races of the season for Red Bull Cheever Racing.  He finished 16th in points in 2003 before being signed to replace Kenny Brack by Bobby Rahal.  For ten points, name this driver who made the most of it by winning from the pole position in the 2004 Indy 500.;;(Buddy) Rice
Pop Culture;;According to a story she tells that may or may not be true, her great-grandmother played a role in the invention of velcro in a visit to Carbon Creek, Pennsylvania.  What we do know is that she underwent the Fullara to suppress the memory that she killed a man and that she suffers from Pa'nar Disease.  Most recently, she resigned her commission from the High Command to join the mission into the Delphic Expanse.  For ten points, name this Vulcan who remains Captain Archer's science officer on Enterprise.;;T'Pol
Pop Culture;;This 1993 movie is set in Wabasha, Minnesota, where activities include snow shoveling and ice fishing.  One romantic subplot concerns the two protagonists' children, played by Daryl Hannah and Kevin Pollak, but the main romantic story centers around Ariel, a professor who moves into the neighborhood and catches the eye of both John Gustafson and Max Goldman.  For ten points, in what film does Ann-Margret become the new focus of the rivalry between Jack Lemmon and Walter Matthau?;;Grumpy Old Men
Pop Culture;;Following the trend of rappers turned actors, he played drug dealer Tito Severe in the 2002 movie Empire.  His first album was 1993's Represent, while he referenced his real last name with Don Cartegena.  His 2001 effort, Jealous Ones Still Envy, includes R. Kelly on "We Thuggin'" and Ashanti on "What's Luv".  For ten points, name this rapper who is a large Puerto Rican like his late partner Big Pun.;;Fat Joe
Pop Culture;;It is run by information technology professional Keith, media specialist Marc, and recruiter Bruce.  Officially launched on December 1, 2000, it presents a résumé for people it lists, assigning significant ID numbers such as 1492 for Christopher Columbus.  In 2003, Al-Qaeda, Michael Jackson, and Rush Limbaugh were ranked highest on, for ten points, what website inspired by Hot or Not? which poll s how irritating celebrities are?;;(www.)Am I Annoying(.com)
Pop Culture;;There was much rejoicing when this band broke up after the lackluster 1995 album Time, the follow-up to the equally unfulfilling 1990 effort Behind the Mask.  But they got back together and performed on MTV, leading to the #1 album The Dance and a tour on the 20th anniversary of a seminal '70s album.  For ten points, what band recorded the songs "Dreams," "Go Your Own Way," and "Don't Stop" on Rumours?;;Fleetwood Mac
Pop Culture;;Robert Picardo had a recurring role as Detective Nick Traub.  The police officer seeks to prove that Dan Barrington's death was no suicide, but the series was cancelled before the killer was revealed.  Jack Turner finds himself thrust into an intrigue-filled law firm after being tapped to replace senior partner Barrington in, for ten points, what short-lived Washington based drama, Rob Lowe's new show after quitting The West Wing?;;(The) Lyon's Den
Pop Culture;;Year and school required.  They shot nearly 90% from the floor in the second half, nearly doubling the percentage that final opponent had allowed in the first five games of the tournament.  Coached by Rollie Massimino, this team used a lack of shot clock in the college game to shock defending national champion Georgetown, led by senior center Patrick Ewing, to claim the title.  For ten points, name this Philadelphia-area college basketball team, the lowest seed ever to win the NCAA men's basketball tournament.;;1985 Villanova (Wildcats)
Pop Culture;;They were first encountered when they destroyed Harvest colony and, from there on, they conquer most of the Outer Colonies despite the efforts of Vice Admiral Preston Cole.  After they devastate most of the Inner Colonies, the United Nations Space Command plans to send a group of genetically engineered soldiers known as SPARTANs, led by the Master Chief on the Pillar of Autumn, but the mission is stymied when this group invade the planet Reach.  For ten points, name this alien alliance from Halo.;;(the) Covenant
Pop Culture;;He has sex with a homeless woman who later claims that all she wanted was "a place to sleep".  A fan of IHOP, this employee of a Santa Monica Starbucks is a big Beatles fan who ends up naming his daughter by the homeless woman after "Lucy in the Sky of Diamonds".  But to keep his daughter, played by Dakota Fanning, he turns to a lawyer played by Michelle Pfeiffer.  For ten points, name this retarded title movie character played by Sean Penn.;;Sam (Dawson)
Pop Culture;;The 1984 poetry collection Love, His Bright Light about the death of her son Nicholas Traina, and the "Max and Martha" series of children's books are atypical output for this author, whose first best-seller was 1978's The Promise.  Vanished, Zoya, and Daddy are other books by, for ten points, what prolific romance novelist?;;(Danielle) Steel
Pop Culture;;This act teamed with Vic Chesnutt as Brute on the album Nine High a Pallet.  They released Space Wrangler on Landslide, before Capricorn issued their eponymous major label debut.  They had what may have been the largest release party ever when, in support of their first live album Light Fuse, Get Away, perhaps 100,000 people attended a free concert in their home base of Athens, Georgia.  For ten points, name this jam band that decided to take a break from touring in 2004.;;Widespread Panic
Pop Culture;;Located at 1 Black and Gold Boulevard, it originally had a capacity of 22,500, later expanded to 30,000.  Opening in 1999 with a game against New England, it hosted the All-Star game and league championship in 2001.  Owned by the Hunt family, this is, for ten points, what first U.S. stadium built specifically for Major League Soccer, which also plays host to state high school championship games in Ohio?;;Columbus Crew (Stadium)
Pop Culture;;Among his television guest roles included Drew Carey's unstable neighbor Earl, and, along with his usual TV partners in crime, a member of Dave's college barbershop quartet, Chockful of Notes, on NewsRadio.  Recent television work includes the voice-over narration of Oliver Beene's future self, but he is best known for co-hosting with Bob Odenkirk 1995-1998's HBO's Mr. Show.  For ten points, name this comedian, now seen as Dr. Tobias Fünke on Arrested Development.;;(David) Cross
Pop Culture;;In this film, an Electro-Lux vacuum cleaner is stolen instead of a prototype conceived by Howard Hughes which works with a helmet invented by Peevy, an old man played by Alan Arkin.  Instead, Cliff Secord, a test pilot played by Bill Campbell, uses the device to become the titular hero, fighting Nazis along the way.  For ten points, name this 1991 flick about a hero who flies with the aid of a jet backpack.;;(The) Rocketeer
Pop Culture;;His 2003 batting average of .266 was his lowest since 1993, when he also hit .266 while hitting 7 home runs in only 154 at-bats.  His fantasy baseball owners cringe because he is a notoriously slow starter in April, but rejoice that he is now in his 9th season of 30 or more home runs, including his 47 in 2003 despite a switch of leagues.  For ten points, name this Philly first baseman who first made his mark with Cleveland.;;(Jim) Thome
Pop Culture;;After his thirty-year sentence ends after five years due to a technicality, this drug dealer decided to go straight by investing in a car rental business.  He seeks out his old girlfriend, played by Penelope Ann Miller, and he runs into trouble due to his involvement with his lawyer, played by Sean Penn, and Benny Blanco "from the Bronx," played by John Leguizamo.  For ten points, name this character who, ten years after Scarface, was played by Al Pacino in a Brian De Palma movie.;;Carlito (Brigante)
Pop Culture;;The family part of the sitcom featured kids named Derrick and Jimmy and a wife named Alicia, while the workplace portion had Bernard and Spoon, two mechanics who worked in the main character's auto garage.  Cancelled after 16 episodes, for ten points, name this unfunny working class African-American comedy starring a Saturday Night Live alum.;;(The) Tracy Morgan Show
Pop Culture;;This maneuver ended the first match of the first Wrestlemania, as Tito Santana defeated the Executioner.  Buddy Rogers, Greg "The Hammer" Valentine, and Jeff Jarrett have all at times used this finishing maneuver, which traditionally can be reversed by the person in the hold turning both people face-down.  For ten points, what submission hold most associated with the "Nature Boy" Ric Flair is named for the configuration of the victim's lower appendages?;;figure-four leg lock
Pop Culture;;He was sued by Robert McIlhinney, who claims that one of his movies ripped off the unproduced film script Lord of the Barrens: the Jersey Devil.  His most recent 2004 hit has also been accused of plagiarizing the 1995 Edgar-nominated children's book by Margaret Peterson Haddix, Running Out of Time, about a girl who finds out she is living on a historical preserve when she is sent to fetch medicine, although his Blinding Edge Pictures denies the charges.  For ten points, name this director of Signs and The Village.;;(M.) (Night) Shyamalan
Pop Culture;;Dean has a drinking problem.  Leslie is a hypochondriac.  Mike suffers from obsessive-compulsive disorder.  What makes this interesting is that the characters are, respectively, a pig, a frog, and raccoon.  Humans include the psychiatrist Brandy Carter and the veterinarian Frank Mellish, although creator Frank Cho portrays himself as a chimp in, for ten points, what comic strip set in a titular animal sanctuary?;;Liberty Meadows
Pop Culture;;Although it was not The X-Files, Nicholas Lea had a recurring role on this show as Ricky Caruso.  It featured one of the last roles of Telly Savalas as Tommy Collette, a mobster who comes to Eastbridge.  Created by Stephen J. Cannell, its supporting characters include cops Cyd Madison and Stan Kelly and the main character's wife, Rachel.  For ten points, name this small town police show starring Michael Chiklis as Tony Scali.;;(The) Commish
Pop Culture;;Although not Robert Parrish, this athlete attended Centenary College and was the College Player of the Year before turning pro in 1981.  In 2000, he won the Players Championship by one stroke over Tiger Woods, his first victory in that tournament since 1983, when he also topped the money list and beat Jack Nicklaus in the PGA Championship.  For ten points, what golfer has been busy more recently as captain of the 2004 U.S. Ryder Cup team?;;(Hal) Sutton
Pop Culture;;This act's least commercially successful album, featuring a cover of John Waite's "Missing You," was 1999's Tight Rope, whose only Top Ten hit was "You'll Always Be Loved By Me".  But Borderline, Waitin' on Sundown and Hardworkin' Man all went double platinum or better.  For ten points, name this country act whose debut, A Brand New Man, included the song "Boot Scootin' Boogie".;;(Kix) Brooks and (Ronnie) Dunn
Pop Culture;;In June 2002, a Roger Sanchez remix of this song topped the Billboard Dance Music Club Play chart.  The original, produced by Nellee Hooper, includes the lines "A performance deserving of standing ovations" and "The waves keep on crashing on me for some reason / But your love keeps on coming like a thunderbolt".  A track off the album Rock Steady, "let's just keep on dancing" because "you've got me feeling," for ten points, what titular way of a 2002 No Doubt song?;;Hella Good
Pop Culture;;Opening in Utah's Wasatch Mountains in 1912, it quickly moves to a ship off the coast of Portugal in 1938, where the title character has recovered the item he lost 26 years earlier.  Returning to his teaching duties in Connecticut, he finds that his estranged father has gone missing in Venice, and he sets off to find him, meeting up with his father's German partner.  From there, it's a race to Turkey and the Canyon of the Crescent Moon, where he must beat the Nazi's to the Holy Grail in, for ten points, what 1989 movie?;;Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade
Pop Culture;;The prototype for this device was first displayed at a 1959 Nuremberg, Germany exhibition by Frenchman Arthur Granjean.  An American company bought the rights to it and developed it using a mixture of small plastic beads and aluminum powder internally.  The Ohio Arts Company makes, for ten points, what familiar red toy in which two plastic knobs guide a stylus to trace lines through the powder?;;Etch-a-Sketch
Pop Culture;;Considered one of the best players never to have played in the NCAA Tournament, he averaged over 20 points and 20 rebounds a game while playing for Massachusetts.  Drafted by the Milwaukee Bucks in 1972, he instead attempted to play for the Atlanta Hawks, but an injunction forced him to return to the Virginia Squires four games into the 1972-73 ABA season.  Often considered the catalyst for the ABA-NBA merger--for ten points--who is this long-time 76er, known for his Afro and dunking ability?;;(Julius) (Winfield) Erving (II)|(Dr.) (J) Erving (II)|Dr. J
Pop Culture;;In her appearance on Buffy the Vampire Slayer, she expressed distaste backstage for playing in "vampire towns".  Her solo career began with the albums Whatever and I'm With Stupid, while Bachelor No. 2 was her first album on her SuperEgo label.  She received a boost when her friend Paul Thomas Anderson was inspired by and used her music in Magnolia.  For ten points, name this former lead singer of Voices Carry and wife of Michael Penn.;;(Aimee) Mannu
Pop Culture;;He is decapitated by an environmentally-sound toilet.  He gets locked out of his house by a Russian mail-order bride who freaks after seeing him and his friend who co-ordered the woman.  His car is killed by the giant mechanical Rabbot created by Dr. Weird.  These misfortunes befall, for ten points, what New Jersey-based friend and neighbor of Frylock, Meatwad, and Shake on Aqua Teen Hunger Force?;;Carl (Brutananadilewski)
Pop Culture;;The follow-up to the EP Opiate, this album includes the song "Bottom" co-written by Henry Rollins.  Other tracks include "Swamp Song," "Prison Sex," and "Intolerance".  The most notable song, featuring a music video with stop-motion puppets, is "Sober".  For ten points, name this 1993 album by Tool.;;Undertow
Pop Culture;;At times, he has been aided by his friend, Woozy Winks.  Once a small-time criminal named Eel O'Brien, he was transformed by a vat of acid, and became a crime fighter, wearing a signature red and yellow costume.  A member of the Justice League, this is, for ten points, what highly flexible hero who often disguises himself by deforming his body?;;Plastic Man
Pop Culture;;Among its notable current participants are Mark Ricciuto, Nathan Buckley, and Adam Goodes, who shared the 2003 Charles Brownlow medal, given to the "best and fairest" player.  Its teams include the Carlton Blues, Hawthorne Hawks, Richmond Tigers, and St. Kilda Saints.  For ten points, what league's premiership has been won for three consecutive years by the Brisbane Lions?;;Australian Football League
Pop Culture;;He started as a radio reporter in Vermillion during college, and then worked in television in Omaha and in Atlanta, before becoming a late-night anchor in Los Angeles from 1965-73.  After that, he covered the Watergate scandal before becoming the host of The Today Show from 1976 until 1983, when he moved over to the anchor desk, which he will step aside from in 2004, giving way to Brian Williams.  For ten points, name this newsman, author of The Greatest Generation,;;(Thomas) (John) (Tom) Brokaw
Pop Culture;;Those that feel less-than-kind towards the main character are Gus Panas, who felt abandoned years ago, and Fukuda and Fryman, who resent remarks said earlier.  Meanwhile, T-Rex Pennebaker is too cocky to respect the old man.  Perhaps the only man happy to see Stan Ross is general manager Schembri, whose Milwaukee Brewers are in fifth place.  For ten points, name this recent movie about an unretired sports star, starring Bernie Mac.;;Mr(.) 3000
Pop Culture;;It has no meaning in its most famous context, since its author stole the line from a 1954 R&B song by the Medallions called "The Letter".  Vernon Green claimed that it originally was a made up childhood word that referred to "a secret paper doll fantasy figure who would be my ideal woman".  In the 1973 song that brought the word back, it was the reason that the author said, "some people call me Maurice".  For ten points, name this word from Steve Miller's "The Joker".;;pompatus (of) (love)
Pop Culture;;In 1986, he received a five-cent raise on the dollar-a-year lifetime contract that he signed in 1972 with the Harlem Globetrotters.  He was named an honorary member of the Basketball Hall of Fame in 2004, even though he did track and football in college and played the trainer of a tennis pro and U.S. agent in I Spy.  For ten points, what Temple grad is not known for the movies The Devil and Max Devlin, Ghost Dad, and Leonard Part Six, but for playing Dr. Cliff Huxtable?;;(William) (Henry) (Bill) Cosby(,) (Jr.)
Pop Culture;;Sweat, a comedy about personal trainers, is the current project of this director, whose last movie brought together American Pie stars Jason Biggs and Mena Suvari in Loser.  Also the director of National Lampoon's European Vacation and Look Who's Talking, inspired by her own pregnancy, she broke through with Fast Times at Ridgemont High.  For ten points, name this screenwriter and director of Clueless.;;(Amy) Heckerling
Pop Culture;;She was talked in to joining the track team after her phys ed teacher at DeKalb County's Columbia High School clocked her breaking the state record in the 220-yard dash.  Although she initially planned to become a hairdresser, she was also persuaded into attending college, winning four NCAA titles at Georgia.  Although she failed to medal in the 100-meter race at Barcelona, for ten points, what runner did win gold in the 200 in 1992?;;(Gwen) Torrence
Pop Culture;;His wife, Carolyn, settled a $10 million lawsuit against the National Enquirer, while he settled a $209 million lawsuit with the tabloid's parent company, American Media.  He had been suing over the "media frenzy" concerning a Modesto resident with whom he had been involved and whose remains were found the following year in Rock Creek Park.  For ten points, what former Congressman had a relationship with intern Chandra Levy?;;(Gary) Condit
Pop Culture;;Amy Tan's ridiculous blurb on this book's back cover reads; "This is the fable you will devour when you fall in love".  It features Eddie, a former war veteran who, on his 83rd birthday, tries to save a little girl.  Instead, the amusement park mechanic dies and encounters the title characters in, for ten points, what first novel by Mitch Albom?;;(The) Five People You Meet In Heaven
Pop Culture;;His military roles have included Colonel Hayes Hodges, Colonel William Hawkins, Colonel Brad Shaw, and Major Hank Marshall, while his civil service roles have seen him as L.A. Disaster Response manager Mike Roarke, former District Attorney Harvey Dent, and Chief Deputy U.S. Marshal Samuel Gerard.  For ten points, who is this Texan, perhaps best known as MIB Agent Kay?;;(Tommy) (Lee) Jones
Pop Culture;;Jeanane Garafalo voiced Sally Reardon, who was pretty much heard but not seen on this show.  Sally would be the recipient of tapes send by the title character, who skipped out on going to Stanford University in favor of the University of New York, only to find out that Ben Covington couldn't easily remember her name.  For ten points, name this show starring Kerry Russell.;;Felicity
Pop Culture;;An All-Pacific Coast Conference safety in 1971 and '72 out of the University of the Pacific, he served apprenticeships as graduate assistant under Lou Holtz at Arkansas and under Earl Bruce at Iowa State and Ohio State.  In 1984, he became a defensive backs coach with the Bills and Vikings.  After serving as defensive coordinator of the Jets, he was promoted to head coach in 1994.  The next two years, he was defensive coordinator of the 49ers before getting another head coaching gig with the Patriots.  After a year out of coaching, he went west and into the college ranks.  For ten points, who built a national championship team at Southern Cal?;;(Pete) Carroll
Pop Culture;;The original version tells of devotion to another, beginning "Called you on the phone / Said I'm coming through / Hope you're all alone / 'Cause I got plans for you".  The second, harder-edged version says: "I met so many men and / It's like their all the same / My appetite for lovin' / Is now my hunger pain" in an attempt to gain street credibility.  Murder Inc. more or less completely changed, for ten points, what song by Jennifer Lopez whose remix featured rapping by Ja Rule?;;I'm Real
Pop Culture;;Due to the success of Green Day, Billie Joe Armstrong's stint as this group's second guitarist lasted only one show, although he did co-write a song on the EP Radio, Radio, Radio.  Formed by two former members of Operation Ivy, Matt Freeman and Tim Armstrong, they were the object of a major label bidding war after the success of the album Let's Go, featuring the song "Salvation".  For ten points, what punk revival act went platinum with ...And Out Come the Wolves, featuring the songs "Roots Radicals," "Ruby Soho," and "Time Bomb"?;;Rancid
Pop Culture;;Its star died just hours after it finished filming and so was a sentimental choice for the Best Actor Oscar that ended up going to Nicolas Cage for Leaving Las Vegas.  Although not about Dante, it does involve both love for a woman named Beatrice and poetry as the title character seeks knowledge about women from an exile who has settled on the island.  For ten points, name the film in which Massimo Troisi played a guy hired to hand-deliver Pablo Neruda's mail.;;(Il) Postino
Pop Culture;;Outings included the Aquarium of the Pacific, a Hare Krishna Temple street festival, a Catalina Islands camping trip, and an Arrested Development concert.  Moses, Jonas, Randy, Miriam, and Ruth lived in a Hollywood Hills house with six city dwellers, leading to potential culture clashes in, for ten points, what UPN reality show about five members of a religious group who venture into the outside world?;;Amish in the City
Pop Culture;;For some fans, the highlight of this comedy may be the appearance of the band Mudhoney.  For others, it is Drake Sabitch who is still fighting the war in the woods of Washington and who is played by Gary Busey.  The protagonist is framed for burning down a recreation center and discovers a voter registration fraud intended to defeat his brother who is running for governor.  For ten points, name this movie that was funnier the first time. . . when it was called Tommy Boy.;;Black Sheep
Pop Culture;;Married to fellow author Laura Frankos, he was a technical writer for the Los Angeles County Office of Education, while writing the novels Wereblood and Werenight.  He won a Hugo for his novella "Down in the Bottomlands," while his novels include Ruled Britannia, The Two Georges, and The Guns of the South.  For ten points, name this master of alternative history.;;(Harry) Turtledove
Pop Culture;;Although Marco Polo saw use of this medium in India, it was not popular with artists because of the tendency of paint to cake.  American Edgar Leeteg became a master of it by using thin, light strokes, but his clientele tended to be drunken sailors who wanted female nudes and it soon became popular for mass-produced art.  For ten points, name this preferred medium of white trash icons of Elvis and subject of an Alannah Myles song.;;black velvet
Pop Culture;;He first had sex with his high school band teacher, Ms. Blankenship.  Zoning inspector Bonnie turns out to be a married woman.  He became a bigamist by marrying both Nikki and Kate; he has also had two sham marriages, once to help Diane keep her kids and one, really a civil union in Vermont, to stave off the deportation of Mr. Wick.  For ten points, name this loser whose best friends are Drew and Oswald.;;Drew (Carey)|(Drew) Carey
Pop Culture;;When first proposed in the 1950s, it was offered initially to Latrobe, Pennsylvania, but a lack of coordinated effort stalled the effort, leaving an opening for its eventual site.  Built on land donated by the school district, its location adjacent to Fawcett Stadium made it more appealing for the game that follows enshrinement ceremonies in the first weekend in August.  For ten points, name this Canton, Ohio institution, which celebrated its 40th anniversary in 2003.;;Pro Football Hall of Fame
Pop Culture;;This singer was recruited after being seen by the band on MTV performing "Suffocate Me".  She quickly abandoned Angelfish after being summoned to Wisconsin, where she joined with Duke Erikson, Steve Marker, and Butch Vig and wowed fans with her performance on songs like "Stupid Girl," "Crush," and "Only Happy When It Rains".  For ten points, name this Scottish lead singer of Garbage.;;(Shirley) Manson
Pop Culture;;When this school decided in 1972 to abandon the nickname Redmen, the Student Senate conducted a poll in which the two losing options were the Artichokes and the Statesmen.  Currently playing baseball on Lorden Field, football at McGuirk Alumni Stadium, and basketball in the Mullins Center, this is, for ten points, what Atlantic 10 school whose teams now play as the Minutemen?;;UMass|(University) (of) Massachusetts
Pop Culture;;In this movie, the bad guys known as the Smokers are led by the chain-smoking Deacon, who at one point refers to "Saint Joe".  Later, a picture of Joseph Hazelwood is shown and Deacon's base of operations turns out to be the Exxon Valdez.  Nicknamed "Fishtar" for its financial woes, this is, for ten points, what uber-expensive film starring Kevin Costner as the Mariner.;;Waterworld
Pop Culture;;This website's forum includes the sections "The Writer's Block," "It Came from Linksville!," "PAX," and an administration forum known as "The Monkey Den".  It also includes news and reviews, but the centerpiece is a creation of Jerry Holkins and Mike Krahulik, who adopt the personas of Gabe and Tycho Brahe.  For ten points, name the website or its popular web comic, which usually deals with video and computer games.;;Penny Arcade
Pop Culture;;This album, featuring producer Bob Rock on bass, was criticized by some fans as a "nu-metal" attempt due to the band's first use of downtuned guitars and the lack of guitar solos.  The shortest track, "Purify," clocks in at over five minutes, while the longest, "All Within My Hands," is almost nine minutes long and the album featured the first lyrical contributories of Kirk Hammett and Lars Ulrich.  For ten points, name this 2003 song featuring the song "Frantic," the much-anticipated follow-up to Reload by Metallica.;;St. Anger
Pop Culture;;He spent one more year with the Prince Albert Raiders, scoring 105 points in 41 games, after being drafted.  Moving up to the NHL, he was the runner-up to Sergei Makarov in Calder Trophy voting, a good showing for the second American to be drafted #1 overall.  In the 1993-94 season, he had a franchise record 50 goals in his first year in a new location and in 1999 led his team to the Stanley Cup.  For ten points, name this star of the Dallas Stars.;;(Mike) Modano
Pop Culture;;Her middle name, "Felicity," is only mentioned in a computer game set in the rainforest, while her first name "Valerie" was learned through a letter from a high school classmate who became a paleontologist.  The owner of a lizard named Liz, she was voiced by Lily Tomlin when she made the jump from books to TV.  For ten points, name this red-headed teacher at Walkerville Elementary in The Magic Schoolbus.;;(Ms.) Frizzle
Pop Culture;;This act was formed when a DJ-slash-rapper and a TV host were put together to record the soundtrack to a movie.  Originally named Joyride, they had the fastest-selling single in their country's history with "My Oh My" in 1997.  They had some international success with the songs "Cartoon Heroes" and "Lollipop(Candyman," but their main U.S. hit was a song that prompted a lawsuit.  For ten points, what Danish group was sued by Mattel over the song "Barbie Girl"?;;Aqua
Pop Culture;;"Cool, Cool Conservative Men" was cut from the film version, while "He Plays the Violin" was sung by Blythe Danner.  Debuting on Broadway in 1969, it was written by Peter Stone with music and lyrics by Sherman Edwards.  Other songs include "Egg", "Piddle, Twiddle, and Resolve" and the hilarious "But, Mr. Adams".  For ten points, name this musical featuring Edward Rutledge, Richard Henry Lee, John Dickinson, Thomas Jefferson, and John Adams together in Philadelphia.;;776
Pop Culture;;Penny is the blonde, beautiful, popular, and dumb as a rock.  Paige is introverted, smart, and unpopular.  Pearce is the crazy, mad scientist type, while Parker is good-looking and athletic and Patton is, well, short.  Living with parents Carol and Bob, played by Rebecca Creskoff and Andy Richter, this is the family of, for tem points, what Fox television show, whose name indicates that all 5 siblings have the same birthday?;;Quintuplets
Pop Culture;;American University's College Republicans cancelled a 2004 appearance by this syndicate columnist due to disapproval from the Bush campaign.  Her first book was Invasion: How America Still Welcomes Terrorists, Criminals, and Other Foreign Menaces to Our Shores, while her promotion of a second led to a memorable talk show appearance.  For ten points, who insisted that John Kerry's war wounds were "self inflicted" during a Hardball appearance ostensibly plugging her book justifying WWII Japanese internment?;;(Michelle) Malkin
Pop Culture;;He is married to Tony-winning actress Idina Menzel, who appeared with him when he originated the role of the landlord Benny in the Broadway production of Rent.  He played one of the strangers brought together in the remake of The House of Haunted Hill, the bodyguard of a millionaire's surrogate mother in The Way of the Gun and the Bandleader in Chicago, after his breakout role as Winston Shakespeare.  For ten points, name this star of How Stella Got Her Grove Back, who is now on the small screen in Kevin Hill.;;(Taye) Diggs
Pop Culture;;It is named for a Douglas Hollis pipe sculpture in Magnussen Park that is designed to make noise in the wind.  Before being signed to a major label, this Seattle act released the EPs Screaming Life and Flopp and the SST Records release Ultramega OK.  After hooking up with A&M, they released Louder Than Love and Badmotorfinger.  For ten points, name this grunge act, which broke out with Superunknown and the song "Black Hole Sun".;;Soundgarden
Pop Culture;;This company is now offering fifteen colors, three checkered patterns, one palm tree pattern and one camouflage pattern for people to custom design slip-ons on its website.  The sponsor of the Triple Crown of Snowboarding and the summer Warped Tour, it was once the favorite of skateboarders and surfers.  For ten points, name this Southern California shoe company made famous when Sean Penn's Jeff Spicoli wore them in Fast Times at Ridgemont High.;;Vans
Pop Culture;;In 1991, his manager held him out of the final game of the season to preserve his batting average at .201, barely above the Mendoza line.  Although working with hitting coach Doug Rader cleaned up his swing, back and heel problems limited him to 74 games combined in 1993 and 1994.  His renaissance began the next year with 39 home runs in only 104 games, followed by four straight 50-plus home run seasons.  For ten points, name this slugger who teed off against Carl Pavano to hit #70 in 1998.;;(Mark) McGwire
Pop Culture;;A long time ago, Dan got his high school sweetheart Karen pregnant, but instead went off to college on a basketball scholarship.  When he returned to his hometown, he had a new wife Deb and a son.  MTV VJ Hilarie Burton's character, Peyton Sawyer and the basketball court become areas of conflict between Dan's sons, Nathan and Lucas, played by James Lafferty and Chad Michael Murray, in, for ten points, what North Carolina-set WB drama?;;One Tree Hill
Pop Culture;;Concerts in this multi-functional building can make use of the highly-customizable Acoustical Cloud sound system.  This venue's minor tenants include soccer's Pythons and Pride and the hockey's Winter Hawks.  Opening in 1995, it had a 104-game consecutive sellout streak that pales in comparison to the 800-plus games of its predecessor, Memorial Coliseum.  For ten points, name this home of the Portland Trail Blazers.;;Rose Garden (Arena)
Pop Culture;;The cover version that appears on Ryan Adams' Love is Hell EP began as a joke during a 2002 acoustic set, where he gave the song a bluesy quality.  Beatles influences can be seen in that the song's title shares its name with the title of George Harrison's first solo album.  Purportedly written as a love song to Meg Matthews, the BBC named it the British song of the decade for the 1990s.  For ten points, name this 1995 Oasis song, the band's biggest American hit.;;Wonderwall
Pop Culture;;His real name is Jason Slocumb Jr.  The son of an institutionalized father and a distant, pill-popping, cancer-stricken mother, he has been kicked out of many good schools and finally escapes from military school.  His wealthy grandfather, played by Jeff Goldblum, invites him to New York, where he has sex with his grandfather's mistress, played by Amanda Peet, and with Sookie Sapperstein, a drop-out played by Claire Danes.  For ten points, name this title character oft-compared to Holden Caulfield and played by Kieran Culkin.;;Igby
Pop Culture;;It is undeniable that Tequila Watson shot Ramon Pumphrey, but Max Pace doesn't want it known that Wilson was taking Tarvan.  Washington D.C. public defender Clay Carter accepts Pace's deal for a quiet settlement and is given the goods for a lawsuit against another pharmaceutical company in, for ten points, what 2003 John Grisham novel about the money to be made in class-action lawsuits?;;(The) King of Torts
Pop Culture;;His wife, Laurie Hibberd, is an entertainment reporter who co-hosted  Fox's After Breakfast, so he is probably not as gay as Chris Kattan implied he was in a Saturday Night Live impression.  He began as a freelance production assistant on what was then called The Morning Show.  He produced a Lifetime variety show for that show's star before returning to what became a nationally syndicated hit.  For ten points, name this executive producer of Live with Regis and Kelly.;;(Michael) Gelman
Pop Culture;;Founded in Columbus, Ohio in 1963 by the son of Russian immigrants, Leslie Wexner, its name reflected the original intent to only sell sportswear.  It remains the eponymous chain of a company that also owns White Barn Candle Co., Bath & Body Works, Victoria's Secret, and other specialty stores.  For ten points, name this common mall denizen which describes itself as "vibrant, feminine, sophisticated style for the modern fashion-forward woman".;;(The) Limited
Pop Culture;;His career began with his 60-second commentaries for an LA radio station.  He has become the first person with simultaneous national public television and radio talk shows, after he began broadcasting on NPR and 2002 and in January 2004 got a PBS show.  For ten points, what black journalist once hosted BET Tonight?;;(Tavis) Smiley
Pop Culture;;Though he won his first post-season game in his MVP year of 1986, he would go 13 years before winning a second post-season game.  In the 13 intermediary years, he would change teams twice, make six All-Star appearances and win four of his record six Cy Young awards. Winning his 300th game as a Yankee in 2003, he announced his retirement, only to change his mind before Spring Training.  For ten points, name this Houston pitcher, known as "The Rocket".;;(William) (Roger) Clemens
Pop Culture;;The title character, a newcomer from Iowa, finds an affordable place in the East Village with one drawback.  Based on a short by John Payson, its true stars are singing and dancing creatures who come with the new dwelling place.  For ten points, name this first ever feature film produced by MTV Networks, which stars Jerry O'Connell and a lot of bugs.;;Joe's Apartment
Pop Culture;;When it entered the charts at #1 and fell to #16, it set the record for fastest-falling #1 album in Billboard history.  This double-CD attacked Marilyn Manson one song.  Other tracks included "We're in This Together" and the band's first Top 40 hit, "The Day the World Went Away".  For ten points, name this 1999 follow-up to The Downward Spiral, by Nine Inch Nails.;;(The) Fragile
Pop Culture;;The first thirteen men to win it were black including Oliver Lewis, who won the first in 1875.  However, Lewis and multiple winners such as Isaac Murphy, Gary Stevens, Bill Hartack, and Eddie Arcaro are not remembered; instead, history records names such as Ben Brush, Judge Himes, Omar Khayyam, Clyde Van Dusen, Lil E. Tee, Ferdinand, Alysheba, Grindstone, Charismatic, and Fusaichi Pegasus.  For ten points, name this annual event held at Churchill Downs.;;Kentucky Derby
Pop Culture;;A descendant of Harriet Beecher Stowe, she believes that painter Walter Sickert was Jack the Ripper, a theory that she made the case for in Jack the Ripper: Case Closed.  Once a reporter in Richmond, Virginia she made the jump to novel-writing with Postmortem, which was followed by books such as Point of Origin and Blow Fly.  For ten points, name this author whose time in the Virginia Chief Medical Examiner's Office was useful in her creation of Dr. Kay Scarpetta.;;(Patricia) Cornwell
Pop Culture;;A mother killed by a bomb hidden in a laundry detergent box.  A college baseball player found beaten to death behind a gay bar.  A teen murdered on a tennis court during a party at a swank estate.  A prisoner allegedly killed while trying to escape during Johnny Cash's 1968 Folsom Prison concert.  A 1978 disco club murder that may have been arson to cover up a murder.  Philadelphia detective Lilly Rush seeks to solve these crimes on, for ten points, CBS show that centers on solving old crimes?;;Cold Case
Pop Culture;;The music video for this song featured model Shana Zedrick driving around town.  Meanwhile, the lyrics state "All the girls walk by dressed up for each other / And the boys do the boogie woogie on the corner of the street".  Although the song first appeared on the album Tupelo Honey, a more recent version from Dance Naked was a hit.  For ten points, what song by Me'shell Ndegeocello and Mellencamp was a cover of a Van Morrison tune?;;Wild Night
Pop Culture;;This movie concerns the relationships between a man and his three daughters: a schoolteacher, an airline executive, and a fast food worker at Wendy's.  Remade less than a decade after being released as Tortilla Soup, which starred Hector Elizondo in a Latino setting, this film centers around the traditional Sunday meals shared by the Chu family.  For ten points, name this movie about an aging chef who has lost his tastebuds, a triumph of Ang Lee.;;Eat Drink Man Woman|Yin shi nan nu
Pop Culture;;The son of a 15-year-old single mother, he was nicknamed "Bubbachuck" while growing up.  In his junior year, he quarterbacked Bethel High to a Virginia state championship, but in his senior year, he was charged with hitting a woman in the head with a chair, although he was later pardoned and the conviction overturned.  Turning to basketball, he was twice the Big East Defensive Player of the Year before becoming the first player to leave early for the NBA in Georgetown history.  For ten points, what point guard was named Rookie of the Year in his first season with the 76ers?;;(Allen) Iverson
Pop Culture;;His collaborations include "Yah Mo B There" with James Ingram, "Ever Changing Times" with Aretha Frankin, and the #1 "On My Own" with Patti LaBelle.  More recently, he's been pressing his album Motown, while Warren G's "Regulate" samples his "I Keep Forgettin' (Every Time You're Near)".  For ten points, name this former back-up performer for Steely Dan and member of the Doobie Brothers who has reached new audiences after being featured in some MCI commercials.;;(Michael) McDonald
Pop Culture;;Former Monkee Peter Tork once played her father Jedediah.  In a later episode, the role was taken over by Michael McKean, as Jedediah and his wife Rhiannon visited from Pittsburgh to announce their divorce.  She had previously run away from Pittsburgh to return to her boyfriend in Philadelphia, the location of Penn Brook College and John Adams High.  For ten points, name this character played by Danielle Fishel on Boy Meets World.;;Topanga (Lawrence)
Pop Culture;;His early acting career was stymied by emotional problems that led him to ask to be excused from Empire Records, from which director Allan Moyle deleted his scenes.  After appearing in the Oscar-nominated short Duke of Groove, he was cast by Terry Gilliam in Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas, Ang Lee in The Ice Storm and by Gary Ross in Pleasantville.  For ten points, name this actor who Ross also cast as Red Pollard, the jockey in Seabiscuit.;;(Tobey) Maguire
Pop Culture;;The 2002 film of this title, based on a comic book by Osamu Tezuka, has Rock, jealous of Tima, a robot built in the image of his adopted father Duke Red's dead daughter, who is meant to take over a complex of towers known as the Ziggurat.  The anime is named after a silent film of the same title, in which Maria is replaced by a robot duplicate created by the mad scientist Rotwang.  For ten points, the classic 1927 movie by Fritz Lang.;;Metropolis
Pop Culture;;Its recent output such as American Pro Trucker and Mary Kate and Ashley: Sweet 16 may have been a harbinger.  Despite a sports portfolio of games such as Jack Nicklaus Golf, Dave Mirra Freestyle BMX, NHL Breakaway, NFL Quarterback Club, and All-Star Baseball, this computer game maker filed for bankruptcy in 2004.  For ten points, name this company best known as the publisher of Midway's Mortal Kombat and the developer of Turok.;;Acclaim (Entertainment)
Pop Culture;;Melanie Bitterman on Maggie Briggs.  Linda Phillips on Duet.  Dr. Elizabeth Newberry on Stat.  Catherine Merrick on The John Laroquette Show.  However, even though she was part of The Jackie Thomas Show and Tom, you can probably blame those on Tom Arnold.  For ten points, name this actress lauded as a female version of Ted McGinley as a show-killer, whose most successful role has been Rachel's boss Joanna on Friends.;;(Alison) La Placa
Pop Culture;;This act owes a lot to Willie Nelson, whose Pedernales Studio in Austin is where they recorded their first album.  Wilson also played guitar on "La Contestacion" and gave a spot on his cable special to this group, the sons of a conjuncto musician.  JoJo, Henry, and Ringo Garza form, for ten points, what Texican rock 'n' roll act behind the song "Heaven".;;Los Lonely Boys
Pop Culture;;His father was recently revealed to be Azazel.  Raised by the gypsy sorceress Margai Szardos, he became the star of Bavarian circus as an acrobat.  Recruited to join the second incarnation of the X-Men, he later led the U.K.-based Excalibur.  For ten points, name this teleporting mutant who stands out due to his demonic appearance.;;Nightcrawler|Kurt Wagner
Pop Culture;;He played basketball with Antoine Walker while attending Chicago's Mount Carmel High School, while, in his chosen sport, another teammate was Pro Bowler Simeon Rice.  His 9,950 total yards of offense and 77 touchdowns led to his being named Big East Player of the Decade and four-time all-conference quarterback at Syracuse.  For ten points, name this Eagle who Rush Limbaugh claimed was overrated because the media wants a black quarterback to succeed.;;(Donvan) McNabb
Pop Culture;;On a mailing list associated with this website, Patricia Chapin coined a term for "inspirational tales which conceal much darker meanings than the uplifting moral lessons they purport to offer".  That genre, "glurge," is one of several categories on this website; others include Wooden Spoons, Inboxer Rebellion, Risqu Business, Rumors of War, and Cokelore.  For ten points, what website created by Barbara and David Mikkelson takes its name from a Faulkner-created family and specializes in urban legends?;;(www.)snopes(.com)
Pop Culture;;The name's the same.  The first one aired in the fall of 2001 and consisted of three teams of two, dropped off in the middle of nowhere and racing each other back to the Statue of Liberty.  The second is a much-hyped show from Alias creator J.J. Abrams, which debuted this fall.  For ten points, what name is shared by a failed NBC reality show and a current ABC drama about people stranded on an island after a plane crash?;;Lost
Pop Culture;;A one-time member of the Atlanta Boys choir, he belonged to a high school a capella group Midnight Voices, which reissued a 1999 album to capitalize on his fame.  But after he flopped with a 2003 eponymous album that included his rendition of "Unchained Melody, " he was dropped by RCA.  For ten points, name this runner-up to Kelly Clarkson on the first season of American Idol.;;(Justin) Guarini
Pop Culture;;In 1999, he was traded with draft picks for Billy Owens, Dale Ellis, Don MacLean, and the rights to Corey Maggette, but left a year later in a four-way trade that included Vernon Maxwell, Glen Rice, Chuck Person, Travis Knight, Patrick Ewing.  Since he left Seattle, he has become increasingly irrelevant in his second tours of duty with the Orlando Magic and Los Angeles Lakers.  His first stint in Orlando saw this former Clemson star helping the Magic to the NBA Finals.  For ten points, name this power forward who once teamed with Pippen and Jordan on the Bulls.;;(Horace) Grant
Pop Culture;;Seeking to afford a Christmas trip, he takes a $300 housesitting job over Thanksgiving break that devolves into a trip to New York City and a stay at the Waldorf.  When he returns to his Boston prep school to face a disciplinary hearing over a vandalized car, he receives the aid of his client, Lieutenant Colonel Jack Slade.  For ten points, name character well-played by Chris O'Donnell in the face of many a "hoo-hah!" by Al Pacino in Scent of a Woman.;;Charlie (Simms)
Pop Culture;;Original drummer Dave Krusen left after recording the first album and was replaced by the New Bohemians' Matt Chamberlain on tour, before the slot was finally nailed down by Dave Abbruzzese.  It was started after two former members of Green River and Mother Love Bone were put in touch with a singer from San Diego, who they asked to join them in Seattle.  For ten points, name this act originally called the Mookie Blaylock Band, who honored the player's jersey number with their first album, Ten.;;Pearl Jam
Pop Culture;;After attending Eastern Washington State on an athletic scholarship, he was recruited to join a semi-pro baseball team in Kamloops, British Columbia, but broke his ankle sliding into home.  He remains in sports, buying a minority interest in the Edmonton Oilers and buying Mark McGwire's 70th home run ball.  He drew upon friend and Kamloops teammate Al Simmons for the name of his most famous creation.  For ten points, name this creator of Spawn.;;(Todd) McFarlane
Pop Culture;;In 1997, he was charged after marijuana was found in the backpack of a passenger in his car, although the charges were later thrown out.  He had plummeted to 12th in the 1995 draft after rumors of marijuana use.  On the non-drug front, he was criticized for a 2002 hit on Chad Clifton and a comment about the NFL's "slave master" mentality".  For ten points, name defensive lineman who signed with the Raiders in 2004, leaving the team that drafted him, the Tampa Bay Buccaneers.;;(Warren) Sapp
Pop Culture;;Recruited after studying psychology at Oxford, he wrote a monograph that helped catch Monty Props.  He began by writing profiles of serial killers, but found a new gig in which he was initially assisted by his then-girlfriend Diana Fowley.  Driven by the disappearance of his sister Samantha, this is, for ten points, what FBI agent devoted to the X-Files?;;(Fox) Mulder
Pop Culture;;After a football career at San Diego State and with the CFL's BC Lions, his move into a film career included a role as Dallas quarterback Dreamer Tatum in Semi-Tough.  1987 was a watershed year for him as producer Joel Silver cast him as Dillon in Predator before giving him own vehicle as Detroit cop "Action" Jackson.  Though more known to younger audiences as Chubbs Peterson in Happy Gilmore--for ten points--name this actor, whose best known role was as Apollo Creed in Rocky.;;(Carl) Weathers
Pop Culture;;This musician was born in Milwaukee, where he wrote a column for the Milwaukee Community Journal.  His solo career has included the album Hoopla and the song "Like Marvin Gaye Said (What's Going On)," but has thus-far been as lackluster as the album Zingalamaduni, the last album of the band that made him famous.  For ten points, name socially conscious rapper from Arrested Development.;;Speech|(Todd) Thomas
Pop Culture;;His less serious roles include the narrator of the Oscar-winning animated short Harvie Krumpet, the voice of Nigel the pelican in Finding Nemo, the villain Casanova Frankenstein in Mystery Men, and Captain Barbarossa in Pirates of the Caribbean: The Curse of the Black Pearl.  For ten points, what actor's Oscar-nominated roles include a supporting role as acting company manager Philip Henslowe in Shakespeare in Love, the marquis de Sade in Quills, and pianist David Helfgott in Shine?;;(Geoffrey) Rush
Pop Culture;;The episodes tend to be named after characters: Bobbi Borderick wants to work at Saks, model Naomi Gaines is attacked by a criminal known as "the Carver," Escobar Gallardo is a drug lord who blackmails the main characters, and Erica Noughton is the mother of Julia and happens to be played by Vanessa Redgrave, the mother of Joely Richardson, who plays Julia.  Dylan Walsh and Julian McMahon play Sean McNamara and Christian Troy, two plastic surgeons in, for ten points, what FX original series?;;Nip/Tuck
Pop Culture;;When it was announced by Tony George in 1993 that it was to be added to the schedule, it marked the first time that anything other than open wheel racing would be held at the facility.  The inaugural race was won by Indiana native Jeff Gordon, who has gone on to win it three more times, including the 2004 outing.  Named for the facility's nickname, for ten points, what is this NASCAR race held at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway?;;Brickyard 400
Pop Culture;;A direct hit causes between 100 and 800 hits of damage, in 100-point increments, while the blast field has 20 rays that cause between 5 and 15 hits of damage each.  While it originally used different types of fireballs and plasma, it was soon made invisible because the many moving objects slowed down the game.  The long time it takes to warm up before it fires a large green ball of plasma and its characteristic noise are weaknesses of, for ten points, what *uber*-weapon introduced in Doom?;;BFG(9000)|Big Fucking Gun|Big Fraggin' Gun
Pop Culture;;The villain in this film is Marty Wolf, a Hollywood producer whose limo hits the main character, Jason Shepherd.  The teen had been required to write 1,000 words in four hours to avoid summer school.  Now, with girlfriend Kaylee in tow, he goes to force the producer to admit he stole the idea for a movie.  For ten points, name this movie starring Amanda Bynes and Frankie Muniz;;Big, Fat Liar
Pop Culture;;Growing on a South Dakota Indian reservation where his mother was a teacher, he trained as a fighter pilot during World War II but never saw action.  Hosting an eponymous L.A. radio show in the 1950s, he was hired to be the host of Truth or Consequences, which he hosted for 18 years.  He has held his current hosting gig since 1972, the title of which led to Adam Sandler's famous retort to him during their brawl in Happy Gilmore.  For ten points, name this television personality, the host of The Price is Right.;;(Bob) Barker
Pop Culture;;A Top 10 hit in 1984, this song includes splashy sound effects taken from a recording of the band jumping into a swimming pool.  A track off the album Welcome to the Pleasuredome, its lyrics tell you to "shoot it in the right direction / Make making it your intention". and gives you advice for "when you want to go to it" and "when you want to come".  Prominent in the movie Zoolander, this is, for ten points, what hit by Frankie Goes to Hollywood?;;Relax
Pop Culture;;His accomplishments include building his own airplane while a student at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, where he graduated in three years.  He played for Washington, Buffalo, Ottawa, and Phoenix, but never lived up to the promise of his 1992 season, where his 70 goals and 102 points were only good enough for runner-up as NHL Rookie of the Year.  For ten points, name this former Boston Bruin who retired in 2004 after the past three seasons with Montreal.;;(Joe) Juneau
Pop Culture;;The author claims that her favorite book in this series is the twelfth one, When Love Dies.  The first, published in 1983, was Double Love, and since then, there have been other series set during senior year, university, and junior high.  For ten points, name this book series starring the twins Jessica and Elizabeth Wakefield, which is written by Francine Pascal.;;Sweet Valley High
Pop Culture;;In 1991 Howard Stern was fined by the FCC for saying that he masturbated to a picture of this woman.  First portrayed by Nancy Green at the Chicago World's Exposition of 1893, she has been modernized in recent years, as you now see her hair instead of a kerchief on her head.  For ten points, name this commercial icon, who has been criticized as a racist logo in the service of selling pancake mix.;;Aunt Jemima
Pop Culture;;The lesser-known athlete of this name was an Arkansas State center who was a 2002 2nd round draft pick by the Portland Trail Blazers.  The more famous athlete of this name went to Baylor and won the 1999 Golden Spikes award as a DH and pitcher, so it is perhaps unsurprising that he is the first player to both throw a shutout and hit a home run in his major league debut.  For ten points, name this 2002 Rookie of the Year, a starter for the Colorado Rockies.;;(Jason) Jennings
Pop Culture;;Former personnel at this location include dance instructor Sara Madre, who supposedly buried money that can be found with a map, and Zeke the custodian, who is the subject of a ghost story.  This place is run by the unseen Dr. Kahn, voiced by Ben Stein, but the main authority figure is Kevin Lee, nicknamed "Ug". Z.Z., Budnick, and "Donkey Lips" are among kids at, for ten points, what camp from Salute Your Shorts?;;(Camp) Anawanna
Pop Culture;;People have misheard the lyrics as "cheap Hawaiian cigarettes" and either "sanitary" or "semi-hairy" trees.  The song speaks of an old place that smells of cheap wine and cigarettes, which feels just like a beat-up truck and of a girl who died of a broken heart disease as the singer listened through the cemetery trees.  "Nothing is forever. / There's got to be something better than / In the middle, / But me and Cinderella / We put it all together. / We can drive it home with," for ten points, what, according to a song by the Wallflowers?;;One Headlight
Pop Culture;;His recent efforts include the books Still Me and Nothing Is Impossible, a directorial turn for HBO's In the Gloaming, and the TV movies A Step Toward Tomorrow and Rear Window.  More recently, he has appeared as Dr. Swann on Smallville.  For ten points, name this advocate of stem cell research who had his own turn as Clark Kent on the silver screen.;;(Christopher) Reeve
Pop Culture;;Two girls, seeking to open a hair salon, head from Georgia to Los Angeles seeking to make money by dancing in a music video.  Although they don't get the part, one of them is persuaded to pretend to be the descendent of the lost love of a dying millionaire, but Michelle and Nisi find out that they have been enlisted in a scheme to take the old man's money.  For ten points, name this horrible movie directed by Robert Townsend and starring Martin Landau, Natalie Desselle and Halle Berry.;;B.A.P.S.
Pop Culture;;In the cliffhanger final episode of this series, one character finds more information of the death of her mother, Catherine, while another finally finds his sister, Emily.  The two also find that they share a half-brother, Ethan.  Miss Parker has been chasing Jarod at the behest of the Centre on, for ten points, what show from NBC's Thrill-ogy lineup starring Michael T. Weiss as a guy who can take on many identities?;;(The) Pretender
Pop Culture;;In 1954 Danny Biasone invited other owners to Vocational High School in downtown Syracuse to watch this new innovation.  Biasone, the owner of the Syracuse Nationals, had taken an idea originally proposed by Howard Hobson of Yale and displayed it in a 20-minute pickup game that made use of a man shouting on the sidelines.  That fall, it debuted in the NBA.  For ten points, what innovation increased both the scoring and the pace of NBA games?;;(24-second) shot clock
Pop Culture;;He first appeared in Detective Comics #255 in a back-up story where a scientist had a heart attack and died after teleporting this character to Earth.  The only character to be a part of every version of the Justice League, his powers include shape-shifting and telepathy.  For ten points, name this DC Comics alien who hails from the fourth rock from the Sun.;;Martian Manhunter|J'onn J'onzz
Pop Culture;;Randy Fitzsimmons writes this band's songs, or so they claim.  That would include the songs found on the albums Barely Legal, A.K.A. I-D-I-O-T, and Hate so Say I Told You So, which were re-released after they broke through with songs like "Main Offender".  For ten points, name this act behind "Hate to Say I Told You So" and the album Veni, Vidi, Vicious, who hail from Fagersta, Sweden.;;(The) Hives
Pop Culture;;Although he received an Emmy for his work on the TV movie A Family of Strangers and starred in the miniseries The Last Don, he is better known for a film career that began with the role of Horse in Bang the Drum Slowly and Tony Rosato in The Godfather: Part II.  For ten points, name this Italian-American actor who played Nicolas Cage's brother and proposed to Cher in Moonstruck and who owned a pizza place in Do the Right Thing.;;(Danny) Aiello
Pop Culture;;He spent two years in Folsom Prison after two convictions in 1993 including for assaulting a woman in his hotel room while on bail after being charged with burning a woman with a crack pipe at his home.  His work at Motown in the '70s included the albums Come and Get It, featuring "You and I," and Bustin' Out of L Seven.  His most notable album, Street Songs, included "Give It to Me Baby" and a song that led to a 1990 Grammy when it was sampled in a rap song.  For ten points, what "Super Freak" singer died in 2004?;;(Rick) James
Pop Culture;;The cast of this show was originally supposed to include Navi Rawat and Rob Estes, but Amanda Righetti and James Remar have since taken over the roles of former con artist Tessa Boyd and managing partner Vincent Boyd.  This ensemble show is headed by Kristoffer Polaha as general manager Jason Matthews and Brooke Burns as his ex-girlfriend, Nicole Booth, now the head of guest relations at Grand Waimea in, for ten points, what new 2004 drama set in a Hawaiian hotel?;;North Shore
Pop Culture;;In May 2004 he resigned as coach at Cal State Fullerton to devote his time to his academy.  A two-time winner of the Foot Locker Slam Fest Tournament, he never scored a point at UC-Irvine before transferring to UCLA for an injury-plagued senior year.  After coach Randy Huntington solved his foul troubles, he made the 1988 Olympic team, winning silver there and in 1992, but made history at the 1991 World Championships.  For ten points, whose 8.95 meters broke the long-standing record of Bob Beamon in the long jump?;;(Mike) Powell
Pop Culture;;Supposedly, this device was invented after Dr. Percy Spenser of Raytheon discovered a melted candy bar in his pocket after working with a magnetron.  Spenser's initial invention, released at a price of 5,000 in 1947, was the Radar Range, while modern versions are much cheaper and smaller and stop working if the door is opened.  For ten points, name this culinary device that vibrates water molecules to heat food.;;microwave
Pop Culture;;The last film in the career of Don Ameche, who played Grandpa Harry.  Set in 1959, it features an ad agency writer named Manny Singer, who has become recently widowed.  Because his daughter Molly has stopped talking, he has to hire a housekeeper, and finds a black woman to take the job.  For ten points, name this film starring Ray Liotta and Whoopi Goldberg.;;Corrina, Corrina
Pop Culture;;In 2000, this band released the compilation Garbage D'Or.  Initially founded with Silos bassist Bob Rupe and Pixes drummer Dave Lovering, this country and blues influenced act included the songs "Happy Birthday to Me" and "Teen Angst" on their eponymous 1992 debut, although it was the next album that yielded the live favorite "Eurotrash Girl".  For ten points, name this band led by former Camper Van Beethoven frontman Dave Lowery, whose Kerosene Hat yielded their biggest hit, "Low".;;Cracker
Pop Culture;;After graduating from Yale's drama school, his first role was his Tony-nominated turn as Jackie Robinson in the musical The First.  He has since been associated with comedy, hosting the horrible game show Random Acts of Comedy and playing the secret agent in charge of First Lady Delta Burke in the short-lived DAG and Bonnie's producer on Life with Bonnie.  For ten points, who played blues singer Calhoun Tubbs and film critic Antoine Merriwether on In Living Color?;;(David) (Alan) Grier
Pop Culture;;The top players it received in the expansion draft included Bill Jobko, Alex Hawkins, and Junior Coffey, while its first draft pick was Tommy Nabis.  Its first winning season came in 1971 under the tenure of coach Norm Van Brocklin and they won there first division title in 1980 while led by quarterback Steve Bartkowski.  With a 14-win season in 1998 and a surprise NFC West division title, they made their first Super Bowl under Dan Reeves, but lost to Denver.  For ten points, what team now plays home games in the Georgia Dome?;;Atlanta (Falcons)|(Atlanta) Falcons
Pop Culture;;On Married with Children, Al Bundy tried to return this book, which he had borrowed from the library in 1957.  Attributed at times to Boston school teacher Mabel C. Briggs or to its named author Watty Piper, it has been lauded for having a female hero who does what the bigger males refuse to even attempt.  For ten points, name this book on the power of positive thinking in which toys must be carried over a mountain by the title character.;;(The) Little Engine That Could
Pop Culture;;His early film roles include two horror flicks: drug-dealing Zeke in The Faculty and the son of Jamie Lee Curtis in Halloween H20.  He also played Trip, whose adult version narrates The Virgin Suicides, and Warren Beatty and Diane Keaton's son in Town & Country.  For ten points, name this actor whose military roles include Captain Danny Walker and Sergeant Matt Eversmann in Pearl Harbor and Black Hawn Down.;;(Josh) Hartnett
Pop Culture;;His political film roles include the president of the U.S. in the 1982 film version of Kurt Vonnegut's Slapstick and the mayor of Passamaquoddy, Maine in Pete's Dragon.  Although he played James Dean's father in Rebel Without a Cause, he was often typecast as a rich man.  For ten points, name this actor who voiced Mr. Magoo and played Thurston Howell III on Gilligan's Island.;;(James) (Gilmore) (Jim) Backus
Pop Culture;;Lesser tracks on this album include "Purple Stain" and "Road Trippin'," while "Parallel Universe," "Otherside," and "Around the World" all made the Billboard Modern Rock chart, which was topped for a record number of weeks by the album's biggest hit.  Marking the return of guitarist John Frusciante, for ten points, what 1999 album by the Red Hot Chili Peppers featured the single "Scar Tissue"?;;Californication
Pop Culture;;His half-brother, Richard Robey, is considered one of the top 100 incoming freshmen in the nation at the University of Colorado.  He missed the 2000 NCAA Tournament after breaking his leg in the Conference USA tourney, but won the Naismith and Wooden awards.  He again fractured his fibula in his rookie season after being drafted #1, but has since earned a reputation as a top defensive player.  For ten points, what former Cincinnati forward will be near his brother, thanks to a 2004 sign-and-trade between the Nuggets and the Nets?;;(Kenyon) Martin
Pop Culture;;Founded in 1967 in Mississauga, Ontario, after a group of filmmakers was inspired by the hit attraction of Montreal's Expo `67, the technology made its debut at Osaka's Expo '70.  The first permanent one was built at Toronto's Ontario Place the next year, while the first domed one was built in 1973 in San Diego.  It uses one single wide-screen projector on a curved screen to create a feeling of envelopment by the movie.  For ten points, name this company, which shows larger than life films.;;IMAX (Theater)
Pop Culture;;Backed by Fatz, Taboo, Leo, Micetro, Katleen, and Silk--aka the Stray Mob-- he had his own album in 1991, deemed the Least Essential Album of the Nineties by the Onion AV Club, for tracks such as "No Dogs Allowed".  A creation of Michael Patterson and Candace Reckinger, he was voiced by Delite of Soul Purpose, who got to sing about liking the movies while his homegirl likes TV.  For ten points, name this animated kitty from Paula Abdul's "Opposites Attract".;;MC Skat Kat
Pop Culture;;His father was mortally wounded by a gorilla at a steel mill.  His enemies include the evil CEO Dick Lecter, played by Robert Vaughn, and Ireenie, played by Stifler's mom, Jennifer Coolidge, who connives to steal the magic belt given to him by his father on his deathbed after leaning his secrets from his friend JB Smoove.  Played by Lance Crouther, for ten points, what title crime fighter of a 2001 movie originated on The Chris Rock Show?;;Pootie Tang
Pop Culture;;Her relationship history is spotty: she once went on a double date with the produce guy's cousin Rune, played by Max Perlich.  Another attempted set-up was with a poultry supplier.  A date with Jason ends up with dinner at a grocery store.  She has turned down multiple proposals, flatly denying her daughter's father, Christopher and calling off her wedding to the teacher Max, but she is finally dating Luke, who has had a crush on her for a long time.  For ten points, name this mom played by Lauren Graham on Gilmore Girls.;;Lorelei (Gilmore)
Pop Culture;;In February 2004 he defeated former World Champion Dremiel Byers in the Dave Schultz Memorial International Tournament.  After a wrist injury cost him the #1 seed, he got past Byers again to qualify for the Olympics, where he lost to Khazakstan' Georgi Tsurtsumia in the semifinals before beating Iranian Sajad Barzi for the bronze.  For ten points, what athlete lost a toe to frostbite less than a year after upsetting Alexander Kharelin for the 2000 gold medal in Greco-Roman wrestling?;;(Rulon) Gardner
Pop Culture;;Books about this man include a 2003 tome by Jordan Raphael and Tom Spurgeon that confirms his bent towards self-promotion and the autobiography Excelsior!  Perhaps because he was the cousin of the owner's wife, he became an editor at the age of 20 at what was then called Timely.  He has been accused of trying to steal the credit of his colleagues Steve Ditko and Jack Kirby.  For ten points, name this creator of the Fantastic Four and the X-Men.;;(Stan) Lee|(Stanley) Lieber
Pop Culture;;The 1973 movie starred Joe Don Baker as a wrestler who settles down with his wife in Tennessee.  The 1981 movie starred Bo Svenson.  In both, the main character is named Buford Pusser.  In the newest version, the main character is now Chris Vaughn, a soldier who returns to Washington State to run a lumber mill and uses a 2-by-4 to fight crime.  For ten points, name this twice-remade movie based on a true story whose 2004 version starred Johnny Knoxville and the Rock.;;Walking Tall
Pop Culture;;1 is Kelly's Eye, 51 is Tweak of the Thumb, and 30 is Dirty Gertie, although these nicknames for the numbers are rarely used in this game that can be traced back to 16th century Italy.  The British version includes numbers all the way to 90, while in the U.S.; only 75 numbers are commonly used.  For ten points, name this game in which one tries to fill patterns on a numbered grid.;;Bingo
Pop Culture;;Cleveland's purchase of one leads to Peter's tax audit and eventual secession of the Griffin house from the U.S. on Family Guy.  On King of the Hill, Kahn's purchase of Buckley's one of these after his death leads to Luanne's claim of visions of the Angel Buckley.  Homer Simpson's acquisition of one via the free section in the newspaper causes him to mispronounce it twice as he runs out of the room to pick it up.  For ten points, what is this recreational apparatus which became the basis for an Olympic sport in 2000?;;trampoline(!)|Trampopoline(!)
Pop Culture;;Drummer Philip Rhoades and lead singer Robin Wilson later went off to form Gas Giants.  The lack of success from the songs "Till I Hear It From You" and "Follow You Down" and the sophomore album Congratulations...I'm Sorry did nothing to stem the belief that this band would not survive without songwriter and guitarist Doug Hopkins who committed suicide after being fired soon after the release of New Miserable Experience.  For ten points, name this alt-pop band most famous for the Hopkins-penned "Found Out About You" and "Hey Jealousy".;;Gin Blossoms
Pop Culture;;He made the 1996 All-Tournament team at the NCAA Frozen Four when his Catamounts lost to Colorado College in the semifinals.  Undrafted out of Vermont, he signed with Calgary, splitting time between the big club and the IHL affiliate.  Untendered as a free agent in 2000, he signed with Tampa Bay, where in 2004 he became the first former U.S. collegiate player to win the NHL scoring title.  For ten points, name this Lightning forward, also the winner of the 2004 Hart Trophy as NHL MVP.;;(Martin) St. Louis
Pop Culture;;After a Chicago ad executive meets a girl on a train and bonds over her with being able to name all the U.S. presidents in order, he doesn't ask for her number.  So, after he puts up posters seeking the girl, his roommates decide to date the respondents, posing as the guy, but it comes off as a cruel joke to Abbey, played by Emmanuelle Chriqui.  For ten points, name this horrible romantic comedy most notable for starring Joey Fatone and Lance Bass of N'Sync.;;On the Line
Pop Culture;;Their creators are detailed in the autobiography Down a Sunny Dirt Road.  Brother's favorite sport is soccer.  Sister would like to jump rope 1,000 times.  Mama is a champion quilt maker.  Papa likes to think he knows everything.  They first appeared in 1962's The Big Honey Hunt.  For ten points, name this ursine family of kiddie lit who are named after their creators.;;Berenstain (Bears)
Pop Culture;;It was first held in 1902, but the second occurrence was in 1916.  Until 1922, it was staged at Tournament Park.  Its only other site besides the current one was Durham's Duke Stadium in 1942 due to wartime restrictions.  Alabama won it four times including 1946 before its current lineup was set.  For ten points, name this game, which, unless the BCS mucks things up, traditionally features the champions of the Pac-10 and Big Ten.;;Rose Bowl
Pop Culture;;Possible cues for a drinking game when watching this show include when someone appears wearing short shorts or in drag, when there is a character named Babaghanouj, when one of the hosts is either faltulent or belching, or when someone utters one of any number of catchphrases, such as Captain Tenneal's "Get it on," Vic Romano's "Indeed," or Kenny Blankenship's "Dirty girl".  For ten points, name thus cult favorite on Spike TV that is now using original footage of obstacles rather than dubbing a Japanese show.;;MXC|Most Extreme Elimination Challenge
Pop Culture;;The guy compares his romantic approach to baseball, claiming that he picks everything up like a shortstop.  However, he's going to be patient because the woman he is after currently has a son and a boyfriend.  The chorus is based on "Love, Need, and Want You" by Patti LaBelle, who appears in the music video for, for ten points, what rap/sung collaboration by Destiny's Child's Kelly Rowland and Nelly?;;Dilemma
Pop Culture;;His early career is marked by small roles in Francis Ford Coppola films: Corporal Flanagan in Gardens of Stone, Midget in Rumble Fish, the gangster Bumpy Rhodes in The Cotton Club, and the PT boat crew member Clean in Apocalypse Now.  More recently, he's played a motorcycle club president in Biker Boyz and the leader of a space rescue mission in Event Horizon.  For ten points, name this once-serious actor who is now best known for playing Morpheus in The Matrix.;;(Laurence) Fishburne
Pop Culture;;He had a short-lived label, More Protein, on which he released non-hits backed by the band Jesus Loves You.  Nominated for a Grammy in the Dance category for "When Will You Learn," he appeared on P.M. Dawn's "More Than Likely" and had a hit with a cover of a 1964 Dave Berry son, although he is most linked to the band which recorded the albums Kissing to Be Clever and Colour By Numbers.  For ten points, name this singer of "The Crying Game" and Culture Club vocalist.;;Boy George|(George) O'Dowd
Pop Culture;;With the help of AOL, it became the first series to put its pilot on-line as a preview before the broadcast premiere.  Set in Hart, Missouri, this show focuses on the family of a college professor named Grace, played by Christine Lahti.  More specifically, it focuses on Grace's sons, played by Matthew Long and Logan Lerman.  For ten points, name this new WB series about two brothers, one of whom will become President of the United States.;;Jack and Bobby
Pop Culture;;Born one day after his father tied for 31st at the 1964 Masters, he followed in his father's footsteps, turning pro after becoming a three-time All-American at North Carolina.  He donated his $700,000 payday to his local church after losing to Tiger Woods in the 2004 Match Play Championship, when he refused to play until a heckler was removed.  For ten points, name this winner of 18 tournaments, including the 1997 PGA Championship, who has failed to make the top 15 on the money list only once since 1995.;;(Davis) Love (III)
Pop Culture;;Benedict Jablonski based its design on the ornament of an Oldsmobile 88.  It was first given out in 1955, although retroactive awards have been handed out at recent WorldCons.  Named after a certain Mr. Gernsback, who founded the magazine Amazing Stories, this is, for ten points, what award of science fiction literature?;;Hugo (Award)
Pop Culture;;He claimed to be Phil Spector's cousin in order to land a job in the mailroom of the William Morris Agency.  From there, he became a hot agent whose work includes hooking up Neil Young with Crosby, Stills, and Nash.  He founded Asylum Records and a namesake label to which he signed Guns N' Roses and produced Andrew Lloyd Webber's Cats on Broadway and the movies Risky Business and Little Shop of Horrors.  For ten points, name this entertainment mogul, now the final letter in DreamWorks SKG.;;(David) Geffen
Pop Culture;;The angry girl tackles the allegedly crazy guy and apparently throws him out, but the lovers realize they're each to blame a couple days later.  She forgives him, but needs more time to apologize.  Deconstructing the lyrics, this order of events is mixed in with pop culture references like Aquaman, the Smoking Man, Sailor Moon, LeAnn Rimes, and Bert Kaempfert in--for 10 points--what song by the Barenaked Ladies?;;One Week
Pop Culture;;This nickname was allegedly coined by Hugh Roberts, sports editor of the Age-Herald after the team held on for a surprising 6-6 tie in 1907 on a muddy field.  The nickname is not really related to the elephant that became associated during coach Wallace Wade's tenure with the linemen, who were sometimes called the Red Elephants.  For ten points, give the nickname now associated with football at the University of Alabama.;;Crimson Tide
Pop Culture;;The macguffin in this movie is at first an issue of contention between its owner, the title character, and his friend Zoe.  When a man accidentally skates into it, the title character chases after his blanket, which is eventually stolen by Huxley and his assistant, Bug the bug.  Along the way, the title character gains the help of Da Dump's ruler, the Queen of Trash, played by Vanessa Williams.  For ten points, name this kids movie in which a three-year old Sesame Street denizen visits Oscar's hometown.;;(The) (Adventures) (of) Elmo in Grouchland
Pop Culture;;When their dad takes a job in Japan, 16-year-old Holly Tyler ends up moving in with her 28-year-old sister Valerie, ruining Valerie's perfectly ordered life as an up and coming PR exec.  Seen as a career bump from Nick's All That for the younger actress and as a career resurgence after 90210 for the elder one, it begins its third season in 2004.  With Lillix covering the 1980 Romantics' hit that names the show, this is, for ten points, what WB sitcom starring Jennie Garth and Amanda Bynes.;;What I Like About You
Pop Culture;;After majoring in chemistry at Wagner College, he spent six months in industry before quitting to teach high school science.  While teaching, he wrote the Pulitzer Prize-winning play The Effect of Gamma Rays On Man-in-the Moon Marigolds and was persuaded to take up novel writing, often describing disaffected youths in books with bizarre titles.  For ten points, who wrote My Darling, My Hamburger,  Confessions of a Teenage Baboon, and The Pigman?;;(Paul) Zindel
Pop Culture;;At Talledega, he drove the wrong way on pit road after the race.  He bumped Scott Wimmer during a caution at Bristol.  His actions led to the accident that knocked out Jeff Gordon at Darlington.  He had a shoving incident with Robby Gordon at Daytona.  He once tried to climb into Kenny Irwin's car and recently attacked a still-strapped in Brian Vickers.  For ten points, name this bad boy of NASCAR who may need some anger management classes.;;(Tony) Stewart
Pop Culture;;Perhaps the last living major star of the silent film era, this Canadian-born actress played the bride Mitzi in Eric con Stroheim's The Wedding March.  She did less acting after marrying screenwriter Robert Riskin, although she played Natalie Wood's mother in the 60s sitcom The Pride of the Family.  Her roles in Doctor X, The Mystery of the Wax Museum, and The Vampire Bat have led some to deem her the first "scream queen".  For ten points, who is best remembered as Ann Darrow, the beauty that killed the beast in King Kong?;;(Fay) Wray
Pop Culture;;This show had several game shows; a radio quiz show offers the prize of carrying the Olympic torch;  David Leisure played Bink Winkleman, the host of How Do I Love Thee, in which couples try to show who can withstand the most torture;  Bill Maher played the host of a dating game in which a hot woman had to choose between a contestant and hard-bodied Rodrigo;  Cramming for a sports trivia show, causes a character to forget who scored four touchdowns for Polk High.  For ten points, name this Fox show about the Bundys.;;Married...with Children
Pop Culture;;He's no one-hit wonder: he has hit the Canadian charts in recent years with "Legal" and "Everybody Wants to Be Like You," "Lonely Monday Morning" and "Runway" both made the rap charts, and he actually had another Top 20 hit with "Girl I've Been Hurt".  For ten points, name this Canadian reggae rapper who had a hit in 1993 with "Informer".;;Snow
Pop Culture;;Cameos in this film include Robert Wagner as himself making handprints in front of Graumann's Chinese Theater and Eric Idle as a man who claims that he wasn't paying for sex, he was just doing research.  Dwight Yoakum plays a hitman, while Master P plays a night club owner who buys a house from the protagonist, a cop who moonlights as a real estate agent.  For ten points, name this flick starring Josh Hartnett and Harrison as partners, which culminates in a chase through Tinseltown.;;Hollywood Homicide
Pop Culture;;Considered more serious than the band's previous efforts, this album features Cypress Hill's Sick Jacken as producer of "Fallen Interlude" and Robert Smith of The Cure making a guest appearance on "All of This".  Tracks include "Down," "Always," and the first single, "Feeling This," while the biggest hit off it so far has been "I Miss You".  Technically untitled rather than self-titled, this is, for ten points, what 2003 follow-up to Take Off Your Pants and Jacket?;;Blink-182
Pop Culture;;Despite losing their team captain to injury with five games to go, this team squeaked into the playoffs with a win over Charlotte.  However, the presence of All-Stars Barbara Ferris and Cheryl Ford and Finals MVP Ruth Riley was not enough to overcome Swin Cash's knee, and the team was bounced by the Liberty in the first round, failing in their attempt to defend their title.  For ten points, name this WNBA squad which went worst to first in 2003 under the coaching of Bill Laimbeer.;;Detroit (Shock)|(Detroit) Shock
Pop Culture;;His role on As the World Turns was Stephen, the son of former Walsh Enterprises executive Kirk Anderson.  He had a smaller role than marketing might have indicated in the marijuana drama Harvest, and played a man who joins the titular group to avenge his family in Texas Rangers, but his most famous movie role is that of quarterback Mox in Varsity Blues.  For ten points, who is best known for playing Dawson on Dawson's Creek?;;(James) Van Der Beek
Pop Culture;;This video game franchise is set to be adapted to film by Charles Stone III, who brought us Drumline and Mr. 3000.  Produced by Namco, its characters include the Jack series of robots, the Sumo wrestler Ganryu, the Mexican wrestler King, the boxer Steve Fox, and Heihachi Mishima, whose grandson Jin and son Kazuya have both won his King of the Iron Fist Tournament.  For ten points, name this 3D fighting game franchise whose installments include a Tag Tournament.;;Tekken
