World History;;The final ruler of this line was appointed by the act of Titulus Regius and, in addition to being likened to a hog in an infamous rhyme by William Collingbourne, was targeted by the propaganda campaign of John Morton.  Its first ruler, who was bribed into cancelling an invasion of France by the Treaty of Picquigny, faced rebellions led by his brother, the Duke of Clarence, and by the Neville family.  This line was founded by Edmund of Langley, whose great-grandson became the first of its three kings, married the commoner Elizabeth Woodville, and was placed on the throne after the ouster of Henry VI.  FTP, identify this English royal house represented by a white rose as such rulers as Edward IV and Richard III fought against the House of Lancaster.;;(House) (of) York
World History;;This man threatened to arrest Cotta for refusing to uphold his resolution banning the inspection of ballot boxes, and was later caught up in a bribery scandal involving Cassius Sabaco and Caius Herrenius.  Lucius Valerius Flaccus and Quintus Catulus Lutatius shared consulships with this man, who, at the end of his career, received political support from the tribune Publius Sulpicius Rufus.  Victories over Boiorix at the Raudine Plain and over Teutobod at Aquae Sextiae made him the hero of the Cimbric and Teutonic Wars, but this former legate of Quintus Metellus fell from grace in a civil war against the Optimates of his rival.  FTP, identify this seven-time Roman consul, a leader of the Populares who feuded with the man who outshined him in the Jugurthine War, Lucius Cornelius Sulla.;;(Gaius) Marius
United States History;;One of the men involved in this episode was fired after having Jonathan Dolliver read an inflammatory letter he wrote on the Senate floor.  In the work Not Guilty, Harold Ickes investigated its occurrence and tried to clear the name of the other main figure involved, a former holder of his office.  It gained national attention after an article in Collier’s publicized accusations made by Louis Glavis that corrupt practices were giving powerful figures like the Guggenheims illegal access to Alaskan coal fields.  Causing a split in the Republican Party between Roosevelt and Taft and leading to the firing of the author of The Fight for Conservation, FTP, what was this 1909-1910 conflict between the Secretary of the Interior and the head of the Forest Service?;;Ballinger-Pinchot (Affair)
World History;;A Byzantine named Sopater visited it in the sixth century AD, while Pliny the Elder called it the land of the Antichthones and told of an envoy from it that visited the court of Claudius.  Legend held that its natives descended from Prince Vijaya and his court at Sinhapura and converted to Buddhism by the third century B.C.  Under Kasappa V it sent troops to save the Pandya kingdom from conquest, resulting in a defeat at Vellur, and decades later, this land would be itself conquered by Rajaraja I of the Chola Dynasty.  The 1505 sailing expedition of Lourenco de Almeida marked the first major Western presence here, and eventually the initial Portuguese colonists would be supplanted by the Dutch and then the British.  Finally gaining independence in the 20th Century through various independence movements by the Sinhalese ethnic majority, this is, FTP, what island located south of the Indian subcontinent?;;Ceylon|Sri Lanka
World History;;Eleven days after this incident occurred, Alexander Bulygin became the new Minister of the Interior.  The man at the center of this event, who was later killed by Pinhas Rutenberg for his believed betrayal of the PSR, led a march of citizens carrying icons and portraits of the monarch to call for the separation of church and state, an eight hour work day, and the cessation of war in the Far East.  Days earlier, a strike at the Putilov Metal Works had inspired the aforementioned petition, which was co-signed by Ivan Vasimov.  But despite peaceful intentions, the demonstrators led by George Gapon were shot at by troops at the Narva Gate.  FTP, identify this weekend massacre of St. Petersburg protestors that ignited the 1905 Russian Revolution.;;Bloody Sunday
World History;;At this event, Hungary was represented by Hieronymus Balbus, who was preoccupied with requesting military support against the Ottomans.  Girolamo Aleandro was the author of the forceful decree issued after this conference, which was partly a reaction to the public burning of the bull Exsurge Domine.  The Holy Roman Emperor sent the Archbishop of Trier, Johannes Eck, to speak before this assembly, which also saw Philip the Magnanimous’ first meeting with its central figure.  In response to the call for the central figure’s arrest in the resulting edict of the same name, Frederick III of Saxony had him whisked away to Wartburg.  FTP, identify this 1521 meeting convened by Charles V in response to the teachings of Martin Luther.;;Diet of Worms
World History;;A 60 year history of this group was authored by Peter Burke.  Notable members of its third generation include Robert Mondreau, Alphonse Dupront, and Georges Duby, though perhaps the most read work of that group is a study of early 14th Century Cathars in the village of Montaillou by Emmanuel LeRoy Ladurie.  Attempting to integrate such disciplines as economics and anthropology into historiography in lieu of a traditional focus on military and political events, it sprang from a journal founded by Marc Bloch and Lucien Febvre and is best represented by a three volume work about the era of Phillip II in the Mediterranean.  FTP, identify this French school of history most associated with Ferdinand Braudel, whose name is similar to that of a work of Tacitus.;;Annales (School)
World History;;Classifying its nation’s population between the aristocratic amelu, the middle class muskinu and the ardu, or slaves, it is now missing its thirteenth section, as well as the entirety of sections 66 through 99, though it once contained 282 sections.  Its epilogue declares that any future leader who undermines the authority of this document shall be cursed by the Anunaki, while others who uphold it and its tenets, such as "an eye for an eye," will be granted long life by Shamash.  FTP, identify this ancient set of laws issued by and named for a Babylonian king.;;Code of Hammurabi
World History;;After his expulsion from Oxford for refusal to attend services, he was successively sent to France and Ireland to train as a courtier, and it was in Cork where he was converted by Thomas Loe.  He was arrested for writing the pamphlet The Sandy Foundation Shaken, and while in the Tower of London, he also wrote Innocency with Her Open Face and No Cross, No Crown.  Before traveling overseas aboard the Welcome, he helped author the Concessions and Agreements Charter and prepared an early democratic constitution for his territory in his First Frame of Government.  It was at Shackamaxon that he co-signed a "Great Treaty" with the Leni Lenape, giving his colony a reputation not only for tolerance, but for fair treatment of the Indians.  FTP, name this Quaker settler who lent his name to the Keystone State.;;(William) Penn
World History;;Key moments of fortitude in this encounter included Hartog’s leading his forces on a charge known as the "death ride," and E.M. Philpotts’ using the Warspite to draw enemy fire in the "Windy Corner".  Initiated by the movement of British forces from Scapa Flow, it broke out from an early skirmish between Beatty and Evans-Thomas’ British scouting patrol and the scouts under Hipper.  The Warrior, the Indefatigable, and the Lutzow were among the vessels lost in this battle, whose main action was marked by an attempt to cross the T against the advancing fleet of Reinhard Sheer.  Both sides claimed victory in, FTP, what ultimately indecisive battle where the British were commanded by Admiral John Jellicoe, a World War I naval encounter fought near the coast of Denmark?;;(Battle) (of) Jutland
World History;;Failures by Thomas James and Luke Foxe killed interest in it for over a century in Britain, until an assignment involving it was given to Christopher Middleton., partially due to Arthur Dobbs’ obsession with it.  Francis Smith and William Moor were among the first to respond to Parliament’s offer of a 20,000 pound reward for information on it, though it wasn’t until 1854 that the prize would be claimed by Robert McClure.  Sir John Franklin died on his quest for it, while rumors of its existence were popularized in 1566 after the publication of a treatise on finding a new approach to Cataia, which was written by Humphrey Gilbert.  Martin Frobisher, William Baffin, and Henry Hudson all led failed expeditions to find, FTP, what storied sea route said to connect the Atlantic and Pacific oceans via the Arctic waters of North America?;;Northwest Passage
World History;;Before gaining power, this figure once had two rivals dismembered, with their still living bodies stuffed in wine jugs and left to die.  Claiming to be a reincarnation of Maitreya, this ruler allegedly passed a law requiring court visitors to perform oral sex as a sign of respect and instituted a twelve part reform program that reduced taxes and encouraged agricultural production.  A devoted practitioner of Buddhism, this ruler emerged as sole head of state after successively deposing Zhongzong and Ruizong, and was finally overthrown at age 80 in a coup that also saw the execution of the Zhang brothers, who served as royal consorts.  Creating a short-lived Second Zhou Dynasty that interrupted the rule of the Tang Dynasty, this is, FTP, which Seventh Century empress of China?;;(Empress) Wu|Wu (Zetian)
United States History;;Calvin Goddard, Timothy Bigelow, and Joseph Lyman were assigned to the committee that drafted its procedural rules, and Dr. Strong delivered most of the prayers that opened its sessions.  A late addition to its roster was William Hall, Jr., who became the only representative of Vermont, though Hall did not help draft its seven proposed amendments, which included banning foreign-born citizens from holding office, requiring a 2/3 majority in Congress to approve adding new states or declaring war, and preventing two men from the same state from serving successively as president.  Theodore Dwight was secretary, and George Cabot was president of this gathering, which was rendered moot by the signing of the Peace of Ghent.  FTP, identify this meeting where secession was debated by a bunch of New England Federalists protesting the War of 1812.;;Hartford (Convention)
World History;;Before its establishment, the man who would eventually revamp it left Felix Gouin in charge of the provisional government and embarked on a so-called "journey through the desert" after resigning in frustration over the development of its constitution, which also led to the formation of the RPF.  Efforts to sustain this regime economically included the adoption of the Planning Commissariat and the creation of a coal and steel coalition, the latter done under the Schuman Plan.  Auguste de Ribes was defeated in the election of its first president by Vincent Auriol, and its following second and final presidential election saw Marcel-Edmund Naegelen lose to Rene Coty.  Crises in Madagascar, Indochina, and North Africa led to the downfall of FTP, what French regime that was replaced upon a 1958 return to power by Charles de Gaulle?;;(French) Fourth Republic
World History;;Sir Graham Bower wrote a "Secret History" of this event, which was prefaced by the buildup of an arms cache including several Maxim machine guns and a force of several hundred troops at the Pitsani Strip.  Its namesake, who had earlier led a campaign against Lobengula, was publicly repudiated by Hercules Robinson after its occurrence, and served a fifteen month sentence in Holloway, but was also celebrated in the poem "If" by Rudyard Kipling.  Joseph Chamberlain drew heat for his private support of this abortive effort, which stemmed from anger over the disenfranchisement of the "uitlanders" and was put down by Piet Cronje at Doornkop, which earned praise in the Kruger Telegram.  FTP, name 1895 this British attempt to lead a raid into Boer territory.;;Jameson (Raid)
World History;;It addressed its central issue by confirming the terms of the Treaty of Breslau six years earlier, and its negotiators included Francis III of Modena and Charles Emmanuel III.  St. Vincent and Dominica were declared neutral, while England regained Chennai, France regained Louisbourg, and Philip was named Duke of Parma.  The Treaty of Madrid revised provisions between England and Spain regarding slave importation that were issued in this treaty, which confirmed Glatz as a Prussian possession.  FTP, identify this treaty that also gave Prussia control of Silesia and upheld the Pragmatic Sanction of Maria Theresa, ending the War of Austrian Succession.;;(Treaty) (of) Aix-la-Chapelle
World History;;One theory holds that it was a reaction to a soldier named Drouet’s attempts to rape the daughter of Roger Mastrangelo.  William Porcelet was one of few occupiers overtly spared, although the inhabitants of Sperlinga refused to participate in it as well.  Pope Martin IV failed to restore the order that existed before this event, which had its roots in a conspiracy by Michael VIII and the husband of Constance, who made a claim for succession based on her Hohenstaufen heritage.  John of Procida was also linked to this uprising, which saw the formation of a regional commune under the protection of the Holy See and Peter III of Aragon’s seizure of the eponymous region from Charles of Anjou.  FTP, identify this rebellion that began in 1282 during some religious services in Palermo.;;Sicilian Vespers
United States History;;Some light has been shed on their activities through the discovery of the aliases "Antenna" and "Liberal" in the Verona Cables.  Their links to Joel Barr and William Perl stemmed from one’s involvement in the Steinmetz Club at CCNY.  Represented by the father and son team of Alexander and Emmanuel Bloch, they were the posthumous subjects of a 1997 memoir by Alexander Feklisov, while a 1987 book told the viewpoint of their two sons, who were adopted by Abel Meeropol after their deaths.  In the court of Judge Irving Kauffman, they were tried along with Morton Sobell, and much of the decisive testimony came from David and Ruth Greenglass, their in-laws, who were trying to avoid prosecution for their own treasonous activities.  FTP, identify this couple that was executed in 1953 on the charge of being Soviet spies.;;(Julius) (and) (Ethel) Rosenberg|(Ethel) (and) (Julius) Rosenberg|(The) Rosenbergs
World History;;Richard Smithers was killed by its leader when the Bow Street Runners and Coldstream Guards attempted to arrest the men linked to it.  Its exposure was the result of an infiltration by George Edwards, and John Brunt and Richard Tidd were among the five men executed for it.  The plan was for a group of armed men to storm the house of Lord Harrowby during dinner, with James Ing insisting on taking the severed head of Lord Sidmouth in a sack.  It was organized by a group of Spencerean Philanthropists led by a former instigator of the Spa Field Riots, Arthur Thistlewood, who was acting out of anger for the Peterloo Massacre.  FTP, identify this 1820 plot to murder the entire British cabinet, named for the avenue near which its planners met.;;Cato Street (Conspiracy)
World History;;This city was briefly conquered in 84 B.C. by a ruler nicknamed "lover of the Greeks," Aretas III, and is said to have been given to Aretas IV by Caligula, again becoming a Nabataean possession.  Seized in 1104 by Toghtekin, who established the Burid Dynasty there, it was subsequently retaken by Nur ad-Din of the Zengid Dynasty.  Saladin left Egypt to establish an Ayyubid sultanate at this city, which would be the site of his death.  An invasion by Tamurlane in 1400 saw the removal of the smiths who forged swords out of the trademark steel of this city, which had once earlier fended off a siege by Conrad III and the army of Jerusalem.  FTP, identify this city that was targeted in the Second Crusade, a former capital of the Ummayads that is now the capital of Syria.;;Damascus
World History;;In Book I’s second section, "Elements," this work’s author differentiates between facts that are either universally known or the products of individual human consciousness in characterizing the true and the certain, reflecting his disdain for Descartes.  Corollaries on topics from Roman history, such as the arrival of Aeneas into Latium, fill out the discussion of subjects like geography and metaphysics in sections whose titles mirror that of Book II, "Poetic Wisdom".  In Book IV, this work categorizes such concepts as symbols, authority, and jurisprudence into three types each, and also expounds upon the author’s division of history into ages of gods, heroes, and men governed by alternating periods of progress and regression, or corsi and ricorsi.  Most notably, the author supports his theory with a lengthy discussion on the "Discovery of the True Homer".  FTP, identify this work advocating a cyclical approach to history and written by Giambattista Vico.;;(The) New Science|Scienzia Nova
United States History;;An immediate predecessor to this agreement came when a commission under Robert Campbell allowed William Emory to complete a survey to revise an earlier compromise made by Bartlett and Conde.  The resulting nine article treaty resolved the confusion created by John Disturnell’s mapping errors, and, in its text, authorized commercial transit across the Isthmus of Tehuantepec and voided the sixth and seventh articles of the treaty signed between the same two nations five years earlier, with the exception of the provision involving the Rio Bravo del Forte.  Reduced by the Senate to a ten million dollar transaction, this is, FTP, which agreement that saw the U.S. gain major portions of Arizona and New Mexico from Mexico?;;Gadsden (Purchase)
World History;;Devised after a period known as the "Great Fear," during which a resolution was passed to eliminate aristocratic privileges, this document states that only actions harmful to society can be proscribed by law, and that law must serve as an expression of the general will in the fifth and sixth of its seventeen articles.  Two years after its release, Olympe de Gouges issued a feminist rebuttal to it.  Signed under pressure by the king before his captivity at Tuileries and preceding the drafting of the Civil Constitution of the Clergy, it was primarily written by Emmanuel Sieyes, though earlier drafts featured the work of Lafayette.  FTP, identify this document passed in 1789 by the National Assembly, the French Revolution’s analog to the Declaration of Independence.;;Declaration of the Rights of Man (and) (Citizen)
World History;;The term "dystrophy" was used to apply to condition of most of the victims of this event, which was the subject of a diary by Vera Inber.  The early fall of Tikvhin exacerbated the situation, and at Zaborie, hasty construction began to provide a means of thoroughfare.  The Spanish Blue Division provided support for this campaign, for which a relief effort was dubbed Operation Spark.  Army Group North, which headed the attack, saw its command transferred to Georg von Kuechler after Wilhelm von Leeb was relieved.  The "Road of Life," which relied on the frozen Lake Ladoga, helped provide supplies during the 900 days of, FTP, what prolonged assault that resulted in the deaths of nearly a million civilians in a Soviet city?;;Siege of Leningrad|Leningrad Siege
World History;;He faced rebellions by leaders such as Gokula and his Jat forces and was the addressee of the angry Fatehnama and Zafarnama letters in response to his harsh policies, which included re-instituting the jizya and ordering the destruction of religious complexes like the Kashi Vishvanath.  The conqueror of Golconda, he did, however, add the Moti Masjid complex to the Red Fort, the site where this former governor of the Decca region imprisoned his father after seizing power and beheading his older brother Dara Shikoh.  Abolishing such practices as suttee, he made the focal point of his reign bringing India under Sharia law.  FTP, identify this Islamic son of Shah Jahan, the last prominent ruler of the Mughal Empire.;;Aurangzeb
World History;;Discussions held during the sixth presidency determined whether it would be put on the agenda of the eighth presidency, and analogous actions involving the use of tree leaves occurred in another city.  A son of Charmus was the first known target, while a leader of Perithoedae was the last before it was replaced by the Graphe Paranomon.  Callixenus and Megacles joined the aforementioned Hipparchus and Hyperbolus on the list of men who experienced it, but they were not called back prematurely as Cimon and Aristides were.  Originating during the rule of Cleisthenes, this is, FTP, what practice in which citizens could be voted into exile from Athens for ten years, named after the shards of pottery on which votes were written?;;ostracism
United States History;;The commission investigating this event included John Kernan and Nicholas Worthington and was led by Carroll Wright.  The inspiration for the passage of the Erdman Act four years later, it garnered support from rallying speeches by the leader of a local women’s group, Jennie Curtis.  Mediation offers by the local Civic Federation and Mayor John P. Hopkins were turned down, and violence soon broke out at Blue Island.  Attorney General Richard Olney issued an initial injunction against it before troops under Nelson Miles were called in to suppress it, with its leader being arrested on charges of disrupting the mail service.  A reaction to wage cuts in response to the Panic of 1893 a year earlier, this is, FTP, what strike spurred on by Eugene Debs and involving workers of a Chicago railroad car company?;;Pullman (Strike)
World History;;The first-hand account of a conversation with this student of John Alymer about Plato’s Phaedo can be found in The Schoolmaster by Roger Ascham.  This figure was exposed to the Swiss Reform movement through correspondence with Heinrich Bullinger, which led to strict Protestant loyalty.  Initially pursued as a pawn by Thomas Seymour, this figure was eventually coerced into an unwanted marriage with Guildford, the son of John Dudley.  John Feckenham was sent on a failed attempt to convert her to Catholicism before her death, which was precipitated by a revolt under Thomas Wyatt over the planned marriage of Philip II of Spain to her cousin, Mary I.  FTP, name this women who was executed in 1554 after spending nine days as Queen of England.;;(Lady) Jane Grey
World History;;The leader of one faction in this conflict was nicknamed "The Red Monk" for his hotheadedness, and was opposed by his son-in-law, and it broke out when the latter’s estate was burned down.  Meanwhile, the ruler who had initiated the causative succession crisis by jointly naming his brother and infant son as heirs abdicated during the sixth year of its ten year span and busied himself with building the Silver Pavilion.  Sozen and Katsumoto, the respective heads of the feuding Yamana and Hosokawa families, both died that same year in this war, which saw the continued destruction of Kyoto and started the Sengoku period.  FTP, the Ashikaga Shogunate entered a Warring States period due to what 1467-1477 Japanese civil war?;;Onin (War)
World History;;A Sicilian one established the right of the Premyslids to the throne of Bohemia, while one of Eger the following year renounced imperial claims to the lands of Matilda of Tuscany.  The founding of universities resulted from two of them: the last major one, which established an academy in Breslau named for Leopold I in 1702, and one, which, after the approval of Clement VI, established the University of Prague.  The Teutonic Knights were offered domain over any Prussian lands they conquered under the one of Rimini, and Andrew II of Hungary was forced to recognize the rights of nobles in the one of 1222.  A major one, revised at the Diet of Metz and first released at the Diet of Nuremberg, and created a body of seven electors.  FTP, identify this term applying to a 1356 document issued by Charles IV, so named because of the shiny color of its seal.;;Golden Bull|Bulla Aurea
World History;;The 11th of the 33 articles in its original charter put forth its three part motto, which emphasized national mobilization, or "qawmiyya," and unity, or "wataniyya".  It moderated its official goals a decade later by issuing the Ten-Point Program, which led to the formation of the breakaway Rejectionist Front.  That same national conference also expressed this group’s official opposition to Resolution 242, which would only be reversed by its signing of the Declaration of Principles in 1993.  The Popular Struggle Front and the FIDA are two of the factions incorporated in this organization, whose largest component group is the Fatah, and whose first leader was Ahmad Shukieri.  FTP, identify this organization most notably fronted by Yasser Arafat and dedicated to the creation of a certain Arabic state.;;P(alestinian) L(iberation) O(rganization)
World History;;Martin Chambi spent his career photographing this city, including the effects of the 1950 earthquake that devastated it.  The Battle of Las Salinas was fought just outside this city, which later became the center of a rebellion led by Mateo Pumacagua.  Juan Veramendi erected a Basilica Cathedral here, and Vicente Valverde served as the first bishop of this city, where Diego Almagro was executed.  Once divided into sections controlled by the Hanan and Hurin, this city with a puma-shaped layout was invaded by the Chankas during the rule of Pachacuti and was believed to have been founded by Manco Capac.  FTP, identify this city in southern Peru that was once the capital of the Inca Empire.;;Cuzco
World History;;They were called to serve under Gerard Lake at Vinegar Hill and helped put down a rebellion in Wexford.  William Faucitt negotiated the contract that established their ranks, and the poet Johann Seume provided an account of his tenure as one sent to Halifax.  Public promises of 50 acres of land were offered in an attempt to get them to switch allegiances, and the first group of them appeared in North America with a landing at Staten Island under Philip von Heister.  The majority of these men were sent by the Landgrave Friedrich II, and the most noteworthy encounter involving them came on Christmas Day, when a force under Johan Rall was surprised by George Washington at the Battle of Trenton.  FTP, name these German mercenaries who fought for the British during the Revolutionary War.;;Hessian(s)
United States History;;Hundreds of thousands of telegrams were sent out to protest this event, whose central figure went on to become chair of the lobby group Common Cause.  John Chancellor described it as "what may be the most serious Constitutional crisis" in American history when reporting about it on NBC, though it was Ronald Ziegler who first publicly announced its occurrence.  Peter Rodino ordered the launching of a formal investigation in response to this event, which was prompted by the rejection of a compromise plan in which John Stennis would verify the accuracy of released transcripts from eight subpoenaed tapes.  William Ruckelshaus stepped down before Robert Bork completed, FTP, what event that also saw Elliot Richardson resign, the controversial firing of Special Prosecutor Archibald Cox at the order of President Nixon?;;Saturday Night Massacre
World History;;Conrad Bussow provided graphic firsthand descriptions of the famine that broke out near the end of this man’s rule, and which he attempted to address by passing a law binding peasants to their lands.  In his diplomatic dealings, he refused a union proposed by Lew Sapieha and forced Jeremiah II into promoting his protegee, Job the Metropolitan, thus establishing a Patriarchate in his kingdom.  His predecessor was an inept fool nicknamed the "Bellringer," who married his sister Irina, and this ruler found his own reign brought down by the arrival of Grigory Otrepyev and his alleged ties to a death that occurred at Uglich.  Crowned by a zemsky sobor after Fyodor I died, this is, FTP, what man whose rule as czar challenged by the first False Dmitri?;;(Boris) Godunov|Boris I
World History;;It was temporarily crippled by the release of the Limehouse Declaration, in which a "Gang of Four" led by Roy Jenkins formed a breakaway group to protest its domination by unions.  This organization had avoided a schism decades earlier when Aneurin Bevan and Hugh Gaitskell had an intense debate over Clause IV of its constitution, which called for public ownership over industry and the means of production.  Officially formed after a conference organized by its first chairman, James Keir Hardie, saw its founders merge with the ILP and SFP, among other groups, this party saw such men as James Callaghan and Harold Wilson elected as prime minister under its banner.  FTP, Ramsey MacDonald was the first prime minister from what left-leaning British party, most recently headed by Tony Blair?;;Labour (Party)
World History;;A trading center at Shortugai was one of the northernmost outposts attributed to these people, and evidence of their funeral practices comes largely from brick burial chambers found at Kalibangan and Lothal.  The second period linked to Nausharo is sometimes cited as the start of its Mature period, while the early ages of Mehrgarh delineate its Neolithic era.  Kot Diji was another major site linked to these people, who built a Great Bath at one of its primary cities, which was excavated by such men as Mortimer Wheeler.  Studied by John Marshall, who led the excavation of the site that provides the alternate name for this Central Asian culture, this is, FTP, which ancient civilization that built Harappa and Mohenjo-Daro and was informally named after the region surrounding a river in Pakistan?;;Indus (River) Valley (Civilization)
World History;;The inclusive Battle of Pasteral was the highlight of one conflict initiated by this movement, who had long since renounced its early pledge not to shoot prisoners made in the Eliot Convention.  Leopold O’Donnell and Antonio van Halen were two generals who headed armies opposing this movement, which fought the aforementioned Matiners’ War.  The Convention of Bergara ended the initial conflict involving this movement, which would later back such pretenders as the Count of Montemolin, the Count of Montizon, and Jaime III.  Tomas Zumalacarregui was the foremost general of, FTP, what movement originally formed out of opposition to the succession of Isabella II and named after the would-be Charles V of Spain?;;Carlism|Carlist(s)
World History;;Credit for the resolution of this conflict is often given to Louis-Auguste de Breteuil, who helped produce an agreement involving the cession of Bayreuth and Ansbach.  Ernst von Louden and Franz von Lacy led the army of the nation that had gained Mindelheim in a secret treaty.  Catherine the Great and Louis XVI were neutral peace brokers for the end of this conflict, which began when the Sulzbach line stood to fill in after Maximilian III’s death ended his branch of the Wittelsbach line, leading Charles Theodore’s claim to be challenged by Charles of Zweibrucken at the urging of Frederick the Great.  FTP, the Treaty of Teschen ended what largely bloodless conflict, nicknamed the Potato War, and fought over a state in southern Germany?;;(War) (of) (the) Bavarian Succession
World History;;In his first major case as an attorney, he unsuccessfully defended Daniel George, Dorephus Abbey, and Nils von Schoultz, a trio of rebels who fought in the Battle of the Windmill.  The patronage of William Draper brought him into politics, and he would go on to serve as a joint ruler with both George Cartier and Etienne Tache.  He then helped form a coalition with his political rival, the publisher of the Globe, and a leader of the Clear Grits faction, George Brown.  On the strength of his National Policy platform, he was able to regain his office and be elected for four more terms after the Pacific Railway scandal had brought down his first Conservative Party regime and forced him to resign in favor of Alexander MacKenzie.  FTP, identify this first Prime Minister of Canada.;;(John) MacDonald
World History;;A highlight from first of these encounters was a surprise 100 man cavalry charge led by Eck von Reischach against waiting gun battalions.  The latter marked the end of the Treaty of Vasvar, and saw a display of bonfires and a chapel service at Kahlenburg mark the arrival of allies summoned by Ernst Starhemberg.  Thousands of prisoners were burned alive before the retreat following the first one, which saw a sustained attack on the Carinthian Gate as cover for the efforts of sappers to tunnel under city walls.  The defending commander of the first was Graf von Salm, and the second saw the attack led by Kara Mustafa saved by the arrival of Jan III Sobieski.  FTP, identify these abortive 1529 and 1683 attempts by the Ottomans to take an Austrian city.;;Siege(s) of Vienna|Battle(s) of Vienna
World History;;Its longest ruling leader was symbolized by a buffalo in a tunic, waged war against the Mahi country, and bore the name Tegbessou.  The man who succeeded him was represented by a gun, marking the evolution of this kingdom’s army into one trained in Western firearms, razed the ports of Epe and Badagry, and was named Kpengla.  During this time, this kingdom, which held the states of Whydah and Allada, and whose kings were traditionally guarded by a troupe of female warriors known as the Amazons, was under the yoke of the Oyo Empire and would remain so until the 19th Century reign of Gezo.  Finally subjugated by the French at the end of that century, this Fon empire owed most of its economic success to the slave trade.  FTP, identify this West African empire based out of present-day Benin.;;Dahomey
United States History;;Communications Association. v. Doud ruled that Section 9H of this legislation did not constitute a bill of attainder, though U.S. v. Brown reversed that decision based on Section 509 of a follow-up act.  Robert N. Denham was the first man to serve as General Counsel to its relevant federal agency after the passage of this act, which was anticipated by the passage of the Hobbs Act one year prior and created a commission called the FMCS and the position of Conciliation Director.  Opposed by Philip Murray and William Green, this bill had a congressman from New Jersey as its House sponsor, and caused a division between the organizations of Green and John L. Lewis.  Anti-Communist oaths and the banning of closed shops were instituted by, FTP, what restrictive piece of labor legislation co-sponsored by an Ohio senator and son of a former president?;;Taft-Hartley (Act)|Labor-Management Relations (Act)
World History;;It was condemned in the bulls Ad Sacram Beati Petri Sedem and Regiminis Apostolicis by Alexander VIII and in the bull Vineam Domini by Clement XI.  A major breeding ground for it was the Abbey of St. Cyran, and a version of the New Testament with commentary from its perspective was published under the name Moral Reflections by Pasquier Quesnel, who was criticized in the bull Unigenitus.  Defended in an attack on the Jesuits, On Frequent Communion, it placed an extreme emphasis on predestination and on the teachings of St. Augustine, and counted Antoine Arnauld among its followers.  The seizure and destruction of the convent of Port Royal effectively crushed, FTP, what Dutch-born Christian heresy that became popular in early 18th Century France and was practiced by Pascal and Racine?;;Jansenism
World History;;Its most prominent campaign was amplified by an independent uprising of the aboriginal Miao people, and one of its earliest campaigns was led by a woman named Tang Sai-er.  Spawning the Eight Diagrams movement and linked to a later revolt by the Nian Army, this group historically had its fighters wear red headgear, earning it the nickname the "Red Army".  Their guerilla tactics confounded imperial forces during their most widespread uprising, and were further aided by the embezzlement of funds issued to raise forces against them by the corrupt general Ho-Shen.  Originating as a sect of Pure Land Buddhism and rising against Chien Lung in what would lead to the decline of the Qing Dynasty, this is, FTP, what namesake of a 1796-1804 rebellion, a Chinese religious society named for a flower?;;White Lotus|Pai Lien Chiao
World History;;An expose entitled Red Horizons was written by one of his defecting intelligence officers, Ion Pacepa, contributing to the discontent that led to his downfall.  High-ranking members of his party eventually denounced him in the "Letter of the Six," and a growing revolution in Timisoara spread throughout his country, partly inspired by concern over the mysterious death of his defense minister Vasile Milea, who may have been murdered by the Securitate.  His policy, described under the term "systematization," was characterized by forced shortages and over-exportation as part of an austerity program to pay off foreign debt.  Coming into power after the death of Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej and being succeeded by Ion Iliescu, this is, FTP, what man who was executed with his wife Elena in 1989, a communist dictator of Romania?;;(Nicolae) Ceausescu
World History;;Its author attacks Ernest Renan and Silvestre de Sacy in a section on "Rational Anthropology and Philological Laboratory," which directly precedes a discussion of Caussin de Perceval.  Robert Irwin attacked it in his For Lust of Knowing, which attempts to re-legitimize this work's subject.  Its author uses H.A.R. Gibb and Louis Massignon as examples of contemporaneous practitioners of its titular discipline, which he describes as a "secret sharer" of anti-Semitism.  Nerval and Flaubert are presented as literary examples in the section on Pilgrims and Pilgrimages, while T.E. Lawrence is criticized for reducing the history of the Revolt in the Desert to his own experiences.  FTP, identify this criticism of the history of Western scholarship regarding Islam, a work of Edward Said.;;Orientalism
United States History;;The first of them was initially intended to be presented by Wilson Cary Nicholas, though the author decided on a change of venue, while the shorter latter one was introduced to the General Assembly by John Taylor.  The first set consisted of nine statements, which emphasized the importance of the Tenth Amendment and offered a "rightful remedy" for violations of the "compact" created by the Constitution.  The latter of them, which asserted both the loyalty of "the good people of this commonwealth" and the danger of government attempts to limit freedom of the press, was written by James Madison, who followed Thomas Jefferson’s authorship of the former ones.  Released in response to the Alien and Sedition Acts, these are, FTP, what set of statements that introduced the doctrine of nullification and were named for the two states in which they were presented?;;Kentucky (and) Virginia (Resolutions)|Virginia (and) Kentucky (Resolutions)
World History;;False hope arose during this conflict when the messenger Ephraem delivered erroneous news to the secretary Thomas stating that the head of state had fled.  Three of the sites damaged during it were the Chalke, the Baths of Zeuxippus, and the church of St. Lawrence, the last of which housed a pair of murderers who were not granted clemency after their failed execution was ordered by an official who was replaced by Tryphon as a result of it.  Along with that prefect, Eudaemon, John the Cappadocian was another of the three officials deposed at the request of the instigators.  Pompeius and his brother, Hypatius, who had been crowned by the masses, were executed as this event was put down by the generals Mundus, Narses, and Belisarius.  FTP, identify this mob riot carried out against Justinian by Blue and Green chariot factions.;;Nika (Revolt)
World History;;In a two year span, a dwarf named John William Bean, as well as Edward Oxford and John Francis before him, each attempted to shoot this ruler.  Baron Stockmar served as an early advisor to this ruler, who, upon gaining power, banished John Conroy, the man who would later be linked to a scandal that led to the forced examination of Flora Hastings’ virginity.  A close relationship with the servant John Brown also created scandalous rumors during the reign of this monarch, who was given an imperial title by the passage of the Royal Titles Act, was honored in Golden and Diamond Jubilees, and counted John Russell, Lord Salisbury, and Lord Melbourne as prime ministers.  FTP, identify this successor to William IV and spouse of Prince Albert, the longest-ruling British queen.;;(Alexandrina) Victoria
United States History;;This organization made its first public appearance in a four day conference at Storer College that featured speeches by Henrietta Leary Evans and Reverdy Ransom, closed with the reading of "An Address to the Country," and honored the memory of John Brown.  A reminder of seven duties and short statements on such topics as health, employees and labor unions, and appeared in its Declaration of Principles.  One of its first actions was a letter writing campaign in protest of the Brownsville Affair, and its first organizational meeting saw Frederick McGhee, Monroe Trotter, and others convene at the home of Mary Talbert.  Other important members include cofounder John Hope, who became president of Morehouse College, and Mary White Ovington, its first white member.  FTP, identify this W.E.B. DuBois-led civil rights group founded in 1905 and named after a river on the Ontario border.;;Niagara (Movement)
World History;;The one led by Richard Vernon was overshadowed by a feud involving Henry Beaufort that forced the banning of weapons, which itself led to clubs, or "bats" being sneaked inside.  Like the "Fire and Faggot" event held 12 years earlier, it occurred at Leicester.  Thomas Audley, Humphrey Wingfield and Richard Rich, successively, oversaw the "Reformation" one, which contemporaneously saw the title of Head of the Church bestowed to Henry VIII during its seven year span.  The one under James I in 1614 was memorably "Adled," while the one organized in 1265 by Simon de Montfort is often cited as the first modern example of one in England.  FTP, identify these political gatherings, of which Charles I called a "Long" one that was later turned into a "Rump".;;Parliament(s)
World History;;Jaroslav Cerny translated this man’s name as meaning "keeper of horses," and lesser works attributed to this author include On Festivals and On the Preparation of Kyphi.  His defining work shares its title with that of Hecataeus of Abdera, and the first recorded reference to him appears in the text Against Apion.  In the case of such rulers as Semerkhet, the chronology devised by this author of The Book of Sothis varies with that of the Palermo Stone, and with such rulers as Djet, even varies across the different versions of his writing recorded by Julius Africanus and Syncellus.  No extant original works of this priest from Sebennytos remain, though Josephus is the best known source.  The source of the story that a hippopotamus killed Menes, this is, FTP, which historian, who wrote the Aegyptiaca and divided pharaohs of Egypt into dynasties?;;Manetho|Manethon
United States History;;The month before the encounter at this site was spent building a road connecting it to Gist’s Plantation.  Its main overseer took charge after the death of Joshua Fry and was forced to share command upon the arrival of reinforcements under James Mackay.  Its fall was linked to the actions of an ally, Half King, who killed the commander of an enemy scouting party, Joseph de Jumonville, and left with his Seneca warriors before fighting began.  Jumonville’s brother, Louis, sought revenge, and thus this outpost in the Great Meadows, built as part of an expedition ordered by Robert Dinwiddie, was besieged by an army from Fort Duquesne.  FTP, name this hastily-made fort, whose capture opened the French and Indian War and saw an ignominious surrender made by George Washington.;;(Fort) Necessity
World History;;The earliest scholarly references to it were made by Ado of Vienne, Aeneas of Paris, and Hincmar of Reims, while St. Peter Damian and Humbert of Silva Candida were the among first to make official appeals to this document, primarily during their disputes with Michael Cerularius, who opposed their leader Leo IX.  Published in Gratian’s Decretum, it was cited by Urban II in his attempts to claim Corsica.  References to Judea and the province of Byzantia, a tale alleging its originator was a leper, and a failure to acknowledge Miltiades as the contemporary pope formed the basis of critiques of it by Nicholas of Cusa, and Lorenzo Valla, the latter of whom proved its falsity.  FTP, Sylvester I was supposedly issued a large share of Roman lands according to what forged document that was attributed to a Christian emperor?;;Donation of Constantine
World History;;This dynasty stemmed from a man who inherited land on the right side of the Lahn River; his counterpart was the founder of the Weilburg line and his brother, Walram II.  They acquired their namesake lands through Claudia of Chalon, whose marriage with Hendrik III produced Rene, the first to bear its name.  A brief conflict over succession in this line emerged as the result of the earlier marriage of Albertine Agnes, leading to claims by both Friedrich of Prussia and Johan Wilhelm Friso, though eventually the husband of Princess Anne, William IV, would inherit the title.  William the Silent and Maurice brought to prominence, FTP, what Dutch royal line, who would see another William become king of England in the Glorious Revolution?;;(House) (of) Orange|(House) (of) Nassau
United States History;;A series of fourteen essays proposing its establishment was authored by Jesse Hawley, and the first resolution to do so was introduced by Joshua Forman in the State Assembly, leading to a report on its feasibility being prepared by James Geddes.   The head of the project was Benjamin Wright, and key members of its overseeing commission included Thomas Eddy, Simeon de Witt, and Gouverneur Morris.  Its most zealous supporter was opposed by a faction called the Bucktails, and memorably emptied a keg to celebrate the completion of this structure, which became the subject of the nostalgic song "Low Bridge" when it was expanded and replaced by the Barge system.  FTP, DeWitt Clinton championed the building of what waterway connecting Albany to Buffalo?;;Erie Canal
World History;;This movement used the date of April 17 as a reference point in classifying urbanites as "new people".  Though it signed the Paris peace agreement allowing Yasushi Akashi and his organization, UNTAC, to oversee the elections in its nation that gave FUNCINPEC a plurality of votes, its opposition to the new national government only ended with the capture of Ta Mok in 1999.  When in power, it operated the infamous S-21, until it was overthrown by an invasion that installed Heng Samrin, though it formed its own rival government under Khieu Samphan.  Emphasizing collective farming in its establishment of Democratic Kampuchea, this is, FTP, what leftist movement that prolifically committed genocide when ruling Cambodia under Pol Pot?;;Khmer Rouge
World History;;One of their attempts to write new constitution was the Green Book, and their leaders were later memorialized when drawings of their profiles were placed on the cover of The Polar Star.  Lesser groups like the Union of Public Good and the Union of Salvation comprised their ranks, as did many members of secret societies like the Freemasons.  Their main dichotomy fell between a northern faction advocating a constitutional monarchy and a southern one advocating a popular revolt; the respective leaders were Nikita Muraviev and Paul Pestel.  Five of their leaders were hanged after an uprising at Senate Square, where many expressed support for Grand Duke Constantine, who had renounced his claim to the throne in favor of Nicholas I.  FTP, identify these participants of an 1825 Russian revolt in the namesake month.;;Decembrist(s)
World History;;When these people tried to promote Olybius as successor to Libius Severus, Leo I sent Marcellinus and Basiliscus on a failed campaign against them.  One general who was sent by Honorius to fight them at Rhaetia, Flavius Stilicho, was actually one by birth.  They expressed tolerance to Catholics when ruled by Gunthamund and Hilderich, but these people, who were originally split into Siling and Asding tribes, mostly practiced Arianism.  During the reign of Gaiseric, they controlled most of North Africa, and their fall occurred under the rule of Gelimer, during which they were crushed at Ad Decimum and Tricameron by Belisarius.  FTP, identify these barbarians who sacked Rome in 455 AD and became synonymous with wanton destruction.;;Vandal(s)
United States History;;Lesser members included a former army major and leader of the Volunteers, and a future minister to Prussia who would also go on to lead the negotiations for the annexation of Texas and serve as the Know-Nothing Party’s only vice presidential candidate.  Beyond William B. Lewis and Andrew Donelson, this group had a strong media presence through men like former New Hampshire Patriot editor Isaac Hill and United States Telegraph editor Duff Green.  Two prominent members were Kentuckians: one being Washington Globe founder Francis Blair, the other being Amos Kendall, who influenced its leader’s policy supporting state banks.  Losing its influence after some drama involving Peggy O’Neill’s marriage to John Eaton, this is, FTP, what group of informal advisors to Andrew Jackson?;;Kitchen Cabinet
World History;;Peter Langtoft claimed it was his servant John Short who betrayed him to John Menteith, leading to his trial and execution in Smithfield, where he claimed he was not guilty of treason since he never swore loyalty to the king.  It is uncertain whether the execution of Marion Braidfute motivated him as legend tells, but he killed William Heselrig in Lanark, and soon met up with Andrew de Moray, who became his major ally.  The poet Blind Harry is the primary source of stories about this man, who was motivated to take arms by the overthrow of John Balliol and crushed the English at Stirling Bridge before being defeated at Falkirk in 1298.  FTP, identify this antagonist of Edward I, the Scottish rebel depicted in Braveheart.;;(William) Wallace
World History;;An encounter here began with the breaking of an unpopular four month treaty through a march on Tegea.  Aristocles and Hipponoidas were banished for showing cowardice during this battle, where the initial surprise of the attacking forces’ being ambushed at the Temple of Heracles wore off as the ensuing hoplite battle was won by the invading Lacedaemonians under Acis II.  Boeotian forces led a left wing charge here and stunned Agesilaus II and his allied Spartan and Athenian army in a battle 56 years later, in which, despite repeating the earlier success at the Battle of Leuctra, the Thebans entered a decline from power because their commander fell in battle here.  FTP, name this area near Argos, the site of a 418 BC Peloponnesian War battle and the site of the 362 BC battle that saw the death of Epaminondas.;;Mantinea
World History;;In recent years it has been rendered irrelevant due to the loss of its coalition partner Freedom Union and the formation of the Civic Platform as a splinter group.  One of its early programs cited a segment of the Catholic Social Teaching of John Paul II, and its leaders often wore black Madonna buttons.  It rose directly out of the KOR, while its rural branch was led by Jan Kulaj.  It continued as an underground organization after being declared illegal by the Sejm, and after teaming with the PUWP, Tadeusz Mazowiecki became his country's first noncommunist premier in forty years.  FTP, name this union formed out of a strike at the Gdansk ship yards, which, under Lech Walesa, was able to break Soviet power in Poland.;;Solidarity|Solidarnosc
United States History;;Venenago, Ouitanon, and Presque Isle were three of the eight sites to fall during this conflict, which was planned during a council at the Ecorse River.  One of the forces called in to fight it was Roger’s Rangers, whose namesake leader later wrote a one act tragedy about it.  The Devil’s Hole Massacre was one of the bloodiest of its encounters, and despite preliminary treaty negotiations with John Bradstreet, it would only end three years later through a treaty with William Johnson.  The British defense of its initial target was successfully led by Henry Gladwin, and after an encounter at Bushy Run, Henry Bouquet was able to defend Fort Pitt, leaving it and Fort Detroit the two main forts not to be captured by the allied tribes under this conflict’s namesake.  FTP, name this 1763 Indian rebellion centered on the Great Lakes.;;Pontiac(’s) (Rebellion)
World History;;This dynasty’s second ruler passed laws forbidding the shaving of beard and heads and the use of ghats for bathing, and only came to power after winning a succession crisis with his older brother Barbak Khan, whom he placated by giving him the Jaunpur territory.  Niamatullah was the primary chronicler of this dynasty, whose first leader, Bahlol, took the throne after the voluntary abdication of Alam Shah, thus ending the preceding Sayyid Dynasty.  Its third and final ruler had his popularly supported brother Jalal killed to keep his own throne safe, causing Alam and Daulat Khan to betray him and seek outside intervention from a Turkic invader who would crush his forces with cannon artillery in an epic 1526 battle.  FTP, identify this Islamic Afghan dynasty that ruled in North India until Ibrahim was killed at Panipat.;;Lodi
World History;;After a stint as a professor at Tours, he joined the French army, and in 1940 was captured and imprisoned in Amiens for two years.  Lamine Gueye recruited him for the SFIO, though he later split with Gueye and joined Mamadou Dia in forming his country’s Democratic party.  Initially elected Mayor of Thies, he helped found the Party for African Reunion and worked with Modibo Keita of the Sudanese Republic in forming the Mali Federation, from which his nation would secede in 1960.  In 1980, he retired and passed the torch to his prime minister, Abdou Diouf after serving four terms as president.  Also the author of the treatise On African Socialism and Shadow Songs, a poetry collection, this is, FTP what man who joined Aime Cesaire in founding the Negritude movement and ruled as the first president of Senegal?;;(Leopold) (Sedar) Senghor
United States History;;The firm of Boring and Tilton was given the contract to rebuild its facilities, which were largely destroyed in a June 1897 fire.  Functioning mostly as a detention center during World War II, it was closed down after the release of its last occupant, Arne Peterssen, in 1954.  Once the site of Fort Gibson, it was overseen by such commissioners as William Williams, Robert Watchorn, and Joseph Senner, and was chosen to replace the facilities at Castle Garden.  Its first commissioner, Colonel John Weber, famously placed a golden eagle coin in the hands of Annie Moore, the first person to pass through this location.  Sometimes called the "Land of Tears," this site slowly grew obsolete with the 1924 passage of the National Origins Act, which drastically reduced the traffic flow of people being processed here.  FTP, identify this island in New York Harbor that served as a stopping point for millions of immigrants to the United States.;;Ellis (Island)
World History;;In 1838, Edward Robinson and Eli Smith first used a telescope to observe the ruins of this site, which is said to have first been built up by Alexander Janaeus.  Alfred Domaszewski and Adolf Schulten led early 20th Century archaeological expeditions here.  A "Snake Path" serves as the primary means of access to this site, which was most thoroughly excavated by Yigael Yadin.  Controversy exists over whether it was captured by Menahem and used by the Sicarii as a base for violent raids on Ein Gedi, but it was eventually besieged by the armies of Lucius Flavius Silva while under the command of Eleazar ben Yair.  Once the site of a palace of Herod, this is, FTP, what Israeli mountain fortress, where in 73 AD, hundreds of Jewish Zealots killed themselves to avoid capture by the Romans?;;Masada
World History;;He counted football as one of his oft-quoted "three F’s" and based his economic policies on the Rerum Novarum of Pope Leo XII.  A former economics professor himself, he was appointed finance minister after the coup of Antonio Carmona, whom he succeeded.  Though his nation had long since abolished the death penalty, he used the island prison of Tarrafal to suppress dissenters, who were rounded up by the PIDE.  His successor, Marcello Caetano, was deposed in the Carnation Revolution, and this Catholic ruler’s own late struggles suppressing rebellions in such colonies as Guinea and Cape Verde foreshadowed the collapses of his Estado Novo.  FTP, identify this man who, from 1932-1968, acted as dictator of Portugal.;;(Antonio) (Olivera) (de) Salazar
World History;;Joseph Stillwell was recalled to the U.S. in exchange for Albert Wedemeyer after a series of heated arguments with this faction’s leader, while Claire Chennault once served as an advisor to its air force.  This organization once made a strong defensive stand at the Battle of Kuningtou to maintain control of Quemoy, spread propaganda through the "Political Weekly," and was symbolized by the image of a twelve-pointed white sun on a blue background.  With the advice of Vasily Blucher, it carried out the unifying Northern Expedition, which saw it defeat the warlords Wu Pei-Fu, Sun Chuan-Fang, and Chang Tso-Lin, and establish a capital at Nanking by 1928.  FTP, identify this Chinese nationalist party, whose primary leader was Chiang Kai-Shek.;;Kuomintang|KMT
World History;;Their decline lay heavily in the rise of regents like Aega and Erchinoald and the growing influence of the Arnulfings, and was finalized when their last ruler was sent off to St. Omer and tonsured under the approval of St. Boniface and Pope Zacharias.  The Chronicle of Fredegar is a major source of information on them, and their later leaders, such as Sigibert III and Childebert III were typically inept puppets of the Mayors of the Palace, which is why all of their rulers after Dagobert I are known as the "do-nothing kings".  Presiding over a kingdom that would later be divided into Neustrian and Austrasian realms, this dynasty’s last ruler was Childeric III.  FTP, identify this dynasty named after the mythical son of a sea creature, who established their rule of the Frankish kingdom under Clovis I, and were succeeded by the Carolingians.;;Merovingian(s)
United States History;;An accidental crash that killed 23 members of the 56th SPS marked its first set of casualties.  Howard Zinn harshly criticized columnist James Reston’s support for government actions in his New York Times editorials, and firsthand accounts of the events leading up to it came from Charlie Miller.  An initial excursion by the Henry Holt revealed that a land evacuation had already occurred, and it was instead the Henry Wilson that would be approached by the boat containing the 39 men at the center of it.  Meanwhile, as an American naval bombardment took place at Kompong Som, U.S. troops staged a fruitless invasion of Kho-Tang while the hostages they sought were being released elsewhere.  FTP, identify this 1975 incident revolving around the Cambodian seizure of an American merchant ship.;;Mayaguez (Incident)
United States History;;Many of his speeches were collected in The Pathway of Peace, and he examined unethical business practices in the utility industry in his work with the Stevens Gas Commission.  For four years a member of the Hague’s Permanent Court of Arbitration, he was appointed to replace David Brewer in another role, which he took after resigning the governor’s office he had won in an election against William Randolph Hearst.  He replaced Bainbridge Colby as Secretary of State and chaired the Washington Naval Conference.  The late loss of California caused a close defeat of his presidential ticket with Charles Fairbanks, and his most notable position came when Herbert Hoover appointed him to fill the vacancy left by William Howard Taft’s retirement.  FTP, name this New Yorker who lost the election of 1916 to Woodrow Wilson and was Chief Justice in his second term on the Supreme Court from 1930-1941.;;(Charles) (Evans) Hughes
World History;;"Squire Leech" and "Caged Rats" were two of the poems in the eponymous set of rhymes criticizing them and written by Ebenezer Elliot.  George Bentinck was one of their leading supporters, and Edward Smith-Stanley resigned over calls for their immediate removal, while a resolution condemning them was annually introduced by Charles Pelham Villiers.  An initial attempt at reform came in the form of a sliding scale proposed by William Huskisson, but eventually a league opposing their existence and led by John Bright and Richard Cobden, as well as the onset of the An Gorta Mor, forced their repeal by Robert Peel.  FTP, identify these unpopular 19th Century Britain protectionist measures concerning a certain grain.;;Corn Laws
World History;;This work’s author categorized its major concept in terms of exemplars and disciplinary matrices in the postscript written seven years after its publication.  Its eighth chapter outlines the three possible ways for addressing the problem of blurring and is entitled, "The Response to Crisis," while its fourth chapter describes the process of puzzle-solving.  This work, whose introduction discusses the role of history in establishing a set of "received beliefs," originated from the author’s observations of errors in reading Aristotle’s Physics, and classifies the transition to subsequent Galilean and Einstein models as examples of the titular occurrences.  FTP, the notion of paradigm shifts was introduced in what work analyzing scientific progress and written by Thomas Kuhn?;;(The) Structure of Scientific Revolutions
World History;;He was given access to the Western media during his stay at Neauphle le Chateau, where he had sympathizers deliver his message to his country through smuggled cassette tapes.  It was here where he introduced his philosophy of "Governance of the Jurist" that would lead to the creation of an Assembly of Experts in the constitution he drafted.  After the death of his mentor, Boroujerdi, he became a critic of the White Revolution, and was exiled after the pleas of Hassan Pakravan to spare his life, which resulted in the granting of his highest title by Shariatmadari.  Upon his return to Qom, he appointed Mehdi Bazargan as interim prime minister after orchestrating the revolution that ended the Pahlavi Dynasty.  FTP, name this Shi’ite cleric who ousted the Shah and was de facto ruler during the U.S. hostage crisis in Iran.;;(Ruhollah) Khomeini
World History;;Spain ceded Santo Domingo to France, who also resolved its conflict with the Prussian states in a set of treaties signed here in 1795.  It and Schaffhausen joined the alliance that would form its eventual nation, doing so in 1501, shortly after an earlier treaty signed at this city came two months earlier as a result of the defeat of the Swabian League at Dornach, establishing its people’s independence from Maximilian I.  A meeting at Ferrera, and later Florence, was called in opposition of the council held here, which served as a precursor to the Pragmatic Sanction of Bourges and created a schism by electing the antipope Felix V in opposition to Eugene IV.  In this city, Pius II founded its nation’s first university, whose scholars included Jacob Burckhardt and the Bernoulli family.  FTP, identify this city on the Rhine, which follows Zurich and Geneva as the third most populous city in Switzerland.;;Basel
World History;;Situated on the Chersonese Uplands, Pierre Bosquet famously observed this battle, which opened when General Gribbe and General Semiakin led a coordinated charge on redoubts at Canrobert’s Hill, and became the subject of scrutiny due to a breach in communications in the process of having an order from Richard Airey relayed through Louis Nolan.  The commander opposing the British was General Liprandi, and British highlights in this battle included a charge by the 5th Dragoons under James Scarlett’s command, and one by the 93rd Highlanders under Colin Campbell, which formed the "Thin Red Line".  The British were commanded by Lord Raglan in, FTP, which Crimean War battle that saw the failure of Lord Cardigan’s "Charge of the Light Brigade"?;;(Battle) (of) Balaclava|(Battle) (of) Balaklava
World History;;The first recorded mention of this land appears in the Nilmat-Puran, though it is in the tome The River of Kings that the poet Kalhana tells of its first known king, Gonanda I.  In the early 1400’s, it was subjected to violent purges under the rule of the Muslim ruler Sikandar, and in 1820 it became part of a dual kingdom of the Dogra people.  When it was released from British colonial rule, controversy emerged as it was invaded in violation of the Standstill Agreement and ceded in the Instrument of Accession by Hari Singh at the end of 1947.  A line of control around this territory was produced by the Simla Agreement, which attempted to resolve the 1971 war between the two nations claiming it.  Linked with Jammu, this is, FTP, which mountainous Central Asian region, the subject of territorial disputes between India and Pakistan?;;Kashmir|Kashmir and Jammu
World History;;The main highlights of the second’s rule was breaking a Roman hold on the papacy by appointing Peter of Pavia as John XIV and being defeated at Calbaria by the Saracens.  His successor, the third bearer of this name, was advised by Adalbert of Prague and called on to suppress John Crescentius’ appointment of an anti-pope to Gregory V, which resulted in his bestowing the papacy on Gerbert of Aurillac as Sylvester II.  The fourth and final one was the only Welf to become emperor, but was defeated at the Battle of Bouvines, after which Frederick II restored the Hohenstaufen Dynasty.  The first holder of this name was the son of Henry the Fowler and founded an eponymous Saxon Dynasty.  FTP, give this first name of the man who stomped the Magyars at Lechfeld in 955 to become the first true Holy Roman Emperor.;;Otto
World History;;This book’s ninth chapter explains the significance of the motion of dust clouds and applies an ominous weight to bird migrations and animal stampedes.  Its eleventh chapter uses such adjectives as "dispersive," "facile," and "contentious" to categorize the "Nine Situations" of its title.  Using analogies involving musical notes, tastes, and primary colors, its author demonstrates the wide range of possible actions based on a limited set of simple techniques, and emphasizes the number five, which also comprises the number of ways to use fire and the different types of spies.  Jean-Joseph Amiot is credited with popularizing this work, which features chapters entitled "Terrain" and "Attack by Strategem," among a European audience.  FTP, identify this treatise on military tactics written by Sun-Tzu.;;(The) Art of War|Ping Fa
United States History;;His rule was marred by a series of disputes with Theophilus Eaton over the trial and extradition of smugglers.  The St. Catherine made its landing during his rule, and after writing to his superiors to ask that he be allowed to expel the Jews, he instead was ordered to allow them to settle.  He was also plagued by poor Indian relations, as shown by the outbreak of the Peach Tree War and conflicts near the village of Esopus, which he renamed Wildwyck.  His military career ended in a raid on the island of St. Martin that cost him a limb, this man was appointed to replace William Kieft and spent his last years on his farm, the Bouwerie, after being forced to surrender his capital to Richard Nicolls.  FTP, identify this peg-legged Dutchman who served as the last governor of New Netherland.;;(Peter) Stuyvesant
World History;;Its second leader was nicknamed Coda, and its founder likely got his nickname from a mistranslation of a description of his castle walls, leading him to be called the "White-Handed".  One of its later leaders, nicknamed "Ironhead," helped Philip II of Spain defeat France at St. Quentin, and was a signer of the Treaty of Cateau-Cambresis.  During World War II, this house briefly held the crown of Croatia under Tomislav II and from 1871-1873 had a brief stint as the royal house of Spain under Amadeus I.  However, it gained its first kingship through the Treaty of Utrecht, in which Spain initially ceded Sicily, and shortly after ceded Sardinia in exchange for Sicily, to this house under Victor Amadeus II.  FTP, identify this house, whose Victor Emmanuel II became the first ruler of a united Italy, and whose Prince Eugene was a prominent military leader.;;(House) (of) Savoy
United States History;;The minutes of one of its last national conventions questioned support for George Julian, while a state convention of that year nominated J. Preston Mann for lieutenant governor and William Smith for governor.  Its last presidential ticket featured S.M. Bell and William Goodell, and William Jay and the brothers Lewis and Arthur Tappan were among those who organized its founding convention at Warsaw.  Francis LeMoyne was replaced by Thomas Earle as this party’s first vice-presidential candidate, and it had candidate trouble two elections later when Gerrit Smith had to fill in for unwilling presidential nominee John Hale.  Once having nominated Frederick Douglass for Secretary of State of New York, this party screwed Henry Clay by swinging New York, and thus the presidency, to James K. Polk in its best election showing.  FTP, identify this abolitionist third party that nominated James Birney for president in 1844.;;Liberty (Party)
World History;;Two of the structures at this site have been colloquially named after Giovanni Belzoni and James Bruce, and John Gardner Wilkinson created a numbering system to classify its landmarks.  Chosen as a place that "nobody would see or hear of" by a court official named Ineni, it was used until the famine marked by the Year of the Hyenas caused widespread bandit activity that forced it to be replaced by Deir el-Bahri.  To date, 63 structures have been unearthed at this site, whose counterpart at Biban al-Harim was created to honor women of the era.  Though the preceding Eighteenth Dynasty established it, Siptah, Merneptah, and Seti I are three of the Nineteenth Dynasty rulers memorialized at, FTP, what site near Luxor, a valley that contains the tombs of numerous ancient Egyptian pharaohs, including that of Tutankhamen?;;Valley of the Kings
World History;;He lamented his nation’s dismal human rights record in Crucifixion of Liberty, and offered a firsthand account of its rise in The Catastrophe.  Editing a newspaper entitled Days kept him preoccupied during his time in Paris, where he ended up taking residence after his supporters’ defeat at Pulkova.  He came to prominence for his role in exposing the spy Roman Malinovsky and later pushed agendas of universal suffrage and increased freedom of speech after being named Minister of Justice.  Also becoming Minister of War, he ascended to power after the resignation of Georgy Lvov and fended off a coup attempt by Lavr Kornilov before being himself toppled in the October Revolution.  FTP, identify this man, who in 1917, had a brief role as leader of Russia’s provisional government.;;(Alexander) Kerensky
World History;;They came to power after a teenage leader’s victory at Sharur over Alvand Beig, although they had their roots in a religious order that was formed in the 1200’s at Ardebil.  Another key early victory for them was at Merv, where they defeated Shaybani and the Uzbeks and then moved their capital.  Alcohol addiction plagued many of their rulers, such as both of its drunken rulers named Suleiman, and their ruler who oversaw the building of the palace of Chehel Sotoon.  One of their leaders feuded with Bayezid II, leading to their defeat at Calidiran by Selim the Grim.  Entering its downfall after Shah Husayn was defeated by invading Afghans, this Sufi-turned-Shiite dynasty was succeeded by the Zand dynasty of Shiraz and had its capitals at Tabriz and Isfahan.  FTP, identify this Persian dynasty that was established by Ismail and ruled from the 16th to 18th centuries.;;Safavid(s)
World History;;Atilius Titianus and Cornelius Priscianus were the only two men found guilty of conspiring against this ruler, who sent troops to protect Olbiopolis from the Tauroscythians and bloodlessly saved Armenia from invasion by writing a single threatening letter to Vologeses III.  He faced a Moorish uprising in Mauritania and sent Lollius Urbicus to put down continuing unrest in Britain.  Upon becoming emperor, this husband of Faustina tirelessly lobbied the Senate to deify his predecessor, who had named him as his imperial successor.  This ruler also celebrated Rome’s 900th anniversary and became the namesake of a Scottish wall.  The fourth of the Good Emperors, this is, FTP, which predecessor of Marcus Aurelius, whose cognomen reflected his perceived virtuous character?;;Antonius Pius|(Titus) (Aurelius) (Fulvus) (Boionus) (Arrius) Antoninus
United States History;;This man took the name his father was baptized under at Lapwai and spent the last years of his life in Colville after being transferred there from Fort Levenworth.  His brother, Ollokot, helped command his military forces in battles such as Whitebird Canyon, which opened his war against the Americans, and Big Hole, in which he saw his wife killed and enemy commander John Gibbon wounded.  His forces encumbered by the accompanying women and children, he, along with Looking Glass, was finally defeated at Bear Paw Mountain, and Lieutenant Charles E.S. Wood recorded the celebrated oration he delivered upon his surrender to Oliver Otis Howard and Nelson Miles.  FTP, name this embattled chief, who, after failing to lead his Nez Perce tribe to Canada, declared, "I will fight no more".;;(Chief) Joseph|Hin-Mah-Too-Yah-Lat-Kekt
World History;;Among the missionaries it has killed are Irene McCormack, an Australian nun, the Italian Alessandro Negroni, and Michal Tomaszek and Zbigniew Strzalowski, a pair of Polish priests; the last three of whom were murdered in the same month in the Ancash region.  In addition to a series of massacres of peasant villagers in the Apurimact region, its highest profile attacks were the murder of a women’s rights advocate and deputy mayor named Maria Elena Moyano, and a deadly car bombing at Tarata Street.  Spawned from the University of Huamanga, where its founder taught philosophy, it is still sporadically active, despite the 1992 capture of that founder, Abimael Guzman, in a raid ordered by Alberto Fujimori.  FTP, identify this guerilla terrorist group that officially calls itself the Communist Party of Peru.;;Sendero Luminoso|Shining Path
World History;;Although his reign saw the passage of the act De Heretico Comburendo, the only major executions that he oversaw under the act were those of John Badby and William Sawrey.  One of the rebellions he faced brought about his order for the execution of Thomas Mawbray and Richard Scrope, though his most significant opposition originated from his ruling in favor of Lord Grey of Ruthin in a land dispute, and was centered out of the captured Harlech Castle.  This ruler also had the future James I of Scotland captured and imprisoned, but he was preoccupied with the aforementioned rebellion, which featured the battles of Homildon Hill and Shrewsbury and saw Edmund Mortimer and Henry "Hotspur" Percy join the Welsh alliance against him.  FTP, name this enemy of Owen Glendower and son of John of Gaunt, who started the house of Lancaster by usurping the throne from Richard II.;;Henry IV|Henry Bolingbroke
United States History;;It was the first battle experienced by Frank Upham, who gathered preliminary intelligence for it by posing as a civilian in Hong Kong.  Supplies were continuously restocked by the Nanshan and Zafiro, which were left unarmed despite orders back home from John Long.  The fighting took place around Sangley Point and commenced with the enemy’s abandonment of its flagship, the Queen Christina.  The enemy’s planned attack to follow up this battle, the Camara Expedition, never materialized, and the Americans only suffered nine wounded in this victory over Patricio Montojo, which began with a memorable command issued to Charles Gridley.  FTP, identify this naval victory of George Dewey that effectively decided the Spanish-American War.;;(Battle) (of) Manila Bay
World History;;Simon de Covino’s De Judicio Solis posited that this event resulted from a planetary feud between Jupiter and Saturn, and Geoffrey of Meaux wrote another treatise on its astrological origins.  Gabriele de Mussi introduced the erroneous theory that its occurrence was linked to the military tactics of troops defending the siege of Caffa.  Bonne of Luxembourg, Leonor of Portugal, and Queen Joan II of Navarre were among its royal casualties, though Alfonso XI was the only ruling monarch to die as a direct result of it.  Its economic consequences were protectionist measures which inspired such insurrections as the Ciompi revolt, while a major religious reaction was the rise of movements of flagellants.  FTP, identify this 14th Century plague epidemic that wiped out one fourth of Europe’s population.;;Black Death|Black Plague|Bubonic Plague
World History;;One was organized to confirm the cancellation of a planned marriage involving Claude of Brittany, and resulted in her father being called "the Father of the People," while one twenty two years earlier had temporarily thwarted the royal ambitions of the latter to be named regent over Anne of Beaujeu.  The penultimate one failed to resolve controversy over a tax called the "paulette," and the final one would only occur 175 years later.  The one of 1484 introduced a system for the election of delegates, which did not exist when the first one was called to provide advice regarding the crown’s dispute with Boniface VIII.  1614 and 1789 also saw notable gatherings of, FTP, what legislative assembly in which the different social classes of France convened?;;Estates General|States General
World History;;The campaigns of Wang Geon and his decisive victory at Seonsan ended the second period of this name in one country, which began during the troubled reign of Queen Jinseong of Silla.  The Kaya League formed during the earlier period of this name, which was chronicled by Kim Pusik in the Samguk Sagi, and saw the Silla struggle with the Paekche in the southern peninsula before allying with the Chinese to conquer Goguryeo in the north and temporarily end this period.  This era in another nation was first chronicled by Chen Shou, an official in the short-lived Jin Dynasty that emerged after its end.  FTP, give this name for a set of early and late periods in Korean history and a Chinese period that saw the rise of the Wei, Shu, and Wu, and was the background for a famous "Romance".;;Three Kingdoms (Period)
United States History;;A bipartisan team of Owen Roberts and Atlee Pomerene was appointed as special counsel to examine this affair.  The investigation began after future governor Leslie Miller reported suspicious dealings and a Senate probe into its occurrence was introduced by John Kendrick.  That investigation was chaired by Thomas Walsh.  Perceived ties to this controversy was a factor in Harry Daugherty’s forced resignation of his Attorney General post, and testimony from Mahlon T. Everhart helped convict its central figure, whom the president of the Monmouth company, Harry Sinclair, bribed in exchange for access to land overseen by Edwin Denby.  FTP, identify this Harding administration scandal in which Albert Fall allowed private oil drilling at a Wyoming naval reserve.;;Teapot Dome (Scandal)
United States History;;Charlie Miller was eleven years old when he joined this organization, which recruited "Young, skinny, wiry fellows not over 18".  Johnny Fry, James Randall, and Billy Hamilton were three of the first men on the roster of this operation, often claimed to be created by Benjamin Ficklin, who left long before control of it was transferred to Ben Holladay due to financial problems.  Popular lore holds that it only had one man murdered while on duty, though his mochila was not lost in the process.  A more serious disruption of its actions came as the result of the outbreak of the Paiute War, though Indian conflicts were hardly the only reason why this holding of the Russell, Majors and Waddell firm was a financial flop in its eighteen months of operation.  FTP, name this company that ran routes from St. Joseph to Sacramento from 1860-1861, a transcontinental mail service whose employees traveled on horseback.;;Pony Express
World History;;One encounter of this name began with a morning skirmish at the Leffingham Bridge over the Yser and saw a series of attacks by a force of tercios with an Italian division under Avalos d’Aquino pushed back by cavalry under the command of Louis, William I’s brother, leading to a victory over Albert of Austria’s Spanish forces.  Another battle of this name featured a surprising charge by William Lockhart’s English redcoats, which allowed their allies to crush the German and Walloon infantry, drive the rival Cavalier forces out of the battle, and defeat Louis de Conde and Don John of Austria, leading to the Peace of the Pyrenees.  FTP, give this name describing a 1600 Dutch victory by Maurice at Nieuport and a 1658 French victory by Marshall Turenne at Dunkirk, derived from the sandy hills on which these battles took place.;;(Battle) (of) (the) Dunes
World History;;Though foreign action against this nation was officially a response to the delivery of smuggled weapons by the Swedish vessel Alfhem, its passage of Decree 900 two years prior is considered the real impetus.  Lobbying for an invasion was led by Tommy Corcoran and Samuel Zemurray, and months after John Peurifoy was appointed as new ambassador, an attempt to plant phony weapons in its neighboring nation was carried out in Operation WASHTUB.  The eventual coup was led by Carlos Castillo-Armas, saw substantial support from Anastasio Somoza, and, under the name of Operation PBSUCCESS, was approved by Allen Dulles.  FTP, identify this Central American nation, the subject of a CIA coup that ousted Jacbo Arbenz.;;Guatemala
World History;;A piece of travel advice given by this man led to his then-pregnant daughter’s being called the girl of the "Two Waistbands".  Lubaina, Zinnira, and Bilal were among the many slaves this man used his wealth to emancipate, and the rest of his money went to fund an expedition at Tabuk.  He oversaw campaigns against the pretenders Talaiha, Malik bin Nawirah, and Musailma the Liar in the Wars of Apostasy, which were led militarily by his trusty general Khalid bin Walid, though he himself caused a schism when, at the Saqifah, his future successor Umar had him elected in favor of Ali, the venerated figure of the Shi’ites.  FTP, identify this man, who, in Sunni tradition, succeeded Muhammad and became the first Islamic caliph.;;Abu Bakr
World History;;William Fitzwilliam ordered that all refugees from this group be executed, though the refusal of Hugh O’Neill to follow this order foreshadowed their countrymen’s alliance with Ireland in the Nine Years’ War.  It was assembled as a response to the Treaty of Nonsuch, and a memorable speech at Tilbury was given to rally the men who would defend against its attack.  The plan was for this force to join with one under Alessandro Farnese, but before that could happen, it participated in its first engagement off Eddystone.  Originally to be commanded by the Alvaro de Bazan, it was opposed by Charles Howard, who decisively defeated it at Gravelines.  FTP, identify this force led by the Duke of Medina Sedonia, which suffered a disastrous naval defeat while attempting to invade England.;;Spanish Armada|Invincible Armada
World History;;The author of a treatise called The Right of Ownership, this man was forced to resign in his second stint as foreign minister for his support of Muhammad Ali; he had also been forced out of his first term due to his anti-Carlist leanings.  An editing job at the Constitutionnel started his early career in the media, and he joined with Armand Carrel and Francois Mignet to found the newspaper Le National in opposition to Jules Armand de Polignac.  His authorship of History of the Consulate and the Empire filled most of his time during the 1850’s and early 1860’s, but it was during the 1870’s that he carried out his significant actions, the negotiation of the Treaty of Frankfurt with Otto von Bismarck and the putting down of the Paris Commune.  FTP, identify this man, who was elected the first president of France’s Third Republic.;;(Adolphe-Louis) Thiers
United States History;;Despite the efforts of Jessie Binford and Florence Scala, it met its end as a result of a state supreme court ruling.  The death of its founder resulted in Adena Rich’s being appointed as its head, though policy disputes led to her replacement by Charlotte Carr.  Its biggest financial backer was Mary Rozet Smith, and one of its leading members was the first director of the Children’s Bureau, Julia Lathrop.  Its status as a haven for socialist intellectuals like Charles Beard and John Dewey was largely the product of the arrival of Florence Kelley at this Helen Culver-owned institution, which was co-founded by Ellen Gates Starr.  FTP, identify this settlement house established in Chicago under Jane Addams.;;(The) Hull House
World History;;The second incarnation of an earlship of this name was created by George III for Thomas Villiers.  The first man to a hold a title from this area was accused of selling Dunkirk to the French, helped draw up the Declaration of Breda, and told of the English Civil War in The History of the Rebellion.  A set of four statutes, including the Five-Mile Act, Conventicle Act, and the Corporation Act, which were designed to reinforce the power of the Anglican Church were named for the aforementioned man, Edward Hyde.  Roughly 500 years earlier, a document placing the final authority of bishoprics and control over the criminal trials of clerks in the hands of the king also held this name.  FTP, give the common name, which identified a "Code" under Charles II and a set of 1164 "Constitutions" under Henry II.;;Clarendon
World History;;This man’s body was seized by student protestors and briefly entombed at the Arts and Science University in opposition to the military government’s refusal to hold a national memorial.  A backer of John McConnell’s proposal to make Earth Day a global holiday, he spent much of his terms worrying about the threat of UFO’s from outer space.  Originally an educator, he was named Director of Broadcasting by Prime Minister Thakin Nu after his nation declared independence from Great Britain in 1948.  In his first term in his career-defining position, he helped negotiate the end of the Cuban Missile Crisis and broker peace for the civil war in Congo, the latter of which his predecessor was attempting before dying in a plane crash.  Replaced in 1971 after his second term by Kurt Waldheim, this is, FTP, which first and only Asian to hold the position of UN Secretary General, a diplomat from Burma?;;(U) Thant
United States History;;When news of this controversy became public, Sprigg’s Resolutions were passed, the short pamphlet "The Detector" was written to examine it, and many citizens affixed their hats with black cockades in protest, though crisis eventually was averted after the appointment of William Vans Murray and the negotiation of the Treaty of Mortefontaine.  One central participant was Pierre Bellamy, and a woman named de Villette served as an intermediary in this incident, which helped lead to the creation of the Department of the Navy.  Jean Conrad Hottinguer and Lucien Hauteval were the other namesake figures, though Marshall, Pinckney, and Gerry were the Americans at the center of, FTP, what diplomatic fiasco that stemmed from Talleyrand’s demand for a bribe, named for the pseudonyms ascribed to the three French agents involved?;;XYZ (Affair)
World History;;Thomas Phillips gave Lieutenant Gray, whose men were guarding several captured ones, orders to fire on a mob of them to defend the Westgate Hotel in a memorable uprising.  The involvement of Jane Smeal and Mary Fildes, among others, was representative of their unusually high female contingent.  Holding a rally at Kennington Common and starting uprisings by sabotaging the boilers they worked at in the "plug plot riots," this group was actually divided into non-violent and violent factions, known as the "moral force" and "physical force" groups.  The dichotomy can be seen in the contrast between Thomas Duncombe and Feargus O’Connor, who each made a failed attempt to present their platform to Parliament.  FTP, a set of "six points" summarized the agenda of what working-class English reformist group, named for the William Lovett-written petition they advocated?;;Chartist(s)|Chartism
World History;;His possibly empty tomb is located at Bull’s Head Hill, and he was nicknamed the man of Three Treasures.  In his first major expedition, he defeated a force of bandits based out of Sanfoqi, and in another he was called to fend off Suganla’s invasion of Sumendala.  He popularized the myth of a unicorn-like animal called a qilin by returning from Adan with a pair of giraffes, and, in his last expedition, he served a new ruler, Xuande, the grandson of his main patron, the Yongle Emperor.  A stone pillar discovered at Fujian details the adventures of this man, who was castrated as a youth after the capture of his homeland, Yunnan, and became the subject of a dubious theory put forth by Gavin Menzies.  FTP, identify this explorer who probably did not discover America while serving the Ming Dynasty in 1421.;;Zheng He|Cheng Ho|(Ma) Sanbao
United States History;;Though Johnson Hooper served as secretary in preparing a preliminary version of it, he did not sign the final version of this document.  William Brooks chaired the first conference to officially support it, though two breakaway factions endorsed it, too: one conference installed George Johnson as the head of a government based out of Russellville, and a similar conference occurred at Neosho.  Howell Cobb presided over the meetings that oversaw its creation, though the committee that wrote it was headed by Robert Barnwell Rhett.  Among the departures in this text are the inclusion of a seventh article and provisions allowing a line-item veto and limiting a president to a single six year term, but it is largely copied verbatim from the 18th Century document on which it was modeled.  FTP, identify this document that formed a nation out of the seceding Southern states.;;Constitution (of) (the) C(onfederate) S(tates) (of) A(merica)|Confederate Constitution|Constitution (of) (the) Confederacy
World History;;One controversy that foreshadowed this development by over 150 years centered on a man, who, after the testimony of Theognostus, was ordered deposed by Nicholas I in favor of Ignatius, and was later forced out by Emperor Leo VI.  More immediately leading to  this occurrence were the decision of Sergius to remove Sergius IV from the Diptychs and the use of a modified rite for the coronation of Henry II at the approval of Benedict VIII.  Though questions over the use of the epklesis and unleavened azymes, along with the aforementioned controversies over Photius and the filioque, led up to it, the immediate and formal cause of this occurrence was when Cardinal Humbert, acting as a delegate of Pope Leo IX, placed a bull on the altar of the Hagia Sophia excommunicating Michael Cerularius, the Patriarch of Constantinople, in 1054.  FTP, identify this formation of a rift that split the Roman Catholic and Greek Orthodox churches.;;(The) (Great Schism|Eastern Schism|East-West Schism){1}?
World History;;Glover Johns commanded the relief force that was sent in as a response to its establishment, and General Lucius Clay, who engaged in diplomatic efforts concerning it, had his troops build a replica to practice quick attempts at its destruction.  The erection of a tower topped by a glass sphere in the Alexanderplatz was used as a symbol in a presidential speech criticizing it, and the wounding of Christian Gaudian and the death of his friend Chris Gueffroy marked the last two casualties linked to it.  The first was Peter Fechter, left to die after being shot by soldiers outside this structure, whose overnight creation was ordered by Walter Ulbricht.  The main point of open passage was Checkpoint Charlie, in, FTP, what structure, which, until its 1989 demolition, divided the German capital?;;Berlin Wall
World History;;This man, who once rejected an offer of alliance from Innocent IV, died on his way home from a diplomatic mission while stopping at a monastery in Gorodetz.  As a teenager, he fought under his father in a battle at the Emajogi River and married the daughter of Bryachislav, a prince from Polotsk.  He later sought the help of Sartak to oust his brother Andrew from power and allowed for a census and tax collection to be imposed by the Tatars in exchange for the protection of Batu Khan’s armies.  Birger Jarl had an eye put out at one of the formative battles won by this son of Yaroslav II; the other being a victory known as the "Massacre on the Ice".  FTP, identify this man who defeated the Teutonic Knights at Lake Peipus, a Russian prince and saint who got his name by beating the Swedes at a certain river.;;(Alexander) Nevsky
United States History;;Charles Hubbard Judd, Kirtley Mather, and Winterton Curtis were among the experts who submitted written briefs for this case, though only Maynard Metcalf was able to make his case orally.  Frequent picketing outside the court building was led by Thomas Theodore Martin during arguments for this case, whose lead counselors were Thomas Stewart and Arthur Garfield Hays.  Epperson v. Arkansas and Edwards v. Aguillard followed up on the same theme as this case, which was the product of George Rappalyea’s opposition to the Butler Act and specifically concerned the use of George Hunter’s textbook.  FTP, Clarence Darrow and William Jennings Bryan dueled in what trial regarding a schoolteacher’s attempts to teach evolution?;;Scopes (Monkey) (Trial)|State (of) (Tennessee) (v.) (John) (Thomas) Scopes
World History;;This leader, who is said to have convinced the Mamertines he was a god by slicing their largest warrior in two, foresaw his death in combat when he came across the statue of a bull fighting a wolf.  He was beheaded that day during his abortive Argos campaign after being knocked of his horse by a roof tile thrown by an old woman.  Failures include his attempt to install Cleonymus as ruler of Sparta and his loss at the Battle of Beneventum, though this one time ally of Demetrius also came close to building a kingdom at Sicily, defeated Antigonus Gonatas to win a second stint as king of Macedonia, and triumphed over the Romans at Heraclea while commanding the army of Tarentum.  Best known for a narrowly-won battle in Apulia during that same campaign, this is, FTP, what Molossian king of Epirus whose victory at Ausculum made his name synonymous with costly victories?;;Pyrrhus (of) (Epirus)
World History;;In a council proposing an official response to this event, Count Tisza opposed Leopold Berchtold’s plan to issue the July Ultimatum.  Taking place on St. Vitus’ Day, it occurred outside Schiller’s Store near the Latin Bridge.  A firsthand account was written by Franz von Harrach, and a list of men linked to its occurrence came from a newspaper editor named Danilo Ilic, one of only three men executed for his role in it: the others were spared by a law forbidding the execution of anyone younger than twenty.  Franz Urban’s mistaken departure from the Appel Quay provided a key opportunity to carry out this act, which, minutes earlier, Nedjelko Cabrinovic had failed to perform with an errant bomb.  FTP, what act of murder by Gavrilo Princip and the Black Hand led to the outbreak of World War I?;;(the) assassination (of) (Archduke) Franz Ferdinand
World History;;Controversy over a section praising the practice of Socinianism in Geneva caused the resignation of one of the men involved in the publication of this work, which was later supplemented by Charles Panckoucke.  Its major illustrations are a frontispiece, showing a scene of dark clouds that recede to reveal sunlight as a thinly-cloaked women has her veil pulled away to symbolize the exposure of Truth, and a diagram with columns entitled Memory, Reason, and Imagination, showing a hierarchy of Human Knowledge.  That chart, based on the "Division of the Sciences" made by Bacon, is elucidated in the Preliminary Discourse to this work, which was originally commissioned for the Abbe Gua de Malves and originated out of efforts to translate a similarly-titled Ephraim Chambers work into French.  FTP, Jean d’Alembert co-edited what vast compendium of knowledge organized by Denis Diderot?;;Encyclopedia|Encyclopedie
World History;;Grenoble, Aix, and Rennes, were among the regions who did not acknowledge its passage until a year later, while Rouen took ten years to adopt it.  It promised citizens abroad safety from the Inquisition in the 56 section addendum that forms its "secret" articles, while its main section was comprised of roughly 95 articles.  The ability to hold government jobs and have public exercise of faith in limited areas were among the privileges offered in this document, which would be undermined decades later by the siege of La Rochelle and the Peace of Allais and finally revoked in the Edict of Fontainebleau.  FTP, identify this decree issued by Henry of Navarre and offering tolerance to Huguenots.;;(Edict) (of) Nantes
World History;;Before this encounter occurred, merchants such as Umichand and Petruse served as intermediaries in the negotiations with William Watts leading to the alliance that would bring victory.  The two opposing commanders had signed the Treaty of Alinagar months before this battle, but such factors as the increasing influence of Joseph Dupleix and the French on the losing ruler prompted Robert Orme to send a message from Fort St. George ordering the campaign of conquest that culminated in it.  The fighting occurred near a mango grove outside Murshidabad, with the outcome determined by the defection of Mir Jafar, whose reward was his replacing the loser, Sirij Ud Daula as Nawab.  FTP, identify this 1757 battle in which Robert Clive established British dominance over India.;;(Battle) (of) Plassey
World History;;Its policy decisions were overseen by a committee known as the Tuesday Meeting, although its main legislative body was the General Affairs Council.  Its primary political movement, the Concordia Society, offered propaganda about "great unity" and the "kingly way".  The expansion of it was ended by the Tangku Truce, signed after the province of Jehol had been annexed by this state, whose origins were questioned by the Lytton Commission, leading to a rift with the League of Nations.  Established by the efforts of the Kwantung Army, it installed a ceremonial leader who was christened Kang Teh and had its capital at Changchun.  FTP, identify this state that featured Pu Yi as a puppet ruler, a Japanese-run regime in Manchuria.;;Manchukuo
World History;;A fee of two million riksdaler was imposed as a result of the agreement, which was revised two decades later in the Treaty of Abo.  It was itself preceded by negotiations with Turkey in a treaty signed at Adrianople eight years earlier, as well as a treaty immediately before it that saw Saxony-Poland cede Stettin and Pomerania.  Andrei Osterman, who initially negotiated with Georg von Gortz, was promoted for his role in this treaty, which saw his nation gain such territories as Ingria, Karelia, and Livonia at the expense of the Hessian-born Frederick I, who had inherited the throne from Charles XII.  FTP, Peter the Great was the beneficiary of what 1721 treaty, which saw Russia gain many Swedish territories and ended the Great Northern War?;;(Treaty) (of) Nystad
World History;;This leader’s son was the victor at the Battle of Ghost Mountain, ending a civil war that had earlier caused this man to be brought to Port Dunford for an attempted restoration by Theophilus Shepstone.  In that war, he fought the Mandlakazi, who were led by his rival, Zibhebhu.  An earlier civil war saw him defeat and kill his brother at the Battle of the Tugela River, earning him the right to succeed his father, Umpanda.  In the months preceding his capture, his forces killed the heir Napoleon-Eugene Bonaparte, and he himself rejected demands for disarmament made by Henry Bartle Frere, leading to the war that would end with his defeat at Ulundi, but not before his army routed Lord Chelmsford’s at Isandlwana.  FTP, name this king who ruled the Zulu during their war with the British.;;Cetewayo|Cetshwayo
World History;;Misdes, Gillimas, and Gisco Strytanus were three of the five envoys sent on a desperate diplomatic mission to prevent this conflict, and it was ordered that at Lilybaeum, an offering of 300 hostages be prepared.  Soon after, Censorinus led a mass confiscation of weapons from his enemy’s capital, and joined Manilius in besieging it when its residents walled up and refused to abandon it.  The last stand of this war was made at the temple of Eshmoun, but by then the attacking Romans already had momentum from their successful siege of Byrsa.  Originating as a response to prior resistance to the encroachment of Massinissa, it was spurred on by Cato the Elder’s repeated claims that "Karthago delenda est".  FTP, identify this war in which Scipio Aemilianus oversaw the final destruction of Carthage.;;Third Punic War
World History;;The first man to hold the Vinerian professorship, he counted James Clitherow as his foremost contemporary biographer.  James Kent modeled his best-known book as a parallel to his work, while James Wilson was a staunch critic of this man, and challenged his assertion of the unquestioned sovereignty of the state in deciding the case that inspired the Eleventh Amendment, Chisholm v. Georgia.  Discussions of private and public wrongs comprise the last two of the four books that comprise his magnum opus, to which A Fragment on Government was Jeremy Bentham’s response.  A solicitor general to Queen Charlotte, the wife of George III, this was, FTP, which jurist who authored a set of Commentaries on the Laws of England?;;(William) Blackstone
World History;;Thirteen years after this agreement’s signing, the international commission it created was eliminated by the Montreux Convention.  The confluence of the Arda and Martisa rivers was set as a boundary, with ownership of the village of Tchorek-Keuy to be determined by majority ethnic makeup under this treaty, whose 22nd article relinquished claims to Cyrenaica and Tripolitania that had been obtained earlier in a treaty of the same name that had ended a war with Italy in 1912.  Great Britain acquired Cyprus, and though the Brussels line was established as a temporary border several months after this treaty, Britain would finish the task of setting a border with Iraq in the 1926 Treaty of Angora.  Eleftherios Venizelos was the primary Greek negotiator of, FTP, which 1923 treaty that supplanted the Treaty of Sevres and allowed Ataturk’s government to establish an independent republic in Turkey?;;(Treaty) (of) Lausanne
United States History;;The settlement of La Montagne was built for people who had defected from this group to become Christians, while an earlier attempt to convert them resulted in the death of St. Isaac Jogues.  The forging of a silver chain marked its entry into the Covenant Chain, an agreement which was later renegotiated by William Johnson and represented its first formal outside alliance.  This group, which later signed the Treaty of Canandaigua, had a constitution called the Great Binding Law, which was authored by one of its founders, Dekanawidah.  Increased from  five to six contingents after the Tuscaroras migrated up from North Carolina, this is, FTP, what union of upstate New York Indian tribes?;;Iroquois (Confederacy)|Iroquois (Nation)|Haudenosaunee
United States History;;The Frazier-Lemke Act was passed to aid victims, and the Shelterbelt Project was introduced to minimize the effects of this crisis, whose name was coined by reporter Robert Geiger the day after Black Sunday.  The Department of Commerce launched the Dalhart Control Project to examine its occurrence in Texas, and the FSA and SCS agencies were created to help relocate victims, many of whom faced "Bum Blockades" and border closings organized by the LAPD, and to teach them proper conservation techniques.  Hundreds of thousands migrated to California during this crisis, which was characterized by the appearance of "black blizzards".  FTP, identify this agrarian disaster of the 1930’s that resulted in layers of dirt being blown all over the Midwest.;;Dust Bowl
World History;;The five provisions of the treaty that created this region also governed the acquisition of horse and oxen and set penalties for acts of murder by the king’s thegns.  Bodies known as wapentakes typically oversaw local government in this area, which had a southwestern boundary extending from the point of intersection between the Ouse River and Watling Street and a northwestern boundary with Strathclyde.  Its territory south of the Humber River was soon reconquered with the aid of the Mercians by Edward the Elder, the son of the man who had created it by signing the Treaty of Wedmore after defeating Guthrum at the Battle of Edington.  FTP, identify this territory that Alfred the Great set aside as an area for autonomous Viking rule.;;Danelaw
World History;;The Forty Group was eventually absorbed into this movement, which was targeted in a raid called Operation Jock Scott.  One of their most successful attacks was an arms raid on the Naivasha Police Station, prompting a new offensive against them, Operation Anvil, to be initiated by George Erskine.  Henry Potter, the acting governor, was replaced by Evelyn Baring during the outbreak of this movement’s violence.  Eric Bowyer, who was killed with pangas, became the first white victim attributed to this group, whose leadership included a man called General China, as well as Field Marshall Dedan Kimathi.  Responsible for a massacre at Lari, this is, FTP, what militant group of 1950’s rebels opposing British colonialism in Kenya?;;Mau Mau
World History;;He immigrated to America under the name Count de Survilliers and spent his last years constructing the Point Breeze estate in Bordentown, New Jersey.  Along with Ludwig Cobenzl, he was a main negotiator of the Treaty of Luneville, and had earlier been an ambassador to Parma and Rome and a representative in the Council of Five Hundred.  He became a king for the first time after the ouster of Ferdinand IV, but was soon replaced by Joachim Murat.  However, when he ceded the throne of Naples in an agreement at Bayonne, he gained another nation’s crown, which he held until he and Jean-Baptiste Jourdan were forced to retreat to France after losing the Battle of Vitoria during the Peninsular War.  FTP, name this man who ruled as king of Spain from 1808-1813 and also happened to be Napoleon’s brother.;;Joseph Bonaparte|Joseph I
World History;;Two of this man’s collections of memoirs are Pointing the Way and Tides of Fortune.  His simultaneous firing of seven cabinet members was dubbed the second Night of the Long Knives, while an earlier dispute over his support for government spending caused Peter Thorneycroft, his Chancellor of the Exchequer, to resign in protest.  He negotiated a deal to purchase Polaris missiles from the U.S., the Nassau Agreement, causing France to veto his nation’s entry into the European Economic Community.  Acknowledging the decolonization of South Africa in his famous "Wind of Change" speech, this man was succeeded by Alec Douglas-Home after the exposure of his subordinate’s affair with Christine Keeler.  FTP, identify this British Prime Minister who resigned due to a scandal involving his Secretary of War, John Profumo.;;(Harold) MacMillan
United States History;;Robert MacDonald’s death in Norfolk from wounds suffered in this incident inspired public rallies and placed him with the three other Americans who died immediately in it.  John Strachen and Jerkin Ratford were two of the four men taken as prisoners in this encounter, which stemmed from George Cranfield Berkeley’s order to retrieve escapees from the Melampus and the Halifax.  Salusbury Pryce Humphreys initiated this conflict several miles off Cape Henry, demanding to examine the vessel commanded by the man who would go on to kill Stephen Decatur, James Barron.  Leading to the passage of the Embargo Act, this is, FTP, what incident in which the namesake British ship boarded and impressed several sailors from the other namesake American ship?;;Chesapeake(-)Leopard (Affair)|Leopard(-)Chesapeake (Affair)
World History;;This battle was prefaced by violent a reprisal campaign that included massacres at the Garonne and the Dordogne Rivers and was designed to punish a revolt by Munuza.  That campaign is described in the Futuh Misr, though the major source on the battle itself is a chronicle by a bishop of Beja named Isidore.  A preoccupation with gaining booty weighted down the losing forces, whose continuous cavalry charges could not break the well-disciplined phalanx of their enemies’ standing infantry.  The victor had been summoned by Eudes of Aquitaine, perhaps to protect to Basilica of St. Martin, and earned his nickname by crushing Abd-al-Rahman.  FTP, a Muslim invasion of Europe was halted by what 732 victory of Charles Martel?;;(Battle) (of) Tours|(Battle) (of) Poitiers
World History;;A meeting with the king at Teplitz preceded the August conferences that led to their adoption.  Article XIII of the Act of Confederation was also debated in the meetings that produced them, and one of their provisions established an "extraordinary" investigating committee at Mayence.  The enforcement of one provision forbidding the assembly of the Burschenschaften prompted Wilhelm von Humboldt to resign from politics.  Friedrich von Gentz was the secretary at the conference that drafted them, and another of their provisions prevented all documents under twenty pages in length from being printed without state approval.  FTP, Karl Sand’s murder of August von Kotzebue prompted Klemens von Metternich’s passage of what set of repressive laws?;;Carlsbad (Decrees)
United States History;;George Boutwell, Thomas Williams, and John Bingham were three of the seven men delegated to the managing committee for this event.  Henry Stanbery resigned from office to provide counsel for it, and the man that followed Stanbery in both his roles as counselor and as Attorney General was William Evarts.  Outlined in an 11 article document, it saw such men as William Fessenden of Maine and Lyman Trumbull of Connecticut break party ranks to oppose its goal.  However, it was ultimately Edmund Ross who cast the deciding vote in this case, which resulted from an attempt to install Lorenzo Thomas in place of Edwin Stanton in violation of the Tenure of Office Act.  FTP, identify this set of proceedings that sought to remove the 17th U.S. president from office.;;(U.S.) (Senate) impeachment (trial) (of) A(ndrew) Johnson
World History;;At this location, the dead were interred in complexes at Monasteriako Kephali, Isopata, and Zafer Papoura, while the most prominent structure was built facing Mount Jouctas.  This city and its surrounding region were seized by Metellus Creticus during Pompey’s campaign against pirates, and the early reports of William Stillman fueled American interest in its unearthing.  Discoveries near the Dictaean Cave prompted a second attempt to purchase land in Kefala from its Turkish owners; an inability to do so earlier had thwarted the efforts of its original discoverer, Minos Kalokairinos.  Instead, it was a curator of the Ashmolean Museum whose work near Herakleion unearthed the palace of its civilization’s namesake king.  FTP, identify this ancient city excavated by Sir Arthur Evans, a landmark of the Minoans.;;Knossos
World History;;One peasant revolt in this nation placed a swineherd named Ivailo on its throne, and other noteworthy rulers of that period included George I, who started the Terter Dynasty, and Kaloyan, who inherited the throne from the brothers Peter IV and Ivan I, who founded its second empire and the Asen Dynasty.  It was subjugated after the overthrow of Ivan Shishman, and later began to experience a national revival initiated by the monk Pasius.  Its unsuccessful April Uprising was the culmination of efforts by Vasil Levski and Stefan Stambulov, and by 1908, Prince Ferdinand would proclaim its independence.  Forced to cede some of its territory in the Treaty of Neuilly, this is, FTP, which Eastern European nation, whose last king was Simeon II and whose capital is located at Sofia?;;Bulgaria
World History;;This kingdom, which buried its leaders in a site now called the "Thousand Mounds" and may have had its roots in a lost dynasty called the Atyads, was involved in peace negotiations led by Syennis and Labynetus, which set its boundaries at the river Halys after its war with the kingdom under the son of Phraortes had ended abruptly due to an eclipse predicted by Thales of Miletus.  Herodotus described how its Heraclid dynasty was ended when the Candaules was murdered for shaming his wife and replaced by the father of Ardys, the latter of whom is often credited as the first king to mint coins.  Though it flourished under the rule of such Mermnad kings as Sadyattes and Alyattes II, it was brought down after the Battle of Thymbra.  FTP, name this ancient kingdom with a capital of Sardis, whose last leader, Croesus, was defeated by Cyrus the Great?;;Lydia|Lydian(s)
World History;;The drowning death of his colleague Diego Salcedo prompted his former ally Agueybana to lead a revolt of the Taino people against him and his settlements, including Caparra.  Another hostile native attack, an ambush by the Calusa, would cause his death by an arrow wound.  Appointed as governor of Higuey, he had previously served as a lieutenant under Nicolas de Ovando.  This conqueror of the islands of Borinquien and Bimini began his career by sailing on the second voyage of Christopher Columbus, but his most lasting achievement was his landing on a certain lush peninsula on Easter Sunday.  FTP, name this Spanish explorer who searched for the Fountain of Youth and ended up discovering Florida.;;(Juan) Ponce de Leon
World History;;The seizure of Thomas Shardelow’s house, with a mass burning of documents and a declaration by Robert Cave, marked its outbreak in Dartford.  Robert Belknap was subdued in his attempt to arrest its original inciters, Thomas Baker and his men, who refused Thomas Bampton’s attempts at collection.  It saw Tower Hill become an execution site as royal officials Robert Hales, John Legge, and Simon Sudbury were beheaded.  Thomas Farringdon, Abel Ker, and Jack Straw ranked among the leaders of this event, which saw violence break out in Essex and Kent over anger at the Statute of Labourers and a poll tax.  An army under Mayor William Walworth helped put down, FTP, what uprising against Richard II by a bunch of poor people under Wat Tyler?;;Peasants(’) (Revolt)
United States History;;In this piece, the enthusiasm of supporters is likened to that of the Crusaders under Peter the Hermit, and fears of the emergence of another Robespierre expressed by William Vilas are dismissed.  Statements by former Massachusetts Governor William Russell and Senator David Hill of New York are also addressed in this piece, which alludes to Thomas Hart Benton’s characterization of Andrew Jackson as a modern-day Cicero that exposed the Cataline-esque conspiracy of the national bank.  Quoting John Carlisle’s claim of a dichotomy between "‘the struggling masses’" and "‘the idle holders of capital,’" it decried an act passed in 1873 and was delivered in Chicago during the Democratic National Convention.  FTP, identify this address that warned against "pressing down upon the brow of labor this crown of thorns," a free silver advocacy speech delivered by William Jennings Bryan.;;Cross of Gold (Speech)
World History;;The U.S.’s role in this conflict consisted of providing an airlift in Operation Nickel Grass and restraining its allies from attacking the enemy’s Third Army, which found itself surrounded south of Bitter Lake.  Its occurrence was examined by the Agranat Commission, which blamed Eli Zeira for a lapse in intelligence and forced the resignation of David Elazar as Chief of Staff, and its aftermath also saw a series of protests led by Motti Ashenazi, a survivor of the surprise assault on the Bar Lev Line that opened it.  The first naval battle between missile boats, the Battle of Latakia, occurred during this war, which followed the War of Attrition and resulted in the creation of a UN buffer zone in the Golan Heights.  FTP, identify this Israeli-Arab war that started on a Jewish holiday.;;Yom Kippur (War)
World History;;Later additions to this group were headed by Ferdinand III of Tuscany and a man crowned as King Jerome.  Created under a forty article charter, it lost most of its members after the Treaty of Kalisch, and also saw its membership reduced by the partitioning of such states as Arenberg.  A Central Administration Committee was created in an attempt to replace it, while the body that oversaw it during its existence was a College of Kings headed by a Prince-Primate, Karl Theodor von Dalberg.  Its formation was the aftermath of territorial reorganization done under the Treaty of Pressburg and the relinquishment of Francis II’s title in exchange for the crown of Austria. FTP, the Holy Roman Empire was effectively replaced by what union of German states formed under Napoleon and named after a river?;;Confederation of the Rhine|Rheinbund|Confederation du Rhin
World History;;His appearance at a council at Etampes drew him into a conflict he would resolve by winning the allegiance of Victor IV to end the succession crisis that came with Honorius II’s death and Anacletus II’s becoming an antipope to Innocent II.  He also put down a church dispute with William X of Aquitaine and defended the legitimacy of Lothair II before beginning his series of sermons on the Canticle of Canticles.  He also wrote On the Love of God and the Book of Considerations, the latter of which was addressed to his student, Pope Eugenius III.  During the Council of Troyes, he set forth the rules for the Knights Templar, but made his most memorable statement in a sermon at Vezelay that inspired King Louis VII to begin a campaign to Damascus.  FTP, identify this French monk who preached the Second Crusade and brought the Cistercian order to prominence.;;Bernard of Clairvaux
World History;;After completing the Libri ad edictum, Ulpian succeeded Papinian as the head of this body.  The duo of Publius Aper and Quintus Ostorius Scapula served as its first formally appointed leaders, and Tacitus criticized Vitellius’ decision to expand it to its largest size and fill its roster with Germans.  After the assassination of Pertinax, Flavius Sulpicianus lost to Didius Julianus in an infamous auction they held to determine his successor.  In 31 AD, Tiberius named Quintus Sutorius Macro head of this body to replace its ambitious prefect, Sejanus, and it was this group who later engineer the assassination of Tiberius’ successor, Caligula.  FTP, name this elite force designed to serve as bodyguards to the Roman emperors.;;Praetorian Guard
World History;;John Thomand O’Brien was promoted to captain for leading a troop of mounted grenadiers in this battle, which also led to the rescue of Admiral Encalada from his forced island exile.  Although the eventual victors lost over 2,000 men in the alpine crossing preceding this encounter, their First Division under General Soler alone outnumbered enemy forces.  Although the morale generated by this victory would be dimmed briefly by a loss to General Osorio the following year at Cancha Rayada, it paved the way for Maipu, the final victory over the Royalists.  FTP, Spain’s Rafael Maroto was defeated by Jose de San Martin and Bernardo O’Higgins in what decisive 1817 battle near Santiago, Chile?;;(Battle) (of) Chacabuco
World History;;This statement decried the "adventurist conception of ‘exporting revolution’ and of ‘bringing happiness’ to other peoples" and argued that nations cannot pursue a "‘non-affiliated’ stand" and "self-determination," characterizing the status quo as a worldwide political struggle in which nobody can avoid taking sides.  The namesake response issued by Helmut Sonnenfeldt was criticized as spineless complacency to this statement, which was first announced to the Fifth Congress of the United Worker’s Party and repudiated two decades later in a statement by Gennadi Gerasimov that alluded to the song "My Way".  Issued as a response to Prague Spring and replaced by the Sinatra Doctrine, this is, FTP, what 1969 policy statement promising Soviet intervention in reforming socialist nations, named after the Soviet leader of the time?;;Brezhnev (Doctrine)
World History;;The father-son duo James and John Craggs were two of the men tried for their involvement in it, though both died before a ruling was delivered.  The claim that a law ought to be made to punish the men involved was issued by Robert Molesworth, who oversaw the prosecution of the Craggs, Charles Stanhope, and John Aislabie.  Briefly empowered by a contract in the Asiento agreement with Spain, it sprang from a proposal by George Caswall and John Blunt, the latter of whom produced its charter, and was formally founded by Robert Harley.  However, it would inspire the passage of an act requiring a royal charter for all joint stock companies with its spectacular collapse in 1720.  FTP, Robert Walpole came to power after a stock market crash driven by what sketchy trading company, known for its eponymous bubble?;;South Sea (Company)|South Sea (Bubble)
United States History;;Its penultimate plank was comprised of Jim Ramstad’s bill to implement an "honesty in evidence" policy and limited use of the "loser pays" system, the Common Sense Legal Reform Act.  The banning of proxy votes in committees, a required 3/5th majority for the passage of tax hikes, and an outside audit of the Congressional budget were among the eight reforms promised in addition to the list that contained the aforementioned act, the American Dream Restoration Act, and a Citizen Legislature Act mandating term limits in its set of ten bills to be pushed forth in the first hundred days of the next congress.  Citing a common bond with Abraham Lincoln, this document borrowed from Ronald Reagan’s 1985 State of the Union speech, and was prepared by Dick Armey.  FTP, the Republicans gained control of the 104th Congress on the strength of what broadly addressed pledge supported by Newt Gingrich?;;Contract with America
World History;;His first major titles consisted of the governorship of Dun and Villefranche, which were bestowed upon him by the Duke of Lorraine shortly after he fought at Ivry.  Hailing from Brabant, he fought for the Spanish under Alessandro Farnese and participated in the siege of Antwerp.  After a few years leading a campaign against the Turks under Rudolph II, he entered his most noteworthy post, where he would achieve victory at Stadtlohn and Lutter, respectively defeating Ernst von Manfeld and Christian IV of Denmark.  Also the victor at Wimpfen, he was defeated in the Battle of Breitenfeld months after he and Gottfried Pappenheim sacked the city of Magdeburg.  FTP, identify this commander of the Catholic League, who, with Wallenstein, was Gustavus Adolphus’ chief military rival in the Thirty Years’ War.;;(Johannes) (Tserclaes,) (Count) (of) Tilly
World History;;The aristocracy staved off a succession crisis in this period by exiling a priest of the Hosso sect named Dokyo, who had convinced the Empress Koken to abdicate in his favor.  The construction of the Todaiji Temple, which houses its namesake city’s Daibatsu statue, was overseen by the Emperor Shomu, who sought to establish a Buddhist state.  During this period, which saw the capital moved from its namesake city to Nagaoka ten years before its end, the Kojiki was compiled and much of Japan’s cultural and political reforms were modeled after those of the Tang Dynasty.  FTP, identify this Japanese historical period that lasted from 710 to 794 AD and fell between the Yamato and Heian periods.;;Nara (Period)
World History;;An attempt to provide this organization with a base was led by Sir Andrew Cunningham, was dubbed Operation Menace, and culminated with a failed naval attempt to seize Dakar.  Its liberation of Syria under Georges Catroux coincided with the formation of the CNF, its main governing body, in London.  The New Hebrides was one of the first territories to ally with this movement, which used the Cross of Lorraine as its distinguishing symbol.  Merged with eight groups, including the Secret Army under Charles Delestraint and the Combat group under Henry Frenay, to form the CNR at the urging of one of its leading members, Jean Moulin, this movement was first proposed in a famous BBC radio address made on June 18th, 1940.  FTP, identify this resistance movement against Nazi occupation of its nation, led by Charles de Gaulle.;;Free France|Free French|France Libre
World History;;When it was purchased from Duncan Campbell, it was known as the Bethia, and it became the subject of a search by Edward Edwards and the Pandora that led to the capture and hanging of Thomas Ellison, John Millward and Thomas Burkitt, while James Morrison and Peter Heywood were pardoned after their trials.  John Fryer wrote a narrative that described how nineteen men were cast off in its tiny launch and made an improbable 3,000 mile voyage from Tofoa to Timor.  Fryer served as master on this vessel, which, after a proposal by botanist Joseph Banks, was sent on a mission to collect breadfruit from Tahiti before being seized by first mate Fletcher Christian.  FTP, William Bligh captained what ship, the subject of an infamous mutiny?;;(HMS) Bounty
United States History;;During the violent actions that occurred at this location, locals used the drowned body of William Leeman as target practice.  Hayward Shepherd was the first man killed, and after the initial actions, Lewis Washington became one of the hostages taken and a train that was detained passing through on the B&O line alerted officials in Washington D.C.  The fire engine house that became known as "the instigator’s fort" was stormed by Israel Green at the orders of J.E.B. Stuart, and that ringleader, who had entered this area under the pseudonym Isaac Smith, received no help from his backers in the Secret Six in preventing his trial and eventual hanging.  FTP, identify this West Virginia weapons storehouse that was raided by John Brown.;;(United) (States) (Armory) (and) (Arsenal) (at) Harper’s Ferry
World History;;Its second part’s last chapter draws a dichotomy between east-west and north-south axes, while an earlier chapter in that part traces the development of edible almonds.  The failure of the Phaistos Disk to spawn advances in printing is examined in another chapter, which argues that "technology begets technology," and is entitled "Necessity’s Mother".  "Farmer Power" and "Apples or Indians" are other chapters in this work, whose author uses the "Anna Karenina Principle" to explain why zebras have never been domesticated.  In attempting to answer a question posed to the author from a New Guinea politician named Yali, this work explains the fall of Atahualpa and the Incas and discusses how the development of human society has been shaped by geography.  FTP, identify this book, whose title refers to three tools of conquest, a work by Jared Diamond.;;Guns, Germs, and Steel(:) (The) (Fates) (of) (Human) (Societies)
World History;;His rise to power was clinched by a filibuster that pressured the senile Maffeo Gherardo into pledging to support him.  He sanctioned the partitioning of Naples in the Secret Treaty of Granada and approved a divorce from Jane of Valois to one of its signatories, Louis XII, in order to win support from France after its earlier ruler, Charles VIII, had invaded Italy.  The defeat of his army at Soriano resulted in the murder of one of his sons, the Duke of Gandia, while another one employed Don Michelotto and savagely raped Caterina Sforza.  An affair with Vanozza Catanei produced those children by this man, who brokered the Treaty of Tordesillas and succeeded Innocent VIII.  FTP, identify this nephew of Calixtus III, a Spanish-born pope and father to Juan, Cesare and Lucrezia.;;Alexander VI|Rodrigo Borgia
World History;;Isaac Davis and John Young served as royal advisors in this kingdom, with Asa Thurston and the crew of the Thaddeus subsequently becoming the first major Christian missionaries to arrive there.  The civil war that unified it is described in the Memoirs of Henry Obookiah, and created a dynasty, which later had Gerrit Judd ruling under it as Prime Minister and ended when Bernice Bishop refused to take the throne.  Once ruled by an elected king, William Lunalilo, this land was the subject of reports by John Morgan and James Blount investigating whether John L. Stevens unjustly used royal attempts to revise the Bayonet Constitution as a pretext to overthrow its last queen.  FTP, Sanford Dole replaced Liliuokalani as leader of, what archipelago, which became America’s 50th state?;;Hawaii
United States History;;For their first terms, Walter Marion Chandler of New York and Roy Woodruff of Michigan were elected to Congress under the banner of this party, and Miles Poindexter spent two years as its only serving senator.  Its leader declared that "We stand at Armageddon" in the "Confession of Faith" speech given at its formative convention in Chicago, while funding for it was largely provided by Frank Munsey and George Perkins, both of whom were criticized for their corporate ties.  During the presidential campaign, John Schrank shot and wounded its candidate, who ran with Hiram Johnson and championed a "New Nationalism" that was overshadowed by the "New Freedom" platform of his victorious opponent.  FTP, identify this third party that finished second in the 1912 election under Theodore Roosevelt.;;Progressive (Party)|Bull Moose (Party)
World History;;The conflict centering on this group was ended by a treaty at Meaux, which followed a series of defeats they suffered under Constable Humbert of Beaujeau.  Earlier, one of their strongholds at Belcaire had been besieged by Amaury, the son of their opposition’s main leader, whose forces are depicted in a famous painting showing them being expelled from the walled city of Carcassonne.  The campaign of violence against them was inspired by the assassination of Peter de Castelnau; and while Peter II of Aragon joined Raymond VI of Tolouse in leading their defense, many nobles in the north rallied against them because of Innocent III’s promise of claims to their lands.  Though Phillip Augustus was too busy with the Bouvines War to join the fight against them, his son Louis VIII did, enlisting the aid of Simon de Montfort.  FTP, identify this group of French Cathars, the target of an early 13th Century crusade.;;Albigense(s)|Albigensian(s)
United States History;;In its final section, the author included tables of calculations made by Josiah Burchett and taken from John Entick’s Naval History to demonstrate the viability of building a strong navy.  Another section quotes from Giacinto Dragonetti’s On Virtue and Rewards, asks whether William the Conqueror’s heritage means Britain should be ruled by the French, and calls for a congress to be assembled to draft a charter for a government where "the law is king".  "Of The Origin and Design of Government in General" is the opening section of this work, which was later reprinted with an appendix responding to the concerns of Quaker representatives.  Benjamin Rush supplied the title for this tract, which was primarily a scathing critique of the British monarchy.  FTP, identify this Revolutionary War pamphlet by Thomas Paine.;;Common Sense
World History;;This event inspired an elegy that begins "My prime of youth is but a frost of cares," written by Chidiock Tichborne the eve before he was executed for his part in it.  Its discovery was aided by Thomas Phelippes’ skill at cryptography and the duplicity of Gilbert Gifford, who would arrange for seditious letters to be transported through barrels, but not before letting them be intercepted by the royal Secretary of State, Francis Walsingham.  Occurring after the Throckmorton and Ridolfi Plots, in which the same rival sovereign was involved, it forced the English ruler to acknowledge the threat of a Catholic coup posed by her cousin and have her tried for treason.  FTP, identify this plot for which Mary, Queen of Scots was beheaded, an attempt by its namesake to overthrow Elizabeth I.;;Babington (Plot)
World History;;Around age thirteen, this ruler founded a youth movement called the Monkey Brigade, and later in life, spearheaded movements for the large scale increase of milk and grain production, called the White and Green Revolutions, respectively.  Ordered by the High Court to step down due to electoral fraud, this leader declared a prolonged state of Emergency Rule, which may have caused the first electoral defeat of this ruler’s party in favor of the Janata.  Operation Bluestar, an attempt to combat a separatist movement under Jarnail Bindranwale with a raid on the Golden Temple, indirectly led to the death of this ruler, whose son Rajiv was killed by the Tamil Tigers.  FTP, identify this prime minister of India, who was assassinated by Sikhs and was the daughter of Jawaharlal Nehru.;;I(ndira) Gandhi
World History;;This event was galvanized by false rumors of the death of Martin Smid, and several days into it, the Public Against Violence was formed.  Undercover agents of the StB contributed to the outbreak of this event, which saw students presenting flowers to police during a demonstration commemorating the anniversary of Jan Opletal’s murder by the Nazis.  Featuring heavy participation from actors and artists, it was spearheaded by members of the Charter 77 movement, who helped found the Civic Forum.  Cardinal Frantisek Tomasek’s support of it contributed to the decisions of Milos Jakes and Gustav Husak to resign in, FTP, what bloodless coup that led to democratic elections and the presidency of Vaclav Havel in the Czechoslovakia?;;Velvet Revolution|Gentle Revolution
World History;;Some debate exists on whether ineptitude or treachery was behind Ibn al-Alkami’s dismissal of warnings preceding this event and whether the mathematician Nasir al-Din al-Tusi provided advice for or participated in it.  According to contemporary accounts, the surrounding waters turned black with the ink of desecrated books, and an invasion of Azerbaijan and an alliance with Baibars, a Mamluk leader, were forged as part of an effort to avenge this event led by its instigator’s brother, Berke.  Rolled up in a carpet to prevent his royal blood from touching the ground, the caliph al-Mustasim was trampled to death by horses during this event, which saw the massacre of hundreds of thousands of city inhabitants and forced the Abbasids to relocate their capital to Cairo.  FTP, Hulagu Khan led what 1258 rout of a city in present-day Iraq?;;(The) (sack(ing)|Siege|Battle of){1}? of Baghdad
United States History;;The work that introduced it borrows from Victor Hehn’s theory on the role of salt in determining European political geography and from Achille Loria’s emphasis on the study of colonialism as the key to European economic history.  Though it points out the contrast between French traders and English farmers, it argues that the Palatinate Germans and Scotch-Irish were able to form a "composite nationality" and examines the principles driving the American System of Henry Clay.  In discussing how the democracy of Jefferson evolved into the democracy of Jackson and how the "Carolina cowpens guided the Texas ranchers," this argument concludes that the first age of American history had come to a close with the 1890 Census.  Introduced in a paper read to the American Historical Association, this is, FTP, what thesis on the importance of American westward expansion, put forth by Frederick Jackson Turner?;;Frontier (Thesis)
World History;;In this region, thousands of natives jumped to their death to avoid capture in the Battle of Tepetchia, and in 1824, it became divided for nearly twenty years due to the secession of the Soconusco District.  The ruins of Palenque are located in this territory, which was the subject of a failed conquest attempt by Luis Marin before it was subjugated by Diego de Mazariegos.  An 1868 revolt here by the Tzotzil nearly resulted in the fall of its former capital, San Cristobal, and foreshadowed the rise of a movement that would participate in the San Andres Accords and would come under the leadership of Subcomandante Marcos, a mysterious masked figure.  FTP, identify this state in southern Mexico that serves as the base for the Zapatista rebels.;;Chiapas
World History;;This man hired Henry Kowalsky to spread favorable propaganda about him in the U.S. and undermine efforts by George Washington Williams, William Sheppard, and others to write exposes on his rule.  The subject of a failed assassination attempt by Gennaro Rubino, he saw the rise of his country’s Workers and Catholic parties lead to the establishment of universal suffrage in his nation, but was preoccupied with his abroad interests, which attracted the attention of the muckraker Edmund Morel and led to Britain’s dispatching of Roger Casement to investigate his abuses.  He established the Force Publique to enforce his management of the AIC, and sent Henry Stanley to explore and acquire colonies for him.  FTP, identify this 19th Century ruler, known more for his exploitation of the Congo than for being king of Belgium.;;Leopold II
World History;;In the first one, the author lamented the loss of such territories as Methone and Potidaea and issued a statement of ways and means describing the finances of raising a legitimate army and navy.  A subsequent one decries the cession of Orchomenus and Coronea as a ruse, contains a potshot against Aeschines near its end, rebukes the crushing of the Phocians in the Third Sacred War, and was issued seven years later in Lyciscus two years after the Peace of Philocrates.  Didymos wrote commentaries on these works and their author, who is also known for his three Olynthiacs.  This series also had its name appropriated by a later set of fourteen critiques against a member of the Second Triumvirate.  FTP, identify these orations delivered by Demosthenes in opposition of a Macedonian king.;;(Demosthenes’) Philippics
World History;;The nations that fought them later squared off at Camperdown, but the last major one of these conflicts was limited to a skirmish off Dogger Bank and resulted in the cession of Negapatnam.  The second of them opened with the Battle of Lowestoft, featured the prolonged Four Days Battle, and ended when one nation’s navy was obliterated by Michiel de Ruyter while docked at the River Medway.  The Battle of Texel that decided the third one saw a fatal duel between rival commanders Edward Spragge and Corneilus Tromp.  That third war was ended by the Treaty of Westminster and was prefaced by one nation’s forging an alliance with France when the Secret Treaty of Dover was signed by Charles II.  FTP, identify this series of four naval wars whose namesake combatants were Britain and the Netherlands.;;Anglo(-)Dutch (Wars)|Engelse Oorlogen
United States History;;Later members of this group were split over support Ambrose Thompson’s failed proposal to establish a coal mining operation at Chiriqui.  It sent Samuel Mills and Ebenezer Burgess on a preliminary expedition, the success of which earned it a $100,000 grant from Congress, where Representative Charles Fenton Mercer was a vocal supporter.  It sent Eli Ayres and Robert Stockton to carry out land purchases, and agents who led its early endeavors included Lott Carey, Jehudi Ashmun, and Samuel Bacon.  Founded by the Presbyterian preacher Robert Finley, this organization made its first president a nephew of George Washington named Bushrod, and used the Elizabeth to transport its first contingent across the Atlantic.  FTP, identify this 19th Century organization that promoted relocating free blacks in such areas as Liberia.;;A(merican) C(olonization) S(ociety)
World History;;The 51st article of the main one contained a provision prohibiting the use of a term meaning "barbarian" in official documents.  In addition, it allowed for the unrestricted recreational travel of passport holders and Christian missionaries, and was made more severe in a conference two years later that raised the total indemnity fee to sixteen million taels of silver and forced the cession of Kowloon.  Signed in the same year as the Treaty of Aigun with Russia, it forced the opening of its namesake port and ten others, including Hankou and Danshui.  Lord James Elgin and Prince Kung signed the primary one of these treaties, which concluded the war that had began as a reaction to the arrest of sailors on the Arrow.  FTP, identify this set of 1858 treaties that ended the Second Opium War.;;(Treaties) (of) Tientsin
World History;;Particularly tragic scenes from it include the killing of the Ribbing children as they pleaded for mercy and the drowning of all the monks in Nydala Abbey.  Hemming Gadh also died as a result of this event, which inspired a future ruler’s trek to Dalarna to organize a rebellion against the king who initiated it.  Occurring several months after the Battle of Bogesund, this event was presided over by Erik Trolle and also saw the corpse of Sten Sture dug up and burned.  The beheading of the bishops of Strangnas and Skara marked its beginning, and as names were drawn from a list of proscriptions, 94 were killed at the order of Christian II.  FTP, identify this sanguinely-named 1520 massacre that occurred in the capital of Sweden.;;Stockholm Bloodbath
World History;;During a confrontation at Rathmore, Alexander Will became the first of them to die in the line of duty.  After the office of Inspector General Joseph Byrne authorized the creation of this group, a series of recruitment ads for it solicited war veterans to "face a rough and dangerous task".  The first man they formally executed was Kevin Barry, whom they captured on the same day as their sack of Balbriggan.  Frank Crozier headed their counterparts, the Auxiliary division, which was actually responsible for their attributed massacre at Croke Park.  Feared for their violent reprisal attacks, such as the aforementioned "Bloody Sunday," this is FTP, what British police force that clashed with Irish revolutionaries and was nicknamed after the two main colors of its uniforms?;;Black and Tans
World History;;The last notable member of this family, Andrew, sold his title to Charles the Affable, though both he and his predecessor Thomas, held that title in name only and merely ruled over the province of Morea.  Before the ouster of this family, the biggest threat to its reign came when a civil war started by the Hesychasts allowed John Cantacuzenus to seize power.  Its founder came to power by murdering George Mouzalon to become regent, then overthrowing John IV to topple the Laskaris Dynasty.  Four more rulers named John came from this dynasty, which also featured three rulers named Andronicus and was the longest ruling dynasty of its empire.  FTP, identify this house founded by Michael VIII, which was also the last ruling family of the Byzantine Empire.;;Paleologus|Paleologi|Paleologan
World History;;One anecdote about this man tells how the pieces of his body were gathered up and buried by Dedee Bazile after he was ambushed and killed at the Red Bridge.  After heading the Conference of Arcahaie, he ordered Catherine Flon to create the flag he adopted by sewing together red and blue strips from a previously desecrated flag.  Also the builder of an eponymous capital city at Marchand, he had his greatest military success at Vertieres, where he helped defeat Rochambeau.  His harsh rule and massacres of white settlers prompted the rebellion that led to his death and split his nation into a southern republic led by Alexandre Petion and a northern kingdom under Henri Christophe.  FTP, identify this former slave who had himself crowned emperor of Haiti as Jacques I.;;(Jean-Jacques) Dessalines
United States History;;In one of its last major assemblies, this organization’s presidential and vice presidential offices were abolished and replaced by a group of three secretaries: Robert Pardun, Mike Spiegel, and Carl Davidson; that convention also passed its famous "women’s resolution".  Its ninth and final national convention resulted in a rift between the PL-WSA and the RYM under Bernadine Dohrn, causing its collapse.  Endeavors by this group included a campaigning drive called the Political Education Project and an urban renewal program called the Economic Research and Action Project.  Todd Gitlin and Robert Haber were two presidents of this organization, which published the New Left Notes.  FTP, identify this group that released Tom Hayden’s Port Huron Statement and promoted activism at college campuses.;;S(tudents) (for) (a) D(emocratic) S(ociety)
World History;;This event was brought to international attention by an April 28th eyewitness article in the London Times written by George Steer.  The Astra weapons factory was one of the major landmarks to survive it, as were the local Assembly House, a 600 year old oak tree, and the stated target, a short road over the Mundaca River called the Renteria Bridge.  Junker Ju 52’s were responsible for the main attack, while He 51’s and Bf 109’s gunned down fleeing citizens during the course of this event, believed to have been ordered by Emilio Mola and carried out under the direction of Hugo Sperrle and Wolfram von Richtofen, the leaders of the Condor Legion.  FTP, identify this 1937 German assault on a Basque town, immortalized by a Picasso painting.;;(bombing) (of) Guernica
World History;;One of the victor’s leading allies died commanding the "Red Devils," whose charge opened this battle.  The death of the senior member of the Council of Five Regents a year earlier touched off the war surrounding it, in which the victor formed the Army of the East to challenge the alliance of the other three remaining regents.  The capture of Konosu and Gifu Castles preceded this battle, whose decisive moment saw a staged round of arquebus fire signal a force of turncoats to attack the army of their initial ally Otani instead.  That secret pact with Kobayakawa enabled the victor to defeat Ishida’s coalition and fill the power vacuum created by the death of Hideyoshi.  FTP, identify this battle, at which victory allowed Ieyasu to establish the Tokugawa Shogunate.;;(Battle) (of) Sekigahara
World History;;In its terms, this agreement promised Stagirus, Acanthus, Scolus, and others the right to neutrality, and declared that one of the two sides receive Panactum back and in return free all its prisoners and relent on its siege of Scione.  It was to be upheld a term of fifty years, though four cities refused to accept it, including Elis.  Put into effect once Pleistolas and Alcaeus began their terms of office, this treaty had its negotiations initiated by Pleistonax after Brasidas and Cleon were both killed in the battle of Amphipolis and upheld the independence of Delphi and the oracle in its terms.  Broken several years later due to the intrigues of Corinth and Argos, this is, FTP, which peace that temporarily ended the Peloponnesian War and was named for the Athenian general who co-chaired the negotiations?;;(Peace) (of) Nicias
World History;;Many of the participants drank themselves to death while pillaging the distillery of Thomas Langdale on a day nicknamed Black Wednesday.  The national bank was twice attacked and successfully defended, but William Murray and John Fielding saw their houses burned to the ground, while Clerkenwell, the King’s Bench Fleet, and Newgate were also burned down, and their prisoners released.  Participants wore blue ribbons in their hats in imitation of its initiator, who was defended in court by Thomas Erskine and acquitted.  John Wilkes led the army sent by George III to put down this uprising, which grew out of a march on the House of Commons in protest of the Relief Act.  FTP, identify this series of anti-Catholic riots in London named after the lord who led them.;;Gordon (Riots)
United States History;;Henry Wallace wrote the foreword to Joseph M. Jones’ critique of this piece of legislation and its repercussions, while a study of its passage as an example of pressure by private interest groups was done by EE Schattschneider.  The Dunning Act was Canada’s pre-emptive response to the signing of this bill, whose passage was protested to the president in a statement by Clair Wilcox of Swarthmore, which was backed by the signatures of 1028 professors.  The later Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act softened the effects of this bill, which itself had raised rates past the already high levels of the Fordney-McCumber Tariff.  FTP, Herbert Hoover signed what highly protectionist 1930 tariff, which is believed to have made the Great Depression worse?;;Hawley(-)Smoot (Tariff)|Smoot(-)Hawley Tariff
World History;;Provisions organizing this group into a 30,000 strong army and promising a select share of them nobility grants in exchange for loyalty to the Commonwealth were included in the Treaty of Hadiach, which they refused to honor, even though their leader Vyhovsky had signed it.  They had earlier pledged allegiance to a rival nation with the Pereyaslev Agreement, which ended their uprising under Bohdan Chmielnicki and organized them into an autonomous hetmanate.  A forced resettlement near the Kuban River marked the end of the dominance of the aforementioned Zaporozhian ones, while another group of them went on a series of revolts under Stenka Razin and were based around the Don River.  FTP, Yevgeny Pugachev also led a rebellion by what group of primarily Ukrainian peasants often remembered as cavalrymen?;;Cossack(s)
World History;;Before being forced into exile in Kraljevica after a coup in this city, Autonomy Party leader Riccardo Zanella briefly served as its elected president after the Christmas of Blood saw the earlier occupying attempts of the Arditi thwarted.  Alceste de Ambris co-authored a short-lived constitution for it based on a system of ten guilds, the Carta del Carnaro, though this effort was opposed by Prime Minister Giovanni Giolitti, who allowed it to be set up as a free state under the terms of the first Treaty of Rapallo.  Later, its eastern section, Susak, would be ceded to Yugoslavia in the 1924 Treaty of Rome by Benito Mussolini.  FTP, identify this Croatian port city now known as Rijeka, the center of a 1919 effort to establish a fascist regime under Gabriele D’Annunzio.;;Fiume
United States History;;According to Gerald McFarland’s history of them, members of this faction were heavily college educated and were courted by Joseph Keppler’s satirical magazine, Puck.  E.L. Godkin’s ties also gave them the support of The Evening Post and The Nation.  Dorman Eaton was another member of this group, which had been alienated by the scandal involving the Little Rock and Fort Smith Railroads, and was denounced in a tirade by the Reverend Samuel Burchard.  Organized by George William Curtis and bearing a name coined by Charles Dana, they rallied behind a candidate that was mocked with the line, "Ma, ma, where’s my pa"? and were accused of supporting "Rum, Romanism, and rebellion".  FTP, identify this group of breakaway Republicans that supported Grover Cleveland in the election of 1884.;;Mugwump(s)
World History;;One woman linked to it used a bandage to choke herself to death while being carried in a covered chair after having her limbs broken on the rack, while another, named Paulina, was physically prevented from joining her husband in suicide.  The commoner Nymphidus was elevated to consul after it, while Turpilianus was given a triumph, and an honorary name was given to Milichus, a former slave of Scaevinus, who exposed it.  The aforementioned torture victim Epicharis emerged as a tragic heroine for not betraying those involved in this scandal, which is discussed in Book XV of the Annals, though such authors as Lucan, Petronius, and Seneca were forced to commit suicide after its discovery.  FTP, identify this conspiracy against Nero, whose namesake was Gaius Calpurnius.;;Piso(’s) (Conspiracy)|Pisonian (Conspiracy)
World History;;The castle housing his first wife was once besieged unsuccessfully by Milo de Montlhery, and this first marriage, to Lucienne de Rochefort, would later be annulled by Pope Paschal II.  Aimon Vairevache, Thomas de Marle, and Hugh de Puiset were among the numerous renegade vassals whom he crushed in his efforts to assert royal power and win support from both the populace and the church.  The biggest threat to his kingdom came from an invasion by Holy Roman Emperor Henry V, who had allied with his traditional enemy, Henry I of England.  Towards the end of the reign of this son of Phillip I, the construction of the Basilica of St. Denis began, and Abbot Suger went on to write a fawning biography of this king.  FTP, identify this man who preceded Louis VII as king of France and was commonly nicknamed "The Fat".;;Louis VI
World History;;A revolt in this nation placed Bacha-i-Saqao in power for nine months under the name Habibullah after the brothers Inayatullah and Amanullah were forced to abdicate.  That revolt ended the reign of this nation’s Barakzay Dynasty, which in turn had supplanted its founding Sadozay Dynasty.  An attempt to install Shah Shoja as king and oust the first Barakzay ruler, Dost Muhammad, led to the first of its three wars with Britain, with the last ending with the Treaty of Rawalpindi and the granting of this nation’s independence.  Its modern borders established by the Durand Agreement, it first became a nation under Ahmad Shah Durrani, the victor at the Third Battle of Panipat.  FTP, identify this Asian nation that faced a Soviet invasion in 1978 and later became home to the Taliban.;;Afghanistan
World History;;One member established himself as a Bordeaux winemaker by purchasing Chateau Brane-Mouton, and partially renaming it after his surname.  The architect George Devey frequently worked on projects for them, such as the estate at Tring Park for Nathan, who was the first one named to the House of Lords.  Francis I of Austria bestowed the title of baron on James, Calmann, and the other three members of the second generation.  The founder worked as an antiques dealer before serving under William IX of Hesse-Kassel and changed his last name from Bauer to honor the logo of his business in Frankfurt, a red shield.  FTP, identify this family brought to prominence by Mayer Amschel, a European banking house known for its wealth and philanthropy towards Jewish interests.;;Rothschild (Family)
United States History;;Attempts to provide compensation for this event can be seen in a recent series of proposed House bills named after Samuel Moody.  Most of the men involved in this event, whose date is memorialized in the annual Valor Day, were gathered outside the town of Mariveles and randomly directed, under the watch of "buzzard squads," to a waiting fleet of boxcars to provide passage from San Fernando to Capas.  Its survivors often ended up being placed on "Hell Ships" or taken to Canabatuan after arriving at Camp O’Donnell.  General Homma was tried and executed for overseeing this event, which he initiated after receiving a mass surrender of Edward King’s combined American and Filipino forces.  FTP, identify this brutal Japanese-led forced march of POW’s that began in 1942 at the eponymous Philippine peninsula.;;Baatan (Death) (March)
World History;;Two answers required: One sprang from an attempt to reunite at Apolda by crossing the narrow Kosen pass.  Despite an inept relocation to Dornburg that saw the future Charles XIV entirely miss any encounters, a decisive victory was achieved after a charge by Morand towards the Lissbach Stream and the deaths of Schmettau and Brunswick.  The other sprang from a planned march to Gera, was preceded days earlier by Lannes’ victory at Saalfeld, broke out suddenly due to an unauthorized charge from Michel Ney, whose side was still able to crush the forces of Prince Hohenlohe on the strength of numbers.  FTP, the Prussian army was routed by Louis Davout and Napoleon in what pair of 1806 battles fought on the same day near the respective German towns?;;(Battles) (of) Jena (and) Auerstadt|(Battle) (of) Auerstadt (and) Jena
World History;;The parties involved in its creation rejected proposals for a hereditary senate and a fourth branch of government to govern morality in the style of the Athenian Areopagus.  Its stability began to crumble when one state, which had been freed by the Admirable Campaign, rallied under the Cosiata movement, a call for autonomy led by Jose Paez.  Another blow came in the form of a military coup that created a short-lived dictatorship under Rafael Urdaneta, after which Jose Caicedo helped create a revised constitution for New Grenada.  Francisco Zea and Francisco Santander were vice presidents of this entity, which was organized by congresses at Cucuta and Angostura.  FTP, identify this failed republic that included Ecuador and Venezuela and was created under Simon Bolivar.;;Gran Colombia|Great(er) Colombia
World History;;This work describes how both the Pythagoraeans and Muhammad likened brutish people to animals and endorses Asaph the Prophet’s saying that "‘You are all Gods.’"  Quoting Hermes Trismegistus and Abdala the Saracen in its opening, this work explains that, during the Creation, God made Adam and his progeny free from the bounds of Nature in its author’s attempt to place humankind on the Great Chain of Being.  Celebrating the "supreme generosity of God the Father," it declares that everyone "is granted to have whatever he chooses, to be whatever he wills".  A papal condemnation against this author by Innocent VIII prevented the debate in Rome for which this work was composed as an introduction, and during which its author would have defended his 900 Theses.  FTP, name this humanist manifesto, an exhortation on man’s unlimited potential by Giovanni Pico della Mirandola.;;(Oration) on the Dignity of Man|De Hominis Dignitate (Oratio)
United States History;;In the years after these events, a sum of 600 pounds was set aside as compensation for affected families, Ann Putnam issued a public apology for her role in them, and Joseph Green took over as minister.  A critical letter from Thomas Brattle helped lead to their end, as the Oyer and Terminer bodies were disbanded by William Phips shortly afterwards.  William Stoughton presided over these events, which stemmed from observations made by the William Griggs, the doctor who examined Betty Paris and Abigail Williams.  Resulting in the "pressing" death of Giles Corey under a pile of rocks, and the hanging of such citizens as Rebecca Nurse, Sarah Good, and Bridget Bishop, these were, FTP, what series of court proceedings that saw members of a Massachusetts town accuse each other of evil sorcery?;;Salem Witch Trials
World History;;This ruler saw feuding between his tutors Sihabedden and Zaganos and the regent Candarli Halil when he was placed on the throne at age twelve, though he would be sent back to Manisa as his father returned from a victory at the Battle of Varna to rule a second time.  Gentile Bellini was commissioned to paint a portrait of this leader, who introduced a dual law code to oversee his lands.  He suppressed the last challenge to his expansion by defeating Uzun Hasan at Bashkent, and had Stjepan Tomasevich beheaded to complete his take-over of Bosnia.  This ruler also fought the forces of Skanderbeg and Vlad the Impaler, and was called both "The Conqueror" and "The Roman Caesar" after his greatest triumph.  FTP, name this Ottoman emperor who oversaw the final conquest of Constantinople.;;Mehmed II|Mehmet II|Muhammad II
World History;;A plebiscite organized to oppose it was coordinated with the raising of the voting age to 24 to block the influence of the emotionally-charged youth vote, but resulted in accusations of the violation of the Berchtesgaden Agreement and manufactured claims of rioting as a pretext to call for military occupiers by radio.  The forced resignation of chief of staff Alfred Jansa and foreign minister Constantin von Neurath foreshadowed its occurrence, and despite the attempts of the Fatherland Front to maintain power, President Wilhelm Miklas was driven from power after his coerced appointment of a new chancellor, Arthur Seyss-Inquart.  FTP, name this event that saw Kurt Schusnigg driven from power and the Ostmark province created, the 1938 annexation of Austria by the Nazis.;;Anschluss
United States History;;Although fortifications were made at Acote’s Hill in preparation for this conflict, Lieutenant John Pitman’s gunshot through a keyhole that wounded George Bardeen in the leg caused its only real casualty.  Jedediah Sprague owned the tavern in Chepachet that served as a base for its participants, who had earlier launched unsuccessful raid on the Cranston Street Arsenal.  Angered by the passage of the Algerine Law and the provisions of the 1663 charter, it stemmed from a dichotomy between the rival Freeman’s and People’s Constitutions, and opposed the rule of the minority-elected governor, Samuel King.  Though John Tyler abstained from taking sides, the issues it raised were resolved by the federal government in Luther v. Borden.  FTP, identify this 1842 rebellion over voting rights in Rhode Island.;;Dorr(’s) (Rebellion)
World History;;A history of this organization’s formation and actions can be found in the Anglia Redivia by Joshua Sprigge.  Henry Vane proposed legislation to prevent government entanglements with this group, whose creation had its roots in a letter to the Committee of Both Kingdoms by William Waller, who urged the need for unification.  The aforementioned law would later force Robert Devereux and Edward Montagu to resign from it upon being elected as legislators, and was called the Self-Denying Ordinance.  Philip Skippon was the first appointed officer of this 22,000 man organization, whose members wore red coats as uniforms and made their victorious fighting debut at Naseby.  Thomas Fairfax was the Lord General of, FTP, what Parliament-sponsored military force, whose cavalry division was headed by Oliver Cromwell?;;New Model Army