Literature;;Max Reinhardt revived interest in this play in 1910, and Jean Cocteau collaborated with Stravinsky to create an operatic version of it. Dodds argued that this work illustrates the "desperate insecurity of the human condition" instead of justifying the gods in an essay titled "on misunderstanding" this play. This play begins with people carrying tree branches wrapped in wool, and ends with the Chorus asserting that "mortal man must always look to his ending". The protagonist resolves to die on Mount Cithaeron after talking with a shepherd, and accuses Tiresias of plotting against him with Creon. In this play, the protagonist's desire to know the source of a pestilence afflicting his city eventually leads him to gouge out his eyes. FTP, name this tragedy about a ruler of Thebes who learns that he killed Laius and married his mother, written by Sophocles.;;Oedipus Rex|Oedipus the King|Oedipus Tyrranus|King Oedipus;;
Literature;;One of this author's poems states that "Justice with unbandaged eyes / Would be oppression in disguise". This author wrote about an artist who "sang of life serenely sweet" but is ignored by the world, which "turned to praise / a jingle in a broken tongue," in "The Poet". A shriveled tree bough narrates a lynching performed by a judge who "wore a mask of black" and a doctor "one of white" in this author's poem "The Haunted Oak". He also wrote about an object that "grins and lies" which "hides our cheeks and shades our eyes" in his poem "We Wear the Mask". The family of Berry Hamilton morally disintegrates after moving to the North in his unbearably depressing naturalistic novel The Sport of the Gods, and his poetry collections include Majors and Minors, Lyrics of Lowly Life, and Oak and Ivy. FTP, name this author born in Dayton, Ohio whose poem "Sympathy" laments "I know why the caged bird sings".;;(Paul) (Laurence) Dunbar;;
Literature;;The Canterbury Festival commissioned this man's Thor, With Angels and his last play was A Ringing of Bells. This author adapted two Jean Giraudoux works as Duel of Angels and Tiger at the Gates, and adapted Anouilh's Invitation to the Castle as Ring Around the Moon. In one of his works, Meadows does not join Corporal Adams or Peter Dale in dreaming; other characters created by this author of A Phoenix Too Frequent include Edgar, son of the Duke of Altair. This author's seasonal quartet includes The Dark is Light Enough and Venus Observes, as well as a play where Jennet Jourdemayne runs off with Thomas Mendip. For 10 points, name this playwright of The Lady's Not for Burning.;;(Christopher) Fry;;
Literature;;In this work, Judy O'Grady thinks it would be hilarious to have sex on the protagonist's grave. At the end of its second scene, circus music plays while the stage revolves increasingly faster. In its third scene, six couples sing "My country 'tis of thee / Sweet land of liberty" after shouting a racist diatribe against foreigners and minorities; those couples later serve on the jury that condemns the protagonist to death. In its final scene, the protagonist is reincarnated by Lieutenant Charles, having earlier met Mr. Shrdlu in the Elysian Fields, where he kisses and then abandons Daisy Diana Dorothea Devore. In this play's second scene, the protagonist kills his boss after learning that he will be replaced by the title object. FTP, name this expressionist play about Mr. Zero, by Elmer Rice.;;(The) Adding Machine;;
Literature;;Attached to this work's first draft was a handbook by its protagonist which included the maxim "Decency is Indecency's Conspiracy of Silence". Act I's set includes a bust of Herbert Spencer and a portrait of Richard Cobden, while in Act III, three scarlet-tied social democrats fight an anarchist over who's sold out to the bourgeoisie. In Act IV, Hector Malone Sr. consents to his son's marriage to Violet before he realizes he has bought stock in a company operated by the brigand Mendoza, who met the protagonist after he fled the Roebucks and Whitefields to the Sierra Nevadas. There, Anna learns from her stabbed lover that she can posthumously restore her youth, and also that there is no physical separation of Heaven and Hell from her visiting statue-father. John Tanner dreams himself as Don Juan in, for 10 points, what play by George Bernard Shaw?;;Man and Superman;;
Literature;;The first scene of this play contrasts the fortunes of Jack Handicraft and Nick Marrabone with the poverty of Jack Generous. One character exposes Father Foigard as the Irishman Mackshane in order to learn about a secret plan to conceal Colonel Bellair in a lady's chamber. This play begins with the arrival of the protagonists to Litchfield Inn, whose landlord Will Boniface is in league with the bandits Gibbet, Hounslow, and Bageshot. In a subplot, Sir Charles Freeman attempts to free his sister from her obnoxious husband Sullen. The protagonist fakes a coma in order to be taken in by Lady Bountiful, enabling him to seduce Dorinda. FTP, name this play about the machinations of Archer and Aimwell, written by George Farquhar.;;(The) Beaux' Stratagem;;
Literature;;In the chapter she narrates, she wishes her relationship with her mother to be "a hot thing," while in the last chapter she is associated with "the loneliness that roams". Fascinated by two turtles having sex in the pond, this character is later given a complete pair of ice skates to skate there, making her sister jealous. She appears finally as an ice-pick-bearing, naked pregnant woman, having earlier asked her father figure to "touch her on the inside part"; that father figure knows she's left when he sees Here Boy sleeping peacefully at the pump. Though she, Howard, and Buglar had escaped Kentucky eighteen years earlier without trouble, the approach of the schoolteacher who'd taken over Sweet Home caused her mother to beat her to death in a shed. For 10 points, name this character who haunts 124 Bluestone Road, the sister of Denver, daughter of Sethe, and title character of a novel by Toni Morrison.;;Beloved;;
Literature;;This novel is narrated for brief periods by Dr. Alfred Goodricke, Jane Gould, Hester Pinhorn, and a tombstone.  Though the main legal duels are undertaken by Merriman and Gilmore, its protagonist is saved from a trap set for him at Knowlesbury by the local lawyer Mr. Dawson, who lets him slip away to the Old Welmingham church to retrieve birth records that are consumed in a fire, along with the primary villain. The latter's assistant is defeated when it is revealed he is a renegade member of The Brotherhood; earlier, that villain steals Marian Halcombe's diary and swaps Anne Catherick with Laura Fairlie. For 10 points, name this novel in which Walter Hartright fights Percival Glyde and Count Fosco over a pale asylum escapee, by Wilkie Collins.;;(The) Woman in White;;
Literature;;This book contains a story by Shusi Itama about an executioner who hands his head to the Mikado after failing to kill Jijiji Ri. It distinguishes the Hebrew from the "Shebrew," which it terms "an altogether superior creation," and describes the fables of "Little Red Riding Hood and the Sugar Trust" and "Ali Baba and the Forty Rockefellers" in its section about "Lore". This book illustrates the central concepts with poems by such figures as Xamba Q. Dar, Jamrach Holobom, and Father Gassalasca Jape. Originally titled The Cynic's Word Book, it calls realism "the art of depicting nature as it is seen by toads," refers to birth as "the first and direst of all disasters," and defines a bore as "a person who talks when you wish him to listen". FTP, name this work of satiric lexicography by Ambrose Bierce.;;(The) Devil's Dictionary;;
Literature;;In La Disparition, Anton Vowl translates this poem into French without using the letter E. An essay about the creation of this poem begins by citing Dickens' assertion that Godwin wrote Caleb Williams backwards, and describes its author's choice of a refrain with a long O and an R. Its structure was inspired by Elizabeth Barrett Browning's poem "Lady Geraldine's Courtship," and James Russell Lowell's "Fable for Critics" mentions this poem before comparing its author to Barnaby Rudge. Its narrator thinks the air is "perfumed by an unseen censer / Swung by seraphim," and later asks if another character will inhabit "the distant Aidenn". Its narrator then wonders if the title character was sent as "respite and nepenthe," terming it "Prophet!…thing of evil," and asking it to return to "Night's Plutonian Shore". However, it "never flitting, still is sitting, still is sitting / on the pallid bust of Pallas just above my chamber door". For 10 points, name this poem about a creature that quoths "Nevermore".;;("The) Raven(");;
Literature;;This author collected mystical ballads, supposedly translated from Illyrian by Hyacinthe Maglanowich, in La Guzla. One of his works is set in Lithuania and features a half-bear, half-man who likes flesh, while another sees Alphonse place a wedding ring on the finger of a bronze statue of Venus owned by Monsieur de Peyrehorade. Besides Lokis and La Venus d'Ille, this author wrote a historical novel set during the St. Bartholomew's Day Massacre. His collection Mosaic includes a story about a Corsican youth killed by his father, "Mateo Falcone," though he is more famous for a novella in which Thomas and Lydia Nevil meet Orsa della Rebbia, Colomba. He also created a character whose attraction to Lucas causes her to be stabbed by Don Jose. For 10 points, name this author of Carmen.;;(Prosper) M(é|e){1}?rim(é|e){1}?e;;
Literature;;This work's action occurs while Betty is "otherwise employed," and involves the dead dog Tripsy, whose skin is used for "night gloves" and whose puppy provides urine for one of the main characters. Two epic similes compare its central act to fat dropping onto cinders and Pandora opening her box. Unlike the narrator, who delights in seeing "Such order from confusion sprung," its protagonist is cursed by the goddess Vengeance to associate his experience with all women, recalling from petticoats and perfume his realization that "Celia, Celia, Celia shits!" For 10 points, name this poem about Strephon's investigation in to the title secret place, by Jonathan Swift.;;("The) Lady's Dressing Room(");;
Literature;;A fellow traveler notes that this character has the same name as an architect who designed a cathedral that subsequently collapsed, as described in Karamzin's History of the Russian State. He is characterized as the "poor knight" from a Pushkin poem by Aglaia, and after seeing Holbein's The Body of the Dead Christ in the Tomb, he claims that it might cause some to lose their faith. His ideological foils include the civil servant Lebedev, who tells a gruesome story about cannibalism, as well as the dying adolescent Ippolit. At the beginning of the novel in which he appears, this character returns from a sanitarium that had been paid for by Pavlishchev to cure his Sydenham's chorea. Despite Nastasya Filippovna' feelings for this man, she runs off with Rogozhin, who is jealous of this character's magnanimity. For 10 points, name this simple minded yet idealistic title character of Dostoyevsky's The Idiot.;;(Prince) (Lyov) (Nikolayevich) Myshkin;;
Literature;;This character is first described as having one green and one black eye, though later the green one becomes gold. He owns a poodle-headed cane and a diamond-studded horseshoe, the latter of which he gives as a present after a party in Apt. 50 that features an orchestra led by Strauss, a simian jazz band, and the assassination of Baron Maigel. Before telling Levi Matvei that he's stupid for wanting to cover the world's shadows in light, he severs the head of Bengalsky at the Variety Theater, performing magic under the name Professor Woland with the help of the assassin Azazello, the choirmaster Korovyov, and the giant cat Behemoth. For 10 points, name this man who finally leaves Moscow with the Master and Margarita, an underworld figure from Christian myth.;;Satan|(The) Devil;;
Literature;;Jack Lynch edits the annual devoted to the "Age of" this writer. One of his essays claims men should be jarred from procrastination by the "certainty that life cannot be long, and the probability that it will be much shorter than nature allows," while another ridicules the education of critic Dick Minim. His major critical work claims "Lycidas" had "no art, for there is nothing new," begins with an essay on Richard Savage, and popularized the term "metaphysical poetry" in a section on Cowley. He commented that "Nothing odd will do long" regarding Tristram Shandy and wrote that Shakespeare lacked a "moral purpose," because he was a "poet of nature," in the Preface to his 1765 edition of the Bard's work. For 10 points, name this author of the Lives of the English Poets, who compiled a Dictionary of the English Language.;;(Samuel) Johnson;;
Literature;;This book incorporates an essay by Mahmoud Mahmoud Mohammed about the character of Lady Macbeth as formal exercise in English composition. In a chapter titled "The Best Use of Leisure Time," the author states that Egyptians spend their time in cafes, tracking women with their eyes. While finishing his first term at Oxford, the narrator describes attending "the usual college board to give an account of myself". Its original edition was significantly revised by its author in 1957, including the removal of most of the passages related to the poet Laura Riding, this book's "spiritual and intellectual midwife". The narrator describes being unable to fire his gun at the Battle of Loos, and also recounts meeting Siegfried Sassoon after joining the First Battalion during World War I. Written by the author of I, Claudius, for 10 points, name this autobiographical memoir by Robert Graves.;;Good-bye to All That;;
Literature;;In one of this man's short stories, a hand mirror catches a reflection of a reflection of the moon on the water, and in another, a man on his way to a dance recital recalls two dead birds. He also wrote a story about an encounter between Fujio and Kiyoko, "The Grasshopper and the Cricket," as well as a novella where Eguchi enters a brothel in which old men sleep with drugged virgins. In another of his short stories, a hiker joins a group of performers and meets the Dancing Girl of Izu, while in one of his novels, Fusako leaves her husband and Kikuko has an abortion, which shocks Shingo. He also wrote a novel where Yoko nurses the dying Yukio, who was possibly once engaged to Komako, a geisha who once loved Shimamura. For 10 points, name this author of The Sound of the Mountain and Snow Country.;;Kawabata (Yasunari);;
Literature;;This character compares life to a flowering almond tree which, blooming too early, dies at the first cold wind, and his last action is to imprison a soldier who helped free him. His first soliloquy describes a silver serpent among flowers as well as a feathered posy and asks "What law... can decree... that man alone should never know the joys... God grants a fish, a bird, a beast, a brook"? His "inborn rage" is first quieted when he meets a Russian girl disguised as a male who gives him a sword. After being twice drugged and manhandling Astolfo for touching his future wife Estrella, he is chained to a tower guarded by the general Clotaldo at the behest of his father. After a revolution, this lover of Rosaura convinces his father Basilio to relinquish the throne of Poland. For 10 points, name this prince who claims "this life is but a dream" in a play by Pedro Calderón de la Barca.;;Segismundo|Sigismund;;
Literature;;As a boy, one character in this work tries to make his voice sound like his friend Timmy Croucher. Later, Percy Smith discusses Darwin aboard the Leviathan, and wonders along with Horace Borrodaile why one of the main characters never moves from a red velvet couch. In this novel, the Prince Rupert drop symbolizes exploded belief systems, and Mr. Jeffris kills a native during a journey to Bellingen. The narrator is a great-grandson of one of the title characters, and claims "In order that I exist, two gamblers, one Obsessive, the other Complusive, must meet". Those two gamblers bet on whether a glass church can be constructed and transported by Easter Sunday to a settlement in New South Wales. For 10 points, name this novel about an Anglican reverend and a glass-factory heiress, by Peter Carey.;;Oscar and Lucinda;;
Literature;;In one of this author's poems, Coplas explains to Estribillo that the blackness of the Virgin Mary does not make he impure. This author wrote poems praising "divine Lysis" and the Marquis of Mancera, and criticized people who call women lewd while paying for prostitutes in "Foolish Men". A play by this author begins with a loa where Religion saves the life of a native woman named America, before Human Nature allegorizes Christ as Narcissus. In addition to The Divine Narcissus, this author defended female learning in a response to a letter written under the pseudonym "Filotea". Octavio Paz wrote about this author in The Traps of Faith, and this author depicted the soul rising toward knowledge in a dream in her poem Primero Sueno. FTP, name this 17th century Mexican poet who spent most of her life in a convent.;;(Sor) Juana (Ines) (de) (la) (Cruz)|(Juana) Ramirez (de) (Asbaje);;
Literature;;Bertrand meets an injured man outside his family's plantation in this author's short story "A Wizard from Gettysburg," and Little Mrs. Sommers finds "herself the unexpected possessor of fifteen dollars" in this author's short story "A Pair of Silk Stockings". The recently widowed Therese won't accept divorced businessman David Hosmer's marriage proposal in this author's novel At Fault. In the title story of a collection by this author, the 28-year old Telesphore, in need of a wife, goes down to Marksville on Sunday night. Another of her short stories describes Louise Mallard, who realizes that she is "free, free, free!" after hearing a report about the death of her husband Brently. In addition to "A Night in Acadie" and "The Story of an Hour," she wrote a novel about a "hadsome" wife who has an affair with Alcee Arobin after she meets a young man on vacation in Grand Isle, Robert LeBrun. FTP, name this author of a novel ending with the suicide of Edna Pontellier, The Awakening.;;(Kate) Chopin|(Katherine) O'Flaherty;;
Literature;;This author wrote about meeting Eloy Santos, who is saved from dying of syphilis when a doctor applies a blowtorch to his heart, in "The House of Changes," the first section of a book translated as this author's "inferno". This founder of the short-lived literary magazine Lunes de Revolucion translated Dubliners into Spanish and wrote a screenplay adaptation of Under the Volcano. This author of the essay "Cinema or Sardine" used vignettes to capture the history of his country in A View of Dawn in the Tropics. Another of his novels contains parodies of Jose Lezama Lima and Alejo Carpentier in a section titled "The Death of Trotsky," and is narrated by Codac, Arsenio Cué, Silvestri, and Bustrofedon, who inhabit cabarets in Havana. FTP, name this Cuban author of Three Trapped Tigers.;;(Guillermo) Cabrera Infante;;
Literature;;One of his poems repeats "Brave Lodging for one, Brave Lodging for one" about the title character's grave, "Gabriel Grub's Song". One of his stories is partially based on the Clayton Rail accident and describes bells foretelling death that only the title character can hear, in "The Signal-Man," while his travels through the Great Lakes and to Eastern State Penitentiary are recorded in American Notes for General Circulation. A wine-merchant rejects Vendale's proposal to marry his niece Marguerite in Louis Lequel's dramatic adaptation of a work he co-wrote with Wilkie Collins, No Thoroughfare, and Elizabeth Gaskell's North and South was serialized in his magazine Household Worlds. In one of his novels, Daniel Doyce sells an invention to liberate Arthur Clennam from Marshalsea Prison, enabling Arthur to marry Amy Dorrit. For 10 points, name this author of Sketches by Boz, who wrote about a clock-stopping jilted spinster who mindfucks Estelle and Pip in Great Expectations.;;(Charles) Dickens;;
Literature;;One work in this form begins "Come Phoebus! With your loosely floating hair," and is addressed to Sulpicia; Delia and Nemesis feature in other works in this genre by Tibullus. Another work in this form claims "No joy in corrupting Venus to a blind motion" and is from the four books of them, many addressed to Cynthia, by Propertius. Catullus crosses the sea to bring his brother gifts in one of these works, which also is the form of his final poem on Lesbia's sparrow. They traditionally used rhyming couplets of dactylic hexameter and pentameter, as in most works of Ovid, though that meter is not often used in more recent ones like "When Lilacs Last in the Dooryard Bloom'd" and "In Memoriam AHH". For 10 points, name this sorrowful Latin poetic genre.;;elegy;;
Literature;;In one of this author's novels, Chege's son loves the preacher Joshua's daughter and abandons the Kameno community. Thoni commits suicide thanks to rejection by her husband Remi, the title character, in one of this author's plays, while in another, Gathoni's pregnancy prevents her marriage to John Muhuuni. Another of his novels is set in the Republic of Aburiria, where Kamiti and Nyawira pretend to be the title sorcerer. In addition to The Black Hermit and Wizard of the Crow, this author is better known for a novel in which Mugo betrays the revolutionary Kihika, as well as another in which Munira burns down Wanja's brothel. FTP, name this Kenyan author of A Grain of Wheat and Petals of Blood.;;Ngugi (wa) (Thiong'o);;
Literature;;One character in this work recalls a time when he made suits for Billy Ekstine and when Count Basie cancelled Cincinnati and Cleveland to wait ten days for a suit made by him. That character's boss, who had helped Shealey's nephew get a job, also employs Youngblood, whose attempt to buy a house for Rena is misconstrued as an affair with Peaches by Turnbo. Another character kills his girlfriend Susan McKnight before this play starts and is released midway through. Later, Becker tries to prevent the city from destroying the street and his business and dies at the mill; however, his son Booster remains proud despite their earlier fight. Set at a cab station in 1977, FTP, identify this member of the Pittsburgh Cycle, a play by August Wilson.;;Jitney;;
Literature;;This man wrote short stories about Queen Isabella having sex with Christopher Columbus and the childhood of the jester Yorick. One of his works features the Water Genie Iff and Rashid, the Ocean of Notions. In one of his novels, the legend of a white panther is used to explain Sufiya Zenobia's tendency to decapitate men who raped her, and that novel takes place in the city of Q. His protagonists include the son of Aurora da Gama named Moraes as well as the dollmaker Malik Solanka, while his newest work features a half-Florentine relative of Akbar. This author of Fury and The Moor's Last Sigh also wrote a novel whose title group includes characters with elephant ears, lethal knees, and a young man with a massive nose, all of whom were born at the stroke of India's independence. For 10 points, name this creator of Gibreel Farishta and Saleem Sinai, the author of Midnight's Children.;;(Salman) Rushdie;;
Literature;;A 2002 play by Peter Gill is named for an author of one of these works. Tony Harrison adapted some of them meta-narratively into a three-part work which relies most on one that introduced a namesake thirteen-line stanza with a CDDDC end-rhyme. In one of them, a drunk wife is so busy gossiping that her sons must carry her from a flood, and in another, Mak and Gill steal a sheep, then claim it's their own baby. The "Coventry Carol" comes from an incomplete one, while one of the four most complete is thought to have been performed in "N Town". Attributed to authors like the York Realist and Wakefield Master, who wrote The Second Shepherd's Play, and usually performed by the guilds on Corpus Christi Day, for 10 points, name these medieval works that enact Bible stories.;;mystery (play) (cycles);;
Literature;;According to Anne Banfield, this poet was the first writer to develop free indirect discourse. His self-written epitaph noted he divided time into two parts, one for idling and one for sleep. He updated versions of the stories of Adonis and of Cupid and Psyche, and wrote verse tales like "Joconde" and "The Ephesian Matron" that adapted fabliaux for a contemporary audience. He's most famous for concluding "Our destiny is met in the paths we take to avoid it," "It's a double pleasure to deceive the deceiver," and "the opinion of the strongest is always the best" in poems concerning a horoscope, the cock and the fox, and the wolf and the lamb. For 10 points, name this 17th-century French fabulist.;;(Jean) (de) (la) Fontaine;;
Literature;;His first play was a one act comedy about Leander and Damon, and he uncharacteristically used rhymed Alexandrines for his play about the Swiss patriot Samuel Henzi. One of his title characters is poisoned by Marwood and is loved by Mellefont. Another title character of this man is a prince who kills himself so his father can extract a full ransom from King Aridäus. This author of Philotas also wrote a play in which the Marquis Marinelli's plotting leads to the murder of Count Appiani so that Hettore Gonzaga can marry the daughter of Odoardo. In another of this man's works, the Templar Conrad von Stauffen finds out he is a Saracen prince after saving Recha from a fire in the title character's house. For 10 points, name this author of Emilia Galotti and Nathan the Wise.;;(Gotthold) (Ephraim) Lessing;;
Literature;;This author wrote "they step together / glory and pain" in a sestina which laments "I am dying alive / in death I live". This poet described Thrasyllus, who asks to be restored to madness after believing he owned all the ships of Piraeus, in "On the World's Chaos and Confusion". His sonnets include "The dawn rises lovely but ill-fated and full of grief," "Dear gentle soul, you who departed this life so soon," an epitaph for his shipmate Pero Moniz, and a farewell to the Tagus River. Another of his poems was translated into English by William Julius Mickle, and includes an episode where Adamastor attacks travelers rounding the Cape of Good Hope. FTP, name this 16th century author of an epic poem about Vasco da Gama's voyage to India, the Portuguese poet of The Lusiads.;;(Luis) (Vaz) (de) Camões|(Luis) (Vaz) (de) Camoens;;
Literature;;A major plot device in this novel was inspired by an editorial written by Alexander Manly. During its climax, Josh Green plunges a knife into the body of his father's killer, George McBane. Another character dresses up as his grandfather's servant to win a cakewalk, and later uses the same disguise to kill Polly Ochiltree, resulting in Sandy nearly being lynched. At the end of this novel, Dr. Miller agrees to operate on the son of Major Carteret after a white mob burns down his hospital and kills his son during a riot that enables the Democratic Party to regain political control of Wellington. FTP, name this novel by Charles Chesnutt that fictionalizes the 1898 Wilmington race riot.;;(The) Marrow of Tradition;;
Literature;;The central institution in this work was founded by a wealthy widow who "had been an admirer of Garibaldi before she died". In one scene, a character is "coaxed to sip tea well sugared" after being accosted by a man during Easter holiday "joyfully exposing himself beside the Water of Leith". Later, this novel reveals that Joyce Hammond was killed in Spain, where her brother was fighting the fascists. The title character has a brief affair with Gordon Lowther rather than the one-armed Teddy Lloyd. Miss Mackay hates this novella's title character, who is revealed to be the inspiration of The Transfiguration of the Commonplace, written by her former student Sister Helena. The title character teaches Rose, Mary, Monica, Eunice, Jenny, and Sandy at the Marcia Blaine School for Girls. For 10 points, name this book about an Edinburgh school teacher by Muriel Spark.;;(The) Prime of Miss Jean Brodie;;
Literature;;This work's author asserted that it "was written for a generation which knew nothing or next to nothing of war, and hardly dreamed of it". The narrator comforts a character with a poem beginning "What endless melodies were poured / As sad as earth, as sweet as heaven," in its final section, "The Long Path". Earlier, the protagonist laments the sad state of civilization due to those who call Norridge "Norwich" and Cincinnati "Cincinnatah". The author calls facts "the brute beasts of the intellectual domain" and claims that all practical wisdom is an extension of 2 + 2 = 4. Beginning with the line "I was going to say, when I was interrupted," many of this work's sections are directed to the divinity student, the schoolmistress, and the landlady, other members of the boarding-house. Serially printed in the Atlantic Monthly, and subtitled "Every man his own Boswell," for 10 points, name this collection of essays by Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr.;;(The) Autocrat of the Breakfast Table;;
Literature;;This work translates lines from Théophile Gautier's "Le Château du Souvenir" as "Daphne with her thighs in bark / Stretches toward me her leafy hands" in a section that mentions the Lady Valentine. One character asks that his beloved's graces may be preserved "As roses might, in magic amber laid" in the "Envoi," and the image of amber is echoed in this poem's final section, "Medallion". That protagonist desires to wring "lilies from the acorn" and talks of "Burnes-Jones cartons" and the Pre-Raphaelites in "Yeux Glauques". This poem caricatures Ford Madox Ford and Arnold Bennet as "The Stylist" and Mr. Nixon respectively, and the epitaph of this poem's title figure reads "Here drifted / an hedonist". The title character's "true Penelope was Flaubert," and wishes to "resuscitate the dead art / Of poetry". For 10 points, name this poem about the "life and contacts" of the title aspiring artist, written by Ezra Pound.;;(")Hugh Selwyn Mauberley(");;
Literature;;In 2005, scholars discovered a poem by Sappho comparing herself to this figure. Another poem of this name asks "Why should a man desire in any way" to "vary from the kindly race of men" or "pass beyond the goal of ordinance"?, and quotes "The gods themselves cannot recall their gifts". That poem's narrator recalls how "strong Hours indignant""beat him down and marr'd and wasted him," and describes how he used to watch his lover's "dim curls kindle into sunny rings". The speaker calls himself "a gray shadow, once a man," and begs "release me, and restore me to the ground". Its first stanza observes that "the woods decay, the woods decay and fall," and laments "Me only cruel immortality / Consumes" even though "after many a summer dies the swan". FTP, name this Alfred Lord Tennyson poem about a lover of Eos who became a grasshopper after being granted eternal life without eternal youth.;;(")Tithonus(");;
Literature;;This poem asserts that "Gertrude, lily, and Luther, are two of a town". It describes "lovely-asunder starlight" and compares God's mercy to the way a "sloe/ Will, mouthed to flesh-burst,/ Gush!", and claims Christ will make sure its subjects will "bathe in his fall-gold mercies". It ends by noting "Our heart's charity's hearth's fire, our thoughts's chivalry's throng's Lord" and claims that the Catholic church shall rise in England once again. In this poem, "O Christ, Christ, come quickly" is the cry of the "lioness," the tallest of the people memorialized. It is dedicated to the "happy memory" of a group exiled by the Falk laws of Bismarck's kulturkampf, five Franciscan nuns who died in a blizzard near the mouth of the Thames. For 10 points, name this long poem about the title vessel run aground, written by Gerard Manley Hopkins.;;("The) Wreck of the Deutschland(");;
Literature;;Sir William of this name wrote the essays "On Thoughts" and "Upon the Cure of the Gout". Inspired by Chaucer, Alexander Pope wrote a poem about one "of fame," and to mock Sister Perpetua's warning against boys, two sisters in a Flannery O'Connor story call each other by this name. As a last name, it describes Lucy and her mother Charlotte, the creations of Susanna Rowson, as well as Maria, the ill-fated Lowood teacher who befriends Jane Eyre. As a first name, it identifies a woman raped with a corncob by the mentally-challenged Popeye in Sanctuary, Ms. Drake. This word more usually refers to the kind of structure Mizoguchi burns down in a novel about one "of the Golden Pavilion". For 10 points, give this word that also names the collection of George Herbert's poetry or any place of worship.;;Temple;;
Literature;;In this work's first section, one character pokes a hole in another's logic by comparing him to a man who attempts to keep out of the rain by moving from tree to tree. In one scene, characters from Lameth and Nicron discuss the problem of overpopulation. The title problem first arises from a five dollar bet over highballs between Lupov and Adell, and later between Jerrodd and Jerroddine. The story concludes by quoting Genesis 1:3 after Dee Sub Wun becomes amused at Zee Prime's interest in violating the Second Law of Thermodynamics. Ending with the Cosmic AC reversing the entropy of the universe, FTP, name this short story by Isaac Asimov about the title query.;;("The) Last Question(");;
Literature;;In this work, an old man who says "the first rule for the wife should be fear" and "the feminine sex must be dominated" is derisively called a Domostroy. Later, another character argues that doctors pervert the young by teaching them the rules of hygiene, and compares the number of abortions to the amount of people killed by the Inquisition. The protagonist argues that men only admire the outer form of women, and states that people are motivated by animal passions instead of love. The protagonist tells the narrator that he and his wife enlisted their children Lise and Basile as allies, and recounts returning to his house at midnight from a session of the Zemstvo, where he kills his wife with a dagger upon seeing her with the musician Troukhatchevsky. Narrated by Pozdnyshev, FTP, name this novella set on a train, a work by Leo Tolstoy named for a composition by Beethoven.;;("The) Kreutzer Sonata(");;
Literature;;One of this author's works opens at "one of Johnny Chipman's parties at the Harlequin club," where Ricky French and the other guests debate the trouble with art, which they conclude is women. In addition to Young People's Pride, this author wrote a play where the voice of Schiller responds, "It does to me" when asked what difference it makes to "Burn a few books, burn a hundred, or burn a million". This author's poems include Western Star and Litany for Dictatorships, and he adapted a passage from Whitman's Specimen Days for a poem about Union Troops after a defeat. A priest travels to the "Place of the Gods" his post-apocalyptic short story "By the Waters of Babylon," and in another of his short stories, the title character defends Jabez Stone from Mr. Scratch. For 10 points, name this author of John Brown's Body and "The Devil and Daniel Webster".;;(Stephen) (Vincent) Benet;;
Literature;;In one of this author's plays, Palmer and Wheadle swindle Sir Nicholas Cully out of one thousand pounds, and the valet of Sir Frederick Frollick, Dufoy, is locked in a tub after eating large amounts of opium. In another, Ariana and Gatty are pursued by Freeman and Courtall, who exposes the schemes of the amorous Lady Cockwood. Besides The Comical Revenge and She Would if She Could, this author used John Wilmot as a model for a character who leaves Mrs. Loveit and Bellinda for Harriet. That play contrasts Dorimant with the ridiculous affectations of Sir Fopling Flutter. FTP, name this Restoration dramatist of The Man of Mode.;;(George) Etherege;;
Literature;;Their land includes the fountain Artacia. They work as much by night as day, allowing their members to make a dual living as shepherd and cattle-herder in their city of Telepylus, which was founded by Lamos and sits on top of steep cliffs overlooking a channel. At first seeing only smoke in their land, the protagonist sends out a search party, which is directed to their king, Antiphates, by his daughter. However, when that party instead encounters this race's violent queen, they retreat, and though the cove-hidden flagship remains safe from them, the rest of the fleet is destroyed by their hurled rocks. Visited between Aeolus and Circe, for 10 points, name this race of man-eating giants from the Odyssey.;;(the) Laestrygonians;;
Literature;;One character in this play compares an unshowered person to "a corpse waiting to be washed," and later asks "Is the number 846 possible or necessary"? After its premiere, Harold Hobson was the only critic to give this play a positive review, and its author stated that this play contained the most important line he ever wrote, "don't let them tell you what to do!" This play ends with one character proclaiming "I was the belle of the ball," and includes a scene where the protagonist screams after two characters shout questions like "Why do you pick your nose"? and "Why did the chicken cross the road"? at him. During the title event, the protagonist steps on a drum and attempts to rape Lulu after his glasses are broken by McCann. Set at a seaside boarding house run by Petey and Meg Boles, FTP, name this play about the abduction of Stanley Webber, by Harold Pinter.;;(The) Birthday Party;;
Literature;;One character in this play observes "women like that part which, like the lamprey, / hath never a bone in 't". In its fourth act, eight madmen dance in front of the protagonist after she is shown wax likenesses of the corpses of her husband and children. The protagonist refuses to marry Count Malateste, and is later banished by dumb-show at the Shrine of Our Lady of Loretto. In its final act, Julia dies after kissing a poisoned book, and Bosola kills a man driven to lycanthropy by the death of the title character, who is strangled by executioners for having children with Antonio. FTP, name this play about a noblewoman destroyed by her brothers Ferdinand and the Cardinal, a revenge tragedy by John Webster.;;(The) (Tragedy) (of) (the) Duchess of Malfi;;
Literature;;The second excursus of Dialectic of Enlightenment analyzes one of this author's characters as the embodiment of the Enlightenment project. In the work where that character appears, she has an extended dialogue with Pope Pius VI, whom she calls by his secular name, "Braschi". Pierre Klossowski analyzed this author's role as a "philosopher-villain" in a book titled "My Neighbor this man". An essay by Simone de Beauvoir states that he was genuinely afraid of people; that essay's title asks if we must burn this author. This author of the novella Flourville and Courval considered the problem of evil in Dialogue between a Priest and a Dying Man. "Therese" narrates the story of Madam de Lorsange's sister, who is eventually struck by a "blazing thunderbolt," in a novel by this author subtitled "The Misfortunes of Virtue". For 10 points, name this French author of Philosophy in the Bedroom, The 120 Days of Sodom, and Justine.;;(Marquis) (Donatien) (Alphonse) (Francois) (de) Sade;;
Literature;;This author drew from the Mercedarian account for his short story about the life of San Pedro Armengol, "El Bandolero". This author of the historical drama Antona Garcia also wrote a short story about the virtues of the dowager Queen Dona Maria, "Prudence in the Woman". He wrote a play about a woman whose only brother, Antonio is murdered by her lover Felipe, Marta la Piadosa, and collected critical essays such as "Labyrinth" and "Pleasure and Profit" in Cigarrales de Toledo. Another of his plays, named for a rake who pulls the beard of a statue of the murdered Don Gonzalo and invites it to dinner, was adapted into a Mozart opera. For 10 points, name this disciple of Lope de Vega, the Spanish playwright whose The Libertine of Seville and the Stone Guest formed the basis for Don Giovanni.;;(Tirso) (de) Molina|(Fray) (Gabriel) Tellez;;
Literature;;After the incident in the Village Hall, the narrator of this work claims to see an Indian chief, the goddess Diana, and a Bavarian broom-girl in the forest outside Paul Dudley's ancient stone wall. In this novel, the story of Fauntleroy is told by a character who seeks to obtain money from the narrator's daughter to build a school for criminals. In its fourteenth chapter, the main characters discuss the place of women after journeying to Eliot's pulpit, and in its first chapter, the narrator talks with Old Moodie before setting out for the title location. After a magician's show in which Westervelt produces a Veiled Lady, Hollingsworth reveals his love for Priscilla, leading to the death of her half-sister Zenobia. Narrated by Miles Coverdale, FTP, name this Nathaniel Hawthorne novel based on Brook Farm.;;(The) Blithedale Romance;;
Literature;;Unable to sleep the night before traveling to Turin, the main character of this work composes a poem about the charming younger brother of Count Duvarney titled "The Piedmontese". Its epigraph begins, "Fate sits on these dark battlements, and frowns," and near the end of this novel, Ludovico reveals that mysterious noises were really caused by hidden pirates. Opening in 1584 on the "pleasant banks of Garonne" in Gascony, the protagonist is pursued by Morano, and is frightened by a nameless horror behind a black veil. Eventually, the main character is reunited with Valancourt after being imprisoned in Count Montoni's title fortress. After reading this novel, Catherine Morland suspects General Tilney of murdering his wife in Northanger Abbey. For 10 points, name this Gothic novel about Emily St. Aubert, written by Ann Radcliffe.;;(The) Mysteries of Udolpho;;
Literature;;In the second chapter of this work, the narrator discusses people who regained sight with cataract operations, while in its last chapter, the narrator follows a bee and contemplates the waters of separation. Also featuring a goldfish named Ellery Channing, in another chapter, the narrator claims "This is it, I think, this is it, right now, the present" while petting a beagle puppy and sipping coffee at a gas station. It opens with the narrator's notion that she has been "painted with roses" while sleeping naked in front of a window the cat uses. Featuring chapters like "Heaven and Earth in Jest," it takes place at the title location in the Blue Ridge Mountains of Virginia. For 10 points, name this theological treatise of nature writing, written by Annie Dillard.;;Pilgrim at Tinker Creek;;
Literature;;In a letter to the author of this poem, its addressee wrote that he would have publicly published it had he not been apprehensive about incurring the "imputation of Vanity". One stanza describes a goddess whose "golden hair" is bound by "olive and laurel," while another implores the muses to listen while the author's pen "relates" how armies pour "through a thousand gates". Its fourth stanza deplores "whoever dares disgrace / the land of freedom's heaven-defended race" after stating that "Gallic powers Columbia's fury found". Originally published two years after its author's collection Poems on Various Subjects, Religious and Moral, this poem ends by encouraging the title figure to "proceed, great chief, with virtue at thy side," and wishing him "a crown, a mansion, a throne that shine". FTP, name this poem by Phillis Wheatley addressed to America's first president.;;(")To His Excellency, George Washington(");;
Literature;;After drinking from an enchanted spring, this character is imprisoned by the giant Orgoglio. He nearly commits suicide after Trevisan brings him to the dwelling of Despair, and defeats his main antagonist upon being revived with ointment from the Tree of Life. At the House of Pride, this character is challenged to a fight by Sans joy, and after Archimago tricks him into doubting the chastity of his companion, this character abandons her for Fidessa, who is really Duessa in disguise. He learns that he will be canonized as Saint George at the House of Holiness before slaying a dragon terrorizing the homeland of Una. FTP, identify this character named for the emblem on his armor and his shield, the hero of the first book of The Faerie Queene.;;(the) Redcrosse (Knight);;
Literature;;One speaker in this work, Johannes-Baptista Bottinius, apologies for the length of his oration, and wishes that his audience included the Pope. Hyacinthus de Archangelis mocks him in the next section, and the narrator of final section's notes that one of the title objects is responsible for "Linking our England to his Italy". Another speaker, Guiseppe Caponsacchi, is upset that he has to "tell over twice what I, the first time, told six months ago," since he was not believed initially. In the section "Tertium Quid," the author claims, "Law's a machine from which to please the mob". Focusing on events which transpired on Februrary 22, 1698, the source of this work comes from a collection of legal documents the author found in the Piazza San Lorenzo about a case involving Count Guido Franceschini. For 10 points, name this 21,000-line narrative poem about a real-life murder trial told from different perspectives, by Robert Browning.;;(The) Ring and the Book;;
Literature;;The protagonist of this work spends hours staring out a window in boredom partially because the only book in her house is an edition of Lives of the Fathers. Later, the protagonist is pinned to the ground by a clerk after placing herself on a machine for weighing animals. The title character has visions of a cat with fiery eyes and the head of her father-in-law, and out of jealousy, the title character kills Sonetka by dragging her into the Volga River. In order to keep seeing Sergei, the title character poisons the mushrooms of Boris Timofeyevich, strangles Fedya with a pillow, and murders her husband Zinovy. FTP, name this short story about Katerina Izmaylov, whose crimes of passion earn her the title nickname, a work by Nikolai Leskov adapted into an opera by Shostakovich.;;(")Lady Macbeth of Mtsensk(")|(")Lady Macbeth of the Mtsensk District(") ;;
Literature;;In Running Dog, Moll Robbins searches for a possible pornographic film starring this man. A devil named DT narrates a 2007 novel by Norman Mailer about the childhood of this man, The Castle in the Forest. In The Tunnel, William Kohler attempts to write a massive study of "guilt and innocence" in this man's country. To "mirror" his play Madame de Sade, Yukio Mishima wrote a play named "my friend" this man, who is portrayed as the Chicago gangster Arturo Ui in a play by Bertolt Brecht. Jack Gladney studies this man in White Noise, and a book by this man describes a "drive to the east" after declaring the need for "living space," or lebensraum. FTP, name this German author of Mein Kampf.;;(Adolf) Hitler;;
Literature;;In John le Carre's novel Smiley's People, the main character must remember to "Tell Max it concerns this figure". This figure titles a Miles Gibson novel about William Burton, a lonely boy who ends up becoming a good-natured serial killer. This figure tells Hjalmar seven stories in seven nights in Hans Christian Anderson's fairy tale Ole-Lukoje. In a short story, Nathaniel associates this figure with the lawyer Coppelius before falling in love with  Spalanzani's automaton Olympia. Freud analyzes a short story about this figure in his essay "The Uncanny". For 10 points, identify this character who titles a short story by E.T.A. Hoffman as well as a series by Neil Gaiman about Dream of The Endless.;;(the) Sandman;;
Literature;;This work cites J.-P. Venant's research to assert that Greek tragedies are composed of words with double meanings "that each character understands unilaterally". It attacks the "castrating objectivity of the realist novelist," and argues that writers produce texts from inner dictionaries. This work cites Mallarme, Valery, Proust, and the Surrealists as writers who tried to overcome the "cult" of the central figure, described as a product of French rationalism, the Reformation, and the culmination of capitalist ideology. First published in Image, Music, Text, this essay states that "writing is the destruction of every voice, of every point of origin," and claims that the title figure should be replaced with "the scriptor". Beginning by analyzing a passage from Balzac's "Sarrasine," FTP, name this essay which argues that the "birth of the reader" needs to be at the cost of the title event, written by Roland Barthes.;;("The) Death of the Author(");;
Literature;;This author of critical works like Return to Painting and The Case for Literature wrote a short story about a boy who develops the title malady by jumping into a pool without exercising enough beforehand. In addition to "Cramp," this author applied Grotowski's concept of a "poor theatre" in his play whose title refers to the Buddhist doctrine of "paramita," The Other Shore. This author of the collection Buying a Fishing Rod for my Grandfather wrote about his relationships with Sylvie and Margerethe in One Man's Bible. Shortly after discovering that he did not have lung cancer, he wrote a novel about a dying man's quest to reach Lingshan. For 10 points, name this Chinese author of Soul Mountain.;;Gao (Xingjian);;
Literature;;The protagonist of this short story works for the PR section of a major manufacturer of electrical appliances, and states that "the most important point is unity" when describing a kit-chin to the editor of a magazine for young housewives. The protagonist casually uses the word "pragmatic" to describe the world, feeling that it "explains a lot" and "makes work easier," and later returns a brick-red umbrella after regretting telling a story which he felt might "excite Sherlock Holmes". While standing on a cliff behind a house, the protagonist feels that the difference in size between the keeper and the title animal, originally sent from East Africa, had shrunk, making it possible for it to have escaped through the bars of his cage. The title animal's disappearance is chronicled in, FTP, which title story of a collection by Haruki Murakami?;;("The) Elephant Vanishes(");;
Literature;;This author wrote about a conversation between waiters named Love, Satan, and Death in the short story "In the Tavern of Life". In one of this author's works, Adham and Sha'ban found an establishment which borrows and lends people's worries. In addition to Anxiety Bank, this author wrote two bildungsromans about his alter ego Muhsin, Return of the Spirit and The Bird of the East, and wrote his country's first absurdist play, The Tree Climber. An allegory in the Qu'ran inspired his first play, which is based on the myth of the seven sleepers of Ephesus. In another of his plays, a mameluk ruler must choose between obeying the law or ruling by force upon learning that he has not been legally manumitted. FTP, name this Egyptian playwright of The People of the Cave and The Sultan's Dilemma.;;(Tawfiq) al-Hakim;;
Literature;;One of this author's protagonists claims only Lewis Carroll could understand Della's words, while in another work, the secretary to the Mayor of New York City pushes Jack Smurch out the window after he flies around the world. In addition to "What Do You Mean It Was Brillig"? and "The Greatest Man in the World," this author wrote about a wife who awaits her death via a car crash after stopping at the Elite Diner in "A Couple of Hamburgers". The title character of another of this author's works thinks Robert E. Lee looks like Robert Browning, and in another, Erwin Martin causes the destruction of Ulgine Barrows by lying about planning to kill his boss. "If Grant Had Been Drinking at Appomattox" and "The Cat-Bird Seat" were penned by, FTP, which American author who wrote about a man who daydreams about being a Navy pilot and a surgeon in "The Secret Life of Walter Mitty".;;(James) Thurber;;
Literature;;One of this man's works is about Sir George Catacomb, the father of Mrs. Berry, and another deals with the fifth son of the penniless Earl of Crabs, Deuceace. In one of his novels, the Fairy Blackstick gives one of the title objects to Prince Bulbo and Prince Giglio marries Rosalba, uniting the kingdoms of Crim Tartary and Paflagonia. One of his characters schemes to blackmail Francis Clavering, while Lady Kew forbids Clive from marrying Ethel in a novel featuring Colonel Thomas. Besides The Rose and the Ring and The Newcomes, this man wrote about George Osborne and Rawdon Crawley in a novel beginning with a character throwing Samuel Johnson's dictionary out of a coach. For 10 points, name this author who created  Amelia Sedley and Becky Sharp in Vanity Fair.;;(William) (Makepeace) Thackeray;;
Literature;;A 2004 revival of this work set it at Idlewild Airport, rather than against a blank backdrop. One subplot involves shrewish Louise's desire to be a "separate person," while in another, Mickey rats on Lou, whose wife Elsie made him put flaws into his book on Soviet law. After being taken to a concentration camp by his new love Holga, its protagonist finally asks the audience whether love can exist in the title state in light of his second wife's rise from telephone operator to recording star and her death of an overdose on pills. For 10 points, name this play about lawyer Quentin's marriage to Maggie, a thinly-veiled depiction of the playwright's relationship with Marilyn Monroe, by Arthur Miller.;;After the Fall;;
Literature;;In one scene in this novel, a group of girls circle in a ring and sing, "Walter, Walter, Wildflower, / Growing up so high," troubling the young protagonist. The protagonist's encounter with Leo on his flat's roof leads him to go to the candy shop of his Aunt Bertha, who is courted by Nathan Sternowitz in the second part of this novel, "The Picture". Its protagonist is sent to get money from Mr. Lobe shortly before the print shop foreman Joe Luter is invited over for dinner, and his paternity is questioned after Genya's short affair with a Gentile, but Albert's anger turns to concern after his son nearly dies from electrocution at the train tracks. FTP, name this novel narrated by David Schearl, the masterpiece of Henry Roth.;;Call It Sleep;;
Literature;;After this character's best friend is left by his wife Jacqueline, he is stabbed during a May Day celebration. He gains the favor of a grand duke by publishing the Pleasures of Childhood, and his slighting of the Grunebaum family leads to the dismissal of Antoinette. Though he kills a soldier while protecting Lorchen and has affairs with Anna and Ada, he later serves as a teacher to Colette Stevens and her besotted cousin, Grazia, who invites this character to spend ten years in Switzerland. This grandson of the conductor Jean-Michel and son of Louisa and Melchior Krafft discovers his widespread fame as a composer after returning to Paris. For 10 points, name this title character of a ten volume novel by Romain Rolland.;;Jean-Christophe (Krafft);;
Literature;;One character in this play tries to convince another to get rich by harvesting dog skins, creating wine from raisins, or raising drowned land. It ends with the title character's boss blasting through a wall in Newgate to rescue him, which leads the protagonist to stop pretending to be bewitched before Sir Paul Eitherside's court. Guilthead, Lady Tailbush, and Ingine assist Meercraft in attempts to con the protagonist out of his money, and Wittipol gives the protagonist a cloak in an attempt to seduce his wife. The title character becomes the servant of Fitz-dottrel, who questions his lack of cloven hooves, after Satan consents to let him visit London for a day. FTP, name this comedy about Pug, who returns to Hell after being beaten and abused by humans, written by Ben Jonson.;;(The) Devil is an Ass;;
Literature;;In this work, the bathtub of a homosexual drunkard becomes a shrine to Muslims. This work sees Fosca carry on a chaste relationship with George Pombal. A doctor writes a commentary known as The Great Interlinear on the manuscript of a work about a woman once married to Jacob Arnauti. One of its title characters learns she can paint well with a prosthesis after an accident with a harpoon; a more deliberate "accident" occurs during a duck shoot when Capodistria is presumably killed. One of its title character falls in love with the blind Liza, the sister of a man who committed suicide, Percy Pursewarden, who'd been troubled by the Hosnani conspiracy. Focusing on the experience of a man who gives up Melissa Artemis for Clea, L.G. Darley, and including Mountolive, Balthazar, and Justine, for 10 points,  name this cycle of novels taking place in the title city, a work of Lawrence Durrell.;;(The) Alexandria Quartet;;
Literature;;In this novel, one character incites the townspeople of Beulah to destroy a "Chamber of American Horrors" operated by Sylvanus Snodgrasse. The protagonist is beaten with mallets by Riley and Robbins during a vaudeville act and is scalped by an Indian during a raid led by Israel Satinpenny, while this novel's heroine is abducted from Ottsville and made to work as a prostitute in an international brothel owned by Wu Fong. Later, the protagonist is assassinated at the Bijou Theatre while giving a speech in favor of the fascist "Leather Shirts" of the National Revolutionary Party, which enables Nathan "Shagpoke" Whipple to become the dictator of America. A parody of the novels of Horatio Alger, its title refers to a saying about the amount of money John D. Rockefeller would pay to have "a stomach like yours". FTP, name this 1934 satire about "the dismantling of Lemuel Pitkin," the third novel by Nathaniel West.;;(A) Cool Million;;
Literature;;One character in this work complains that Bélise is "dry in talk and poor in spirit," and that Geralde uses tu when speaking to the great. Later, Du Bois announces a note that may be about a lawsuit, but claims it's too illegible to read and pretends to have forgotten it in a drawer. That lawsuit responds to its title character's unfavorable comparison of a bad sonnet about hope to the old song "I prefer my love," insulting Oronte. Though the protagonist rejects the advances of a woman whose good reputation is based on her inability to attract anyone, Arsinoé, he fights with Clitandre and Acaste over the affections of coquette Celimene, eventually causing him to make good his promise to "break with the whole human race". For 10 points, name this play about the irritable Alceste, by Moliere.;;(The) Misanthrope|(Le) misanthrope;;
Literature;;In the decade after this work's premiere, its author appended an Epilogue apologizing for its "nasty ending" and encouraging the audience to find its own happy one. Its sixth scene ends with the song "St. Nevercome's Day," which comes after the postponement of a wedding by an oft-suicidal mail pilot because his bride owes money to a carpet dealer and will neither sell her tobacco shop nor consult the cousin whom she is later falsely accused of murdering. It begins when three gods run into the water-seller Wong, who persuades them to give a thousand silver dollars to a prostitute; however, the demands on her wealth force her to create a cold-blooded male alter ego to manage it, Shui Ta. For 10 points, name this play about the charitable Shen Te by Bertold Brecht.;;(The) Good Woman of Setzuan|(The) Good Person of Setzuan|(Der) gute Mensch von Sezuan;;
Literature;;Balzac's The Wild Ass's Skin takes its epigraph from this work. Early on, its narrator chastises the reader for failing to deduce that his mother is not a papist, and later writes an acrostic about love that stalls when he switches S and R.  That narrator catalogs the nine hundred streets of Paris in its seventh part, during which he complains of how often the French change horses and tells a story about the Abbess of Andouillets. Another of its characters builds a "hobby-horse" recreation of the Battle of Namur, where he was shot in the groin, with Corporal Trim, and is pursued by Widow Wadman. This novel also contains two blank chapters, a marble page, and a black page, and is half done before Uncle Toby and Walter manage to get upstairs to see its title character born. For 10 points, name this novel by Laurence Sterne.;;(The) (Life) (and) (Opinions) (of) Tristram Shandy(,) (Gentleman);;
Literature;;In one section of this work, a man goes blind after a seer opens the book of wisdom. In another, workmen build "a huge ball of masonry" upon a mountaintop, only to be crushed by it while admiring it from below. This collection includes a poem about "many red devils" who struggle in ink after emerging from the speaker's heart, and ends with a poem about a spirit who is killed by "a sword from the sky" after screaming "Ah, there is no God!" In another poem, the speaker sees devils carousing before one calls him "Comrade! Brother!" Originally published in all capitals, this collection features a poem about "a creature, naked, bestial" eating his heart in the desert, and begins with a poem in which the title characters "came from the sea" with "clang and clang of spear and shield / and clash and clash of hoof and heel". FTP, name this poetry collection by Stephen Crane.;;(The) Black Riders (and) (Other) (Lines);;
Literature;;One character in this work finds a scroll in a dead man's hand claiming that he must place drowned lovers side by side in a crystal mausoleum at the bottom of the sea. In book IV,  the title character and his lover get on flying horses and the title figure gains the "power to dream deliciously" after dismounting a huge eagle he found when the "winter-sleep" of Adonis ended. The title character laments that the intermingling of Alpheus with Arethusa is prohibited and falls in love with the Indian Maiden. Peona discourages the title character from desiring a love he meets in his dreams named Cynthia. Beginning "A thing of beauty is a joy forever," for 10 points, identify this poem by John Keats named for a mythological shepherd who loved Selene.;;(")Endymion(:) (A) (Poetic) (Romance");;
Literature;;In two of her recent short stories, Charlotte learns that her actress mother cheated on her neurologist father, and a clarinetist learns that her cellist husband had cheated on her. Those stories, "Beneficiary" and "The First Sense," appeared in the New Yorker, as had "Our Bovary" and "Six Feet of the Country" five decades earlier. In her most recent novel, a thyroid operation causes the short-term radioactivity of Paul Bannerman. In another of her novels, the beautiful Marisa Kgosana and the lover Conrad fight for the imagination of Rosa, along with her dead communist father Lionel. She also wrote novels about the industrialist Mehring and the Smales family, who flee a black rebellion to the title character's village. For 10 points, name this author of The Conservationist, Burger's Daughter, and July's People.;;(Nadine) Gordimer;;
Literature;;A "protosurrealist" version of this work was recently illustrated by Mahendra Singh. Martin Gardner's annotation of this work argues that those who think this work nonsense base their judgment on the line "Then the bowsprit got mixed with the rudder sometimes". An essay by its most recognized illustrator, Henry Holiday, states that it was published separately from Sylvie and Bruno. Its fifth and eighth sections, "The Beaver's Lesson" and "The Vanishing," state that the Bellman and his crew "pursued the title character with forks and hope" and "charmed it with smiles and soap," and that the title character may or may not be a boojum. Subtitled "An Agony in Eight Fits," for 10 points, name this poem that describes "with infinite humor, the impossible voyage of an improbable crew to find an inconceivable creature," by Lewis Carroll.;;("The) Hunting of the Snark(");;
Literature;;One character in this work used all of his money and lottery tickets to consume a pot of honey so that no one would inherit them. Another character believes that behind every happy man there must be a man with a hammer reminding him of the existence of unhappy people, and insists that the meaning of life is something greater and more rational than happiness. The protagonists are taken aback by the beauty of Pelagea, their host's servant, and one tells the story of his brother Nikolai, who left his government job and married a rich widow in order to grow the title fruit. FTP, name this work about Burkin and Ivan Ivanovitch's visit to Alehin's farm, a short story by Anton Chekov.;;(")Gooseberries(");;
Literature;;A man suffers from nervous exhaustion so extreme that the sight of creeping vines in gold on a decorated tobacco tray upset him in this author's story "Loyalty". In an essay, this author describes the stings of recognition he felt from every book he read, including Madame Bovary, on the upstairs shelf of a Maruzen bookstore. In one of his novels, Patient number 23 recounts his travels to an underground country populated by creatures with oval-shaped saucers tied to their heads. He also wrote a short story about an evil but brilliant artist, Yoshihide, who sacrifices his daughter Yuzuki to create the titular artwork, and described inhabiting a "world of diseased nerves, lucid as ice," in an "A Note to an Old Friend," his suicide letter. FTP, name this author of "Hell Screen" and the novel Kappa, the namesake of the highest literary award of Japan.;;Akutagawa (Ryunosuke);;
Literature;;The epigraph to this work comes from Wallace Stevens' poem "An Ordinary Evening in New Haven," and quotes the line "As it is, in the intricate evasions of as". The author references the essay "Of the Advantage and Disadvantage of History for Life" to suggest that he owes more to Nietzsche and Emerson for the formulation of the title concept than to Johnson, Coleridge and W.J. Bate in the chapter titled "Tessera". This book uses the Covering Cherub to represent the difficulties of maintaining divinity and immortality. The author borrows a concept from Lucretius in order to describe the first of his "Ratios of Reversion," the Clinamen, also described as Poetic Misprision. Its author calls Satan a modern poet "because he shadows forth gigantically a trouble at the core of Milton and of Pope". Written by the author of A Map of Misreading, for 10 points, name this landmark critical work about the relationships between poets and their precursors, by Harold Bloom.;;(The) Anxiety of Influence;;
Literature;;Christopher Okigbo compared his last testament to this type of "prayer to the scabbard" in "Elegy for Alto". A Par Lagerkvist play about a giant who decapitates dolls is titled for one "of heaven," and the disappearance of George Talboys is central to a Mary Elizabeth Braddon novel named for one of Lady Audley. Jaromir Hladik is given a one-year respite from a firing squad to complete his play The Enemies in a short story about this kind of "miracle". This adjective also appears in the title of a story about Leggatt, who becomes the double of an unnamed captain, and a novel about Mr. Verloc, who plots to blow up the Greenwich Observatory. FTP, identify this word which describes a "sharer" in a story by Joseph Conrad as well as a "garden" in a novel by Frances Burnett.;;secret;;
Literature;;This work's narrator delivers a useful Ptolemaic astronomy lesson before Gildippe enters a donnybrook. Later, a devil named Astagorre speaks to the Fury Alecto about an attack on the Dane's troops in Thrace. The Wiseman of Ascalon admonishes another character for his romantic interlude with Armida, who was sent by Hydraotes to distract the Franks. In Canto III, Erminia points out the heroes to Aladine, admires Rinaldo, and conceals her secret passion for Tancred, who loves Clorinda even though she's a pagan. After Lesbin is slain in the ninth canto, Solyman flees the title location, although Ismen predicts the arrival of Saladin. For 10 points, name this epic poem about the recovery of the title city during the First Crusade, by Torquato Tasso.;;Jerusalem Delivered|(La) Gerusalemme liberata;;
Literature;;This work's 1966 second edition integrated the three extended readings from its third part into the first two. Its later sections note the influence of Nathanael West on the rising success of Jewish fiction and criticize genre works for creating half-believed shocks instead of seeking "the Moor at the back of the cave". It discusses the evolution of Lovelace into the Faust figure, distinguishes between the Gothic and sentimental plots, and, developing on ideas posited in "Come Back to the Raft Ag'in, Huck Honey," claims that frontier landscapes and maternal, Puritan authorities prevent the national literature from depicting heterosexual passion, often redirecting its energies to morbidity. For 10 points, name this critical work by Leslie Fielder.;;Love and Death in the American Novel;;
Literature;;This poem's third section imagines the soul "threshed out like maize in the endless granary of defeated actions". In its first section, the speaker compares himself to an "empty net" moving "from the air to the air," and in its tenth section, the speaker  plunges his hand into the earth and hears the beating of "the old forgotten human heart". In its twelfth and final section, this poem's speaker declares "I come to speak for your dead mouths" and asks "Let bodies cling like magnets to my body. / Come quickly to my veins and to my mouth. / Speak through my speech, and through my blood". In its sixth section, the speaker climbs "the ladder of the earth" to reach the title location. In its original collection, this poem appears between sections called "A Lamp on Earth" and "The Conquistadores". FTP, name this poem in Canto General named for an Incan ruin, written by Pablo Neruda.;;("The) Heights of Macchu Picchu(")|(")Alturas de Macchu Picchu(");;
Literature;;The father of this novel's protagonist was rumored to have outwrestled a black bear. The protagonist writes about a professor who goes off with a group of gypsies in A Season of Ashes, and also pens a story about a man who kills his wife so that he can cry pearls. This novel also sees the invention of Thomas and Betty Caldwell's orphanage in a letter by Rahim Khan, causing Omar Faisal and Raymond Andrews' to help facilitate the adoption of Sohrab by Soraya. Its key scene occurs in an alley in 1975, when Assef rapes the Hazara servant Hassan after the latter performs the title act for Amir when he wins Kabul's winter tournament. For 10 points, name this 2003 novel by Khaled Hosseini.;;(The) Kite Runner;;
Literature;;The only novel by Aleksis Kivi focuses on the lives of this many brothers, and Julio Jurenito has this many disciples in a work by Ilya Ehrenburg. At school, Gimpel the Fool was given this many nicknames, and a poem with this number in its title begins "A simple child / That lightly draws its breath / And feels its life in every limb / What should it know of death"? Stories about A.V. Laider and Enoch Soames are contained in a collection named for this many men by Max Beerbohm, and a critical work by William Empson identifies this many types of ambiguity. This number appears in the title of a play about the funeral of Floyd "Schoolboy" Barton, and "The Deluge at Norderney" and "The Supper at Elsinore" are contained in an Isak Dinesen collection of this many Gothic Tales. The number of books in Omeros as well as the number of novels in In Search of Lost Time, FTP, name this number of warriors led by Polynices "against Thebes" in a play by Aeschylus.;;seven;;
Literature;;In one poem in this collection, the speaker bequeaths his eyes to Argus and his pensiveness to buffoons. Another poem in this collection declares "Hope not for mind in women; at their best, / Sweetness and wit they are, but mummy, possess'd". In addition to "The Will" and "Love's Alchemy," this collection includes a poem which states "Princes do but play us; compared to this, / All honour's mimic, all wealth alchemy" and a poem which declares "And if no piece of chronicle we prove, / We'll build in sonnets pretty rooms". It also contains a song declaring "Go and catch a falling star / Get with child a mandrake root," and begins with a poem metaphorizing an insect as a "marriage bed, and marriage temple". FTP, name this poetry collection including "The Ecstasy," "The Canonization," "The Flea," and "A Valediction: Forbidding Mourning," written by John Donne.;;Songs and Sonnets;;
Literature;;One of this man's dramas features Sine Manibus, who opposes Lady Mary Magdalene, earlier known as La Belle Dame Sans Mercy. In his first play Alda competes with Gaea after the death of Loftur, and his last play sees unwanted wealth showered on a pants presser. Besides Short Circuit and Pigeon Banquet, his time in a Luxembourg monastery inspired the novels Under the Holy Mountain and The Great Weaver of Kashmir. This man satirized his nation's epics in The Happy Warriors and attacked Mormonism in The Fish Can Sing. One novel of this man features Arnas Arnaeus, who is beloved by the protagonist of the section called "The Bright Jewel". Other creations of this man include Madam Myri, who sends Finna to care for Rosa's daughter Asta in a novel seeing the foreclosure of Bjartur's home. For 10 points, name this author of Iceland's Bell and Independent People.;;(Halldór) Laxness;;
Literature;;This story's narrator corrects his friend's confusion of the words "vassals" and "vessels" and keeps unsuccessfully suggesting they go to a new restaurant, The Library. The difficulty of understanding its title concept rises when one character doesn't call his kids because his wife doesn't want him talking to ex-wife Marjorie, and first emerges when Terri describes how her ex-boyfriend, Ed, beat her by dragging her around the room and later drank rat poison. Tess Gallagher recently republished an earlier draft, "Beginners," that more directly depicted cardiologist Mel's depression and added detail to his story of the Gates couple's auto accident, both of which had been edited down by Gordon Lish. For 10 points, name this title story of Raymond Carver's third collection, in which two drunken couples try to discuss affection.;;(")What We Talk About When We Talk About Love(");;
Literature;;This work's twenty-sixth section compares the imagination to a "giant that fought / against the murderous alphabet". Its thirtieth describes the "banal suburb" of Oxidia, while in another its speaker notes "These degustations in the vaults oppose the past and the festival" after reading a lean review in a cathedral. It states that "the thinking of art seems final when the thinking of god is smoky dew," and ends by describing "The moments when we choose to play" and "the imagined pine, the imagined jay". The title figure claims that "Poetry exceeding music must take the place of empty heaven and its hymns" and asks "Is this picture of Picasso's, this 'hoard of destructions,' a picture of ourselves"? For 10 points, name this thirty-three section poem about "a shearsman of sorts" asked to play a tune of "things exactly as they are," upon the title instrument, written by Wallace Stevens.;;("The) Man with the Blue Guitar(");;
Literature;;One man who wrote in this language subtitled one of his works "A Tarot Novel for Divination" and used crossword puzzles in a novel about the architect Atanas Svilar, Landscape Painted with Tea. Another man who wrote in this language collected a story inspired by a sura in the Koran, "The Legend of the Sleepers" in The Encyclopedia for the Dead and collected "The Knife with the Rosewood Handle," "The Mechanical Lion," and "Dogs and Books" in another work. Besides a novel telling of the title people and which comes in male and female versions, The Dictionary of the Khazars, and A Tomb for Boris Davidovich, other works in this language include one about the stingy spinster Raika Radakovic and another about the title object built by Mehmed Pasha. For 10 points, name this language, used by Milorad Pavic, Danilo Kis, and the author of The Woman from Sarajevo and The Bridge on the Drina, Ivo Andric.;;Serbian|Serbo-Croatian|Yugoslavian|Bosnian-Croatian-Serbian|;;
Literature;;The speaker of this poem tells its main character "No, no, thou hast not felt the lapse of hours!" The speaker likens the central action to Dido's refusal to talk to Aeneas in Hades, "still nursing the unconquerable hope," and compares the title character to a "grave Tyrian trader" who sails "between the Syrtes and soft Sicily". In this poem, rumored sightings of the title character include "at some lone homestead on the Cumner Hills," "above Godstow's Bridge," and "on the skirts of Bagley Wood". Inspired by Joseph Glanvil's book The Vanity of Dogmatizing, it describes a character "tired of knocking at preferment's door" who "one summer-morn forsook his friends," and "roamed the world with that wild brotherhood". For 10 points, name this poem about a poor Oxford student who leaves to join the titular group, written by Matthew Arnold.;;("The) Scholar Gypsy(");;
Literature;;On the eve of the second millennium, the narrator's unnamed wife asserts that "Feeling is believing" when a mysterious stranger enters their home. Pantocyclus defeats a rebellion led by Chromatistes in its chapter "Of the Suppression of the Chromatic Sedition," and the narrator calls fog "the Nurse of arts, and the parent of sciences" in its sixth chapter, "Of Recognition by Sight". In this book, women must warn of their presence by issuing a "peace-cry," and after the Grand Council passes a law targeting those who claim to receive "revelations from another World," the narrator is arrested for propounding the doctrine of "Upward, not Northward". The narrator has a vision of a Point which believes itself to be the entire universe after talking to a Sphere. Subtitled "A Romance of Many Dimensions," for 10 points, name this book by Edwin Abbott narrated by A. Square.;;Flatland;;
Literature;;Though the narrator claims he will "essay" a portrait of this character, he "shall never hit it"; that description notes this character's violet eyes and a brow "phrenologically associated with more than average intellect". His error-riddled obituary claims he showed that patriotism is not the refuge of scoundrels and that his death came from a stab in the heart. The narrator earlier calls him an example of "natural depravity," as the protagonist finds when told this man is down on him by Dansker, possibly causing this character to send an afterguardsman to the protagonist's post during the night.  Nicknamed "Jemmy Legs," this man's death comes from a blow to the head in Captain Vere's quarters after he makes an unfounded accusation of mutiny. For 10 points, name this master-at-arms who didn't like Billy Budd.;;(John) ("Jemmy) (Legs") Claggart;;
Literature;;He attacked "things old and worm-eaten" in his gastronomic satire King Revel, and dedicated his collection The Conquest of the Stars to his friend Gustav Kahn. While in Alexandria, he founded the literary magazine Le Papyrus. He wrote a novel banned for obscenity about a brutal warlord named Mafarka, who constructs a mechanical son. This author advocated for absolute novelty in The Theater of Surprises and The Theatre of Essential Brevity, and suggested that Christian morality has no purpose in The New Ethical Religion of Speed. In a founding text of the movement he is most associated with, he claims that a "race-automobile which seems to rush over exploding powder is more beautiful than the Victory of Samothrace". For 10 points, name this Egyptian-born Italian author of the Futurist Manifesto.;;(Filippo) (Tommaso) Marinetti;;
Literature;;Minor characters in this novel include Phil Sanderson, an architect who dreams of erecting buildings made of colored tile, and Stanwood Emery, who commits suicide by lighting his apartment on fire. In a subplot, a French sailor nicknamed "Congo Jake" becomes a millionaire bootlegger. Its first section, "Ferryslip," ends with an immigrant shaving his beard upon seeing a Gillette advertisement. In "Went to the Animals Fair," George Baldwin proposes to Ellie Thatcher, who returns from World War I with the protagonist in its section "Rejoicing City That Dwelt Carelessly". The protagonist quits his job as a newspaperman and leaves the title location after having a vision of a skyscraper symbolizing the Tower of Babel. FTP, name this novel about Jimmy Herf, a 1925 book by John Dos Passos which takes place in New York.;;Manhattan Transfer;;
Literature;;In one of this author's poems, the speaker says "men work together" whether "they work together or apart" after discovering a clump of butterfly weed. Another contains sections titled "Loneliness," "House Fear," and "The Impulse," and ends with a man learning of "finalities / beside the grave". In another of his poems, a boy dies after his hand is destroyed by a "buzz-saw" which "snarled and rattled in the yard," while yet another describes a "total sky almost without defect" reflected by spring pools. This author commanded "Here are your waters and your watering place / Drink and be whole again beyond confusion" in a poem beginning "Back out of all this now too much for us," "Directive," and wrote about a "singer" who "says the highway dust is over all" and questions "what to make of a diminished thing" in "The Oven Bird". The author of  "Out-, Out-" and collections such as Mountain Interval and North of Boston, FTP, name this American poet of "The Death of the Hired Man" and "Mending Wall".;;(Robert) Frost;;
Literature;;This work shares its name with the subtitle of Philip Marsden's The Chains of Heaven. One character is saved from being burnt at the stake by her ring Pantarbe after Arsace orders her to be poisoned. That character is born with a fair complexion because her mother stared at an image of Andromeda while conceiving. Canonically translated by Moses Hadad, its narrators include Calasiris, an exiled Egyptian priest, and Cnemon, an exiled Athenian youth. It begins at a violent banquet where the central couple are captured and sold into slavery by the pirate Thyamis, and describes their efforts to reunite with one another. FTP, name this work about the lovers Theagenes and Chariclea, a princess of the title location, a third century novel of love by Heliodorus.;;(An) Ethiopian Romance|Aithiopika;;
Literature;;He called himself "Happy-like a man with a woman" and wrote "A night in June.  You're seventeen, and drunk on it" in his early works "Sensation" and "Popular Fiction," which contrast with the later description of his brain as a "green-white wad of fat" in "Shame". His later prose works include The Deserts of Love and a collection which calls flesh "a fruit hanging in the orchard," Illuminations. He also wrote a poem about a boy who feels the nails of two nuns orgasmically kill his lice and a poem containing a synesthesic treatment of vowels, which he refers to in the "Delirium II" section of his longest work. That work's first section, "Delirium I," includes the confession of a man who may be Paul Verlaine. For 10 points, name this author of A Season in Hell.;;(Arthur) Rimbaud;;
Literature;;One character in this work tells a story about a whaling captain who threw 61 of 70 passengers from a leaky longboat on the way to Halifax. It also includes monologues by Aleskii Antedilluvianovich Prelapsarianov about the failure of Theory and by Isidor Chemelwitz about the death of Sarah, "the last of the old ones". Another character tells his doctor Henry that his disease is liver cancer because the fact that he can get Nancy Reagan on the phone means he's not homosexual. The lawyer that man mentors, Joe Pitt, leaves his pill-addicted Mormon wife Harper for Louis Ironson when he realizes he's gay; Louis had left Prior Walter when he contracted AIDS, though with the help of the title creatures Prior acquires Roy Cohn's AZT stash. Containing Millennium Approaches and Perestroika, for 10 points, name this "Gay Fantasia on National Themes" by Tony Kushner.;;Angels in America;;
Literature;;This author used the pseudonym "Miching Mallecho" to dedicate his poem satirizing Wordsworth as an author who believes "Happiness is wrong" and writes odes to the devil, "Peter Bell the Third". This author fictionalized his relationship with Lord Byron in a poem about a visit to a maniac, "Julian and Maddolo," and described "mandrakes, and toadstools, and docks, and darnels" which "Rose like the deal from their ruined charnels" in "The Sensitive Plant". He lamented "Alas! I have nor hope nor health / Nor peace within nor calm around" in "Stanzas written in dejection, near Naples". This author also wrote a poem praising "The awful shadow of some unseen power" which "floats unseen among us" as well as a poem asking the title entity to "Drive his dead thoughts over the universe / Like withered leaves, to quicken a new birth". FTP, name this English poet of "Hymn to Intellectual Beauty" and "Ode to the West Wind".;;P(ercy) (Bysshe) Shelley;;
Literature;;Musical interludes in this work include"The Stripper," which is played as one character is described as a "patronizing Kant-struck pig," as well the "Appassionata" Sonata, which degenerates absurdly into "Mr. Gallagher and Mr. Shean". At that point in this play, characters like the butler Bennett, begin to speak in rhyme, as when one character declares that "Brother Jack is news to me". One character in this play writes his poems by pulling words out of his hat, another is discussed in a lecture on Marxism by Cecily Caruthers, and another tells Henry Carr that during the war he "wrote Ulysses!" A parody of The Importance of Being Earnest, it is set in Zurich, and portrays a fictional meeting between Tristan Tzara, Vladimir Lenin, and James Joyce. FTP, name this play by Tom Stoppard.;;Travesties;;
Literature;;This author was crushed by the failure of a speech he made during a celebration of Whittier's birthday about a Nevada miner treated rudely by Oliver Wendell Holmes, Emerson, and Longfellow. His essays include "At the Shrine of St. Wagner" and "The United States of Lyncherdom," and he wrote about the virus-like effects of the jingle "Punch, brothers! Punch with care! Punch in the presence of the passenjare!" in "A Literary Nightmare". The Edwards family is attacked by germs on a nightmarish voyage through a drop of water on a microscope in his short story "The Great Dark". His title characters include a nephew of Satan who demonstrates the pitfalls of the Moral Sense to Theodor Fischer, and a boy helped by Miles Hendon after switching places with Tom Canty. FTP, name this American author of The Mysterious Stranger and The Prince and the Pauper.;;(Mark) Twain|(Samuel) Clemens;;
Literature;;This author used the persona of Cuthbert Curry-knave for his pamphlet satirizing "Martin Marprelate," An Almond for a Parrot. The erotic poem "The Choice of Valentines" was known as this author's "dildo". He attacked Gabriel and Richard Harvey in Pierce Penniless, His Supplication to the Devil, and attempted to confute "the slender imputed praises to feminine perfection" in The Anatomy of Absurdity. He wrote "Beauty is but a flower, / Which wrinkles will devour" in his play featuring personifications of the four seasons, Summer's Last Will and Testament. He also wrote about a character who meets Sir Thomas More and Erasmus in Rotterdam while serving the Earl of Surrey. FTP, name this member of the University Wits who wrote about the picaresque adventures of Jack Wilton in The Unfortunate Traveler.;;(Thomas) Nashe;;
Literature;;This play opens with an old woman sneaking outside with a bundle on a stick over her shoulder, but being stopped and interrogated by a man with an enormous Adam's apple. The protagonist asserts that "little stealing" leads to jail, while "big stealing" puts him in the "Hall of Fame" when he croaks. In the second scene, the protagonist is discouraged after turning over a white stone only to discover no food. Throughout this play, a drum played at 72 beats per minute becomes increasingly louder, and its final scene begins with Lem asserting "we cotch him". In a forest, the title character has visions of "Little Formless Fears," a prison guard, and a slave auction, causing him to fire all of his bullets except for a silver one, which he uses on a ghostly crocodile. In its final line, Smithers states that the title character "died in the ‘eighth o' style" at the hands of natives. FTP, name this Eugene O'Neill play about a former Pullman porter who rules a Caribbean island.;;(The) Emperor Jones;;
Literature;;The first monologue of this work's hero apostrophizes night as having "hue so black" and being "ever art when day is not," while its heroine notes her "cherry lips" have kissed "Thy Stones with lime and hair knit up in thee". Those two proceed to compare their love to that of Procrus and Shafalus, and respectively proclaim their climactic deaths with the lines "Adieu, Adieu, Adieu," and "Now, die, die, die, die, die". At its most famous performance, one spectator noted it was no wonder that "one lion may speak, when many asses do" and marveled at Tom Snout's monologue as The Wall. Performed by the "rude mechanicals" of Peter Quince after Theseus arranges a double-wedding, for 10 points, name this godawful play from A Midsummer Night's Dream, based on an Ovid story about Babylonian lovers.;;(The) (Most) (Lamentable) (Comedy,) (and) (the) (Most) (Cruel) (Death,) (of) Pyramus and Thisbe;;A Midsummer Night's Dream
Literature;;In one poem, this author refers to Van Dyck as the "prince of tranquil gestures". One of this man's creations cannot listen to Wagner without the odour of burning cinnnamon, Oranthe, who appears in "Fragments from Italian Comedy". In one of this man's short stories, Laurence becomes the object of Violante's affection, while another describes the violinist Baldassare Silvande. This author also created a character who meets the artist Elstir in Combray and sees his friend Robert de Saint-Loup marry his former childhood love Gilberte. That character narrates a novel where Madame Verdurin marries the Prince of Guermantes. For 10 points, name this author of In the Shadow of Young Girls in Flower and Sodom and Gomorrah, sections of his magnum opus In Search of Lost Time.;;(Marcel) Proust;;
Literature;;He collaborated with Jan Peter Tripp on the posthumously published poems of The Unrecounted, and combined the lives of George Stellar and Matthias Grunewald into his own in After Nature. He similarly interweaved Stendhal and Kafka's lives with his in the novel Vertigo, and pondered Michael Hamburger in a book based on his walking tour of Suffolk. He also wrote a novel that begins by comparing the Centraal Station, Nocturama, and old fortress of Antwerp before following Jacques's attempts to reconstruct his parents' journey to a concentration camp, and a novel tracing the narrator's childhood to the town of S while he meets with Max Ferber and Henry Selwyn, who have left Germany. For 10 points, name this German author of The Rings of Saturn, Austerlitz, and The Emigrants.;;(Winifred) (Georg) Sebald;;
Literature;;If for some reason you care what Christopher Hitchens thinks about literature, you know he considers the Great American Novel to be this work, whose oddly-named minor characters include Lollie Fewter and Five Properties Coblin. Early on, after an ill-advised relationship with Frazer, Mimi Villars gets an abortion with the protagonist's help, which cuts off his relationship with Lucy Magnus. Later, that protagonist turns down Bateshaw's offer to work on protoplasmic experiments after escaping the wreck of the MacManus and returns to Stella, whom he met in Mexico while falconing with Thea Fenchel.  He'd gone there after working with the financier Einhorn in its early chapters. For 10 points, name this picaresque novel about a Chicago-born American by Saul Bellow.;;(The) Adventures of Augie March;;
Literature;;This author's interviews with David Barsamian are collected in The Checkbook and the Cruise Missile. A series of riots in 2002 inspired this author's essay "Democracy: Who's She When She's at Home," and she criticized testing nuclear weapons in "The End of Imagination". One of her characters is sexually abused while viewing a production of The Sound of Music in Ayemenem; the title character of that work fixes the machines at Paradise Pickles and Preserves. The protagonists of that novel are forced to lie about the death of Sophie Mol by Baby Kochamma, and commit incest with one another after being reunited in America. FTP, name this Indian author of The Algebra of Infinite Justice, who wrote about the twins Estha and Rahel in The God of Small Things.;;(Suzanna) (Arundhati) Roy;;
Literature;;The protagonist of this work finds his letters traced in the snow by the girl he falls in love with and serenades her with bagpipes. The protagonist finds a wallet after killing a monster in an underwater cave; another character buys the Durande as a way to recover from Rantaine's treachery. In this novel, a plan to escape to South America falls apart for Sieur Clubin, and the protagonist sits on a rock in the middle of the sea and lets himself be drowned by the high tide. The rector Ebenezer Caudray marries the protagonist's love Deruchette, and the plot is driven by an engine desired by Lethierry. Taking place in the parish of St. Sampson on the Isle of Guernsey, where the author was exiled for fifteen years, and focusing on the life of Gilliat, for 10 points, name this novel by Victor Hugo.;;(The) Toilers of the Sea|(Les) Travailleurs de la mer;;
Literature;;One character in this work claims her pitcher of beer is bewitched after scolding the maid for breaking several mugs. Later on, its title character recalls a quarrel over a frame for Miss Lydia when Bartle Massey suggests that the protagonist might be replacing a recently deceased character. It also sees the rector of Broxton, Aldophous Irwine, hope for the marriage of Mary Burge, particularly after the death of Lisbeth's husband, Thias. After Wiry Ben dances at a party, Totty's grasp of a locket leads the protagonist to suspect that another character has a secret lover. A trip to Windsor results in a trial condemning the title character's fiancée to death for killing her baby, but Captain Donnithorne has her sentence commuted. The title character marries Dinah Morris after the death of Hetty Sorel at the end of, for 10 points, which novel about a carpenter by George Eliot?;;Adam Bede;;
Literature;;One author from this country wrote a play about Madior, who becomes the king of Cayor by sacrificing his wife Yacine Boubou. Another author from this country wrote an epistolary novel about the correspondence between Ramatoulaye and her friend Aissatou, So Long a Letter. In addition to Ibrahima Sall and Mariama Bâ, another author from this country wrote the novels God's Bits of Wood and Xala before directing films like Black Girl and Ceddo. This country's Thiaroye massacre was dramatized by Boubacar Boris Diop, and a poet from this country included "Snow in Paris," "Totem," and "Prayer to the Masks" in his first collection, Shadow Songs. The birthplace of Birago Diop and Ousmane Sembene, this another author from this country founded negritude along with Leon Damas and Aime Cesaire. FTP, name this African country home to Leopold Senghor.;;(the) (Republic) (of) Senegal|(Republique) (du) Senegal;;
Literature;;This poem mentions the "still, sad music of humanity" and claims that neither "the sneers of selfish men,  nor greetings where no kindness is... Shall ever prevail against us... Therefore let the moon shine on thee in thy solitary walk". The speaker says "I have felt a presence that disturbs me with the joy of elevated thoughts," and laments his anticipated inability to "catch from wild eyes these gleams of past existence". The speaker prays that memories will render another character's mind "a mansion for all lovely forms," and claims "I cannot paint what I then was" after five years away from the title locale. The author, "so long a worshiper of Nature," focuses this poem's last section about his sister Dorothy. For 10 points, name this poem written "on revisiting the banks of the Wye during a tour," a work of William Wordsworth.;;(Lines) (Composed) (a) (Few) (Miles) (Above) Tintern Abbey;;
Literature;;This author discussed her conversion to Catholicism in "If 2 + 2 = 5". One of this author's works opens as Mr. Gram hears "The Merry Widow, played at a preposterously fast tempo". That work tells of a painter who has gone to Rome to seek artistic inspiration, but instead has a baby out-of-wedlock, who dies after six weeks. This author of the novel Images in a Mirror wrote about Olav in The Snake Pit, the second volume in a tetralogy that also includes The Axe, In the Wilderness, and The Son Avenger. One of her title characters is initially betrothed to Simon Darre, but falls in love with Erlind before donating a golden wreath to a shrine in Trondheim. For 10 points, name this Norwegian author of Jenny, The Master of Hestviken, and Kristin Lavransdatter.;;(Sigrid) Undset;;
Literature;;Inspired by his recollection of "the bum-swipes of Gargantua," the protagonist of this novel uses two sheets of paper to wipe his ass after Captains Scurry and Slye cause him to shit himself. The protagonist becomes bedridden in a brothel run by Mary Mungummory, the traveling whore of Dorset, and saves the lives of Quassapelagh and Drepacca over the objections of his valet Bertram. This novel features a search for the ledger of John Coode, which also contains a secret diary describing how John Smith used an eggplant to deflower Pocahontas. The protagonist marries the prostitute Joan Toast, and continually runs into his disguised tutor Henry Burlingame III after being commissioned to write a Marylandiad by Lord Baltimore. FTP, name this novel about the poet Ebenezer Cooke, written by John Barth.;;(The) Sot-Weed (Factor);;
Literature;;Its introduction claims that not even Goethe and Hugo were able to clear away the debris of writing and reveal their pure imaginations. It proceeds to analyze the tale of Amis and Amile, as well as that of Aucassin and Nicolette, and later notes that Winckelman's powers waned when he sought to go beyond the Greek sense of unity with the self.  Before concluding that its readers should "burn with a hard, gemlike flame," it states that art attempts to obliterate the distinction between form and content, and thus aspires to the condition of music, in "The School of Giorgione". Also containing the essays "Leonardo da Vinci" and "The Poetry of Michelangelo," for 10 points, name this book by Walter Pater about an aesthetic movement.;;(The) Renaissance(:) (Studies) (in) (Art) (and) (Poetry);;
Literature;;This novel's narrator proclaims that until the protagonist appeared, "the world had only known apples...The best apples that can be, for sure, but still only apples!" This novel infuriated James Whistler by caricaturing him as the "idle apprentice" Joe Sibley. In the beginning of this novel, one character scratches an outline of the protagonist's beautiful left foot on the wall of his studio. The title character models for Taffy, the Laird, and Little Billie, and later sings Schumann's "Nussbaum," "Ben Bolt," and Chopin's Impromptu in A flat during her triumphant debut in Paris. However, the title character's debut in London is a fiasco when she is unable to maintain eye contact with her husband. FTP, name this book about Miss O'Ferrall, who becomes a virtuoso singer after being hypnotized by Svengali, a novel by George Du Maurier which inspired a craze for a namesake type of hat.;;Trilby;;
Literature;;This location appears in the title of a Walter Abish novel in which each word of the first chapter begins with A, each word of the second chapter begins with either A or B, and so on. W. H. Auden's poem "As I Walked Out One Evening" declares "I'll love you dear, I'll love you / Till China and this location meet," and Countee Cullen's poem "Heritage" asks "What is this location to me"? Derek Walcott wrote "a wind is ruffling the tawny pelt" of this location in his poem "A Far Cry From" this place, and Bird fantasizes about traveling here in A Personal Matter. Ernest Hemingway wrote "All modern American literature comes from one book by Mark Twain called Huckleberry Finn" in a book named for the "Green Hills" of this location. FTP, name this location that titles an epic poem about the Battle of Zama by Petrarch, a continent home to authors like Tsitsi Dangarembga and Chinua Achebe.;;Africa;;
Literature;;One character in this work remarks that her husband's name is actually Pedro, but she calls him Moby because it goes better with the butler's name. Hermoine and Adolfina offer red roses to that character, whose body is nearly wholly made of artificial material due to a plane crash in Afghanistan. The protagonist is not arrested after giving shoes to the Chief of Police, and is carried around on sedan-chairs by two blind, castrated men who had lied in court. At the end of the first act, the townspeople are aghast at a proposal to kill a former lover of the protagonist, although they murder him in the third and final act. The town of Gullen agrees to kill Alfred Ill in order to receive a million marks from Claire Zachanassian in, FTP, what play by Friedrich Dürrenmatt?;;(The) Visit (of) (the) (Old) (Lady)|(Der) Besuch (der) (alten) (Dame);;
Literature;;In its original collection, this poem comes between "Tag" and "College Formal: A Renaissance Casino". It opens with a quatrain in rhyming couplets by a secondary speaker, which ends "Then, it will be true," though the primary speaker later notes it's "not easy to know what it is true for you or me" and that the other speaker is "somewhat more free". In between, its speaker notes he'd like a pipe for Christmas, that he likes Bach as well as bop and Bessie, and that "I hear New York too". While this poem notes that the secondary speaker "is a part of me, as I am a part of you," because "That's American," its main speaker also asserts that his page, "Being me…will not be white". For 10 points, name this poem from Montage of a Dream Deferred framed as a composition assignment, by Langston Hughes.;;(")Theme for English B(");;
Literature;;The protagonist of this short story imagines a little boy bringing her a slice of marble cake, and drinks water flavored with sweet-gum before falling into a ditch. The protagonist asks a lady carrying an armful of presents to tie her shoes, since she "can't lace ‘em with a cane," and mistakes a scarecrow for a ghost. Motivated by a relative who swallowed lye, the protagonist picks up a nickel dropped by a hunter, and crosses a creek and a barbed wire fence. Taking place on a bright frozen day in December, the protagonist travels from from her home to a doctor's office in Natchez, where she obtains throat medicine for her grandson. FTP, name this short story from A Curtain of Green about Phoenix Jackson's journey on the title road, written by Eudora Welty.;;("A) Worn Path(");;
Literature;;This novel ends with the birth of a girl whose name means "may the path never close," Amaechina. The protagonist tells a British poet nicknamed "Mad Medico" that "we were enslaved originally by Gordon's Dry Gin," and is later shot by soldiers after giving an incendiary speech at the University of Bassa. This novel begins with delegates from the province of Abazon protesting the shutdown of their water-holes. The protagonist's critical editorials cause him to be fired from the National Gazette; his death causes Chris Oriko to resign his post as Commissioner of Information in Kangan. FTP, name this 1988 novel about Ikem Osodi, a reporter killed on orders of the ruthless dictator Sam, written by Chinua Achebe.;;Anthills of the Savannah;;
Literature;;One character in this play refuses to translate an English article because it asserts the influence of a higher power on people's actions. Its third act reveals that Billing is running for secretary, and in its second act, one character assures the protagonist of the support of the Temperance Society and the Homeowners Association. In the fourth act, the title phrase is uttered after the protagonist compares the masses to mongrels during a meeting at Horster's house. In its final act, the protagonist rejects a deal made by Morten Kiil, and attempts to throw the People's Herald journalists Aslaksen and Hovstad out a window. The protagonist's family is shunned after he gives a speech about the tyranny of the majority. FTP, name this play about Dr. Thomas Stockmann's attempts to reveal that the baths in his town are contaminated, written by Henrik Ibsen.;;An Enemy of the People|En Folkenfiende;;
Literature;;One character in this work has a sexual encounter with Harry Minowitz, and experiences a "terrible hurt" while listening to Eroica outside of a window. It also sees an impotent man take up sewing and using perfume after the death of his wife Alice, as well as Baby Wilson accidentally being shot by Spareribs' BB gun. Its protagonist's makeshift violin is mocked by Bill, while another character is disappointed by sons such as Hamilton, Karl Marx, and Willie. Other characters include Biff Brannon and a Marxist who works at a carnival, Jake Blount, who, along with Dr. Copeland and Mick Kelly, enjoy talking to a man who shoots himself after learning of the death of Spiros Antonapoulous. For 10 points, name this work about the deaf-mute John Singer by Carson McCullers.;;(The) Heart is a Lonely Hunter;;
Literature;;In one of this author's works, the narrator is abandoned by Aurélie because of his fascination with Adrienne. This author of "Sylvie" tells white roses to fall from the burning sky because the saint of the abyss is holier than them in "Artémis" and wrote a poem which states "the pale Hydrangea is united with green Myrtle". Those poems appear in a collection which contains five sonnets on Christ of the Mount of Olives and ends with "The Golden Verses". That collection, Les Chimères, begins with a sonnet that speaks of "the black sun of Melancholy" and claims the author is the dispossessed Prince of Aquitane as well as "the shadow-man, the widower, the unconsoled". For 10 points, name this author of "El Desdichado".;;(Gérard) (de) Nerval;;
Literature;;The speaker of this poem wishes to call up Chaucer in order to listen to the completed Squire's Tale. This poem mentions a "sad virgin" who might "bid the soul of Oprheus sing / such notes as warbled to the string / Drew iron tears down Plutoes cheek". Its speaker refers to religious music which "may with sweetness, through mine ear / Dissolve me into extasies / And bring all Heaven before mine eyes," and wants to read Plato and "outwatch the Bear" in "som high lonely tower". The speaker wishes to inhabit a "Hairy Gown and Mossy Cell" in order to attain "somthing like Prophetic strain," and hails a goddess born to Vesta and Saturn in the grove of Ida. Beginning "Hence vaine deluding joyes / the brood of folly without father bred," FTP, name this poem about the melancholy man by John Milton, the companion to "L'Allegro".;;(")Il Penseroso(");;
Literature;;One character in this work recalls being told to shine her shoes for the Fat Lady. Another character is interrupted by his mother while reading the manuscript of "The Heart is an Autumn Wanderer". A discussion of a paper about Flaubert in Sickler's eventually leads to one character fainting while on a date with Lane Coutell. The second part of this work opens with one title character recalling his time on "It's a Wise Child"; the other title character's fascination with The Way of a Pilgrim and the Jesus Prayer causes her brother to impersonate their oldest living brother Buddy using the phone of Seymour, who had committed suicide in "A Perfect Day for Bananafish". FTP, name this work about two title Glass siblings, written by J. D. Salinger.;;Franny and Zooey;;
Literature;;Klausner hears the screams of roses and a tree using the title device in this author's story "The Sound Machine". This author also wrote a story in which William Botibol jumps off a boat to try to win a bet, as well as another in which Mary Maloney convinces detectives to eat the weapon used to murder her husband. This author of "Dip in the Pool" and "Lamb to the Slaughter" also wrote the collection Switch Bitch, and used Battle of Britain as the starting point for his novel Sometime Never: A Fable for Superman. He may be better remembered for a work in which the Roly-Poly Bird helps exact revenge on the title couple, as well as one in which Miss Trunchbull prevents the title character from moving up in school. FTP, name this British author of The Twits and Matilda, as well as James and the Giant Peach and Charlie and the Chocolate Factory.;;(Roald) Dahl;;
Literature;;One of this man's uncollected poems remarks "Again and again, however we know the landscapes of love". In one poem, he wrote of a woman "whirling faster and faster" who "fans her dress to passionate flames," while another describes figures "like enormous feathery blossoms, seducing" and mentions "all the subtle paints of Fragonard". Besides "The Flamingoes" and "Spanish Dancer,"" this author of the collection Lares' Sacrifice wrote a poem which states "We cannot know" the title figure's "legendary head" and claims "You must change your life". His correspondence with a student at the Vienna Military Academy, Franz Kappus, was collected in Letters to a Young Poet. This author of "Archaic Torso of Apollo" and "The Panther" also wrote a set of works dedicated to Vera Ouckham Knoop, as well as a cycle of poems beginning "Who, if I cried out, would hear me among the angels' hiearchies"? For 10 points, name this author of the Sonnets to Orpheus and the Duino Elegies.;;(Rainer) (Maria) Rilke;;
Literature;;In one of this author's works, a king found hiding in a barrel is unable to be restored by Patrick Sarsfield.  While in Egypt, this author wrote a pamphlet supporting Ahmad Bey's nationalist revolt against the Khedives, Arabi and His Household. A one-act play by this author consists of dialogue between two women named Mary, the wife and mother of the recently executed Denis Cahel. This author of plays such as The Gaol Gate, The Deliverer, and Hyancinth Halvey commented "It is the old battle, between those who use a toothbrush and those who don't," in response to a riot that broke out during Synge's Playboy of the Western World. She collected folktales in works like Cuchulainn of Muirthemne and The Kiltartan Wonder Book, and her home at Coole Park served as a venue for the Irish Literary Revival. For 10 points, name this Irish playwright who, along with Yeats, cofounded the Abbey Theatre.;;Lady Gregory (Isabella) (Augusta) Persee;;
Literature;;In French, this phrase titles a poem that tells its addressee, "For all this sea-hoard of deciduous things," there's "Nothing that's quite your own". In English, it titles a poem that begins "Your thighs are appletrees" and briefly forgets that Fragonard, not Watteau, painted The Swing, as well as a poem where a performance of Chopin preludes sets a "false note" in the narrator's ear as he abandons an over-the-hill woman who "shall sit here, serving tea to friends"; the latter is the second poem in Prufrock and Other Observations. They all take their name from a novel where Henrietta Stackpole tries to get Caspar Goodwood to marry the title character, though Madame Merle has her to go to Italy and wed Gilbert Osmond. For 10 points, give this shared title of poems by Ezra Pound, Williams Carlos Williams, and T.S. Eliot, as well as a novel by Henry James about Isabel Archer.;;(")Portrait of a Lad(y")|(")Portrait d'une femme(");;
Literature;;The narrator claims that, because the English do not believe in genii like the Muslims do, it's difficult for him to find a way to save this character from Tyburn. He discusses the merits of equality with a Gypsy-king with whom he takes shelter for the night, learns how a gambling problem and the betrayal of Watson lead to the destitution of the Man of the Hill, and gives three guineas to a novice highwayman who fails to rob him. He discovers the highwayman is Mrs. Miller's cousin when he arrives in London, where he is nearly executed for stabbing Mr. Fitzpatrick while avoiding the affections of Lady Bellaston. He is also helped by his one-time lover Mrs. Waters, who is briefly thought to be his mother before Squire Allworthy sorts things out. For 10 points, name this foundling created by Henry Fielding.;;Tom Jones;;
Literature;;The Hound & Horn: A Harvard Miscellany included this author's first published poem "Anne Gardner". He authored a posthumously-published collection of letters to Father Flye, as well as the novella The Morning Watch and the poem "Descriptions of Elysium," which appears in his collection Permit Me Voyage. A rejected draft from Esquire became this author's travelogue describing backstreet neighborhoods like Flatbush, Midwood, and Sheepshead Bay that "roll silently to the sea," Brooklyn Is. He wrote a semi-autobiographical novel beginning with the prologue "Knoxville, Summer 1915," which set in LaFollette, where Rufus reacts to his father's death in a car crash. For 10 points, name this author of A Death in the Family who collaborated with Walker Evans on Let Us Now Praise Famous Men.;;(James) Agee;;
Literature;;This author of Men Without Art wrote a novel about an author kidnapped by Ali Akbar while researching a book on the cult of Mithras. He also wrote novels about a man who breaks off his engagement with Bertha Lunken, and a Dantesque explosion of fire and ice which destroys Hotel Blundell, the temporary home of Hester and Rene Harding. Besides The Snooty Baronet, Tarr, and Self-Condemned, his other creations include a man who collects whips, Don Whittingdon, who appears in a novel where Dan Boleyn is tutored by Horace Zagreus. He also wrote a novel in which Jack Cruze beats Percy Hardcaster, a communist organizer in the Spanish Civil War. For 10 points, name this author of a trilogy beginning with Childermass, The Human Age, who also wrote The Apes of God and The Revenge for Love, and founded Vorticism.;;(Percy) (Wyndham) Lewis;;
Literature;;One character in this work founds the station of Nibir to determine the bounds of the year. Later, the Igigi wail in lamentation after Gaga describes how one character created monster-serpents made of poison to destroy them. This work describes the creation of E-sara by a character who uses an evil wind and a net to defeat his antagonist. In its third section, Ansar asks Lahmu and Lahamu to prepare a feast after learning that the antagonist exalted Kingu by giving him the Tablets of Destiny. It begins with Apsu provoking his wife to wage war against the gods, which causes Tiamat to be slain by Marduk. Meaning "when on high," FTP, name this creation myth of Babylonian mythology.;;Enuma Elish;;
Literature;;She is said to wear the Inarculum because she is the queen priest, and supposedly "Her eyes the glow-worm lend thee". "The damn'd would make no noise" if they could listen to her "melting melodious words to lutes of amber," and if asked where to find rubies, her lover would point to the lips of this woman, who wears an "azure robe... as airy as the leaves of gold". She goes in silks, and "sweetly flows that liquefaction of her clothes". Her lover wrote poems upon this woman's ribbon, sweat, and teeth, as well as unrelated ones like "Delight in disorder" and "To the Virgins, To Make Much of Time". For 10 points, name this foremost poetic mistress of Robert Herrick, who shares her name with an aunt in a Mario Vargas Llosa novel.;;Julia;;
Literature;;This novel's protagonist is chastised by its narrator for his habit of using "derange" to mean "disturb". One subplot involves the suspicion that Mrs. Ferrars poisoned her husband to marry the title character, while another deals with Flora's ring, discovered on the path behind the house. Its solution relies on the deduction that the victim's voice was being played by a since-removed Dictaphone, and that suspicious stepson Ralph Paton was being hidden away at a local inn by the real killer. Though its protagonist would star in over forty more books, at its start he's already retired to grow marrows in King's Abbot, where he meets Dr. James Sheppard, the man that serves as his new sidekick and chronicler until the twist ending.  For 10 points, in what novel does Hercule Poirot discover that the narrator killed the title character?;;(The) Murder of Roger Ackroyd;;
Literature;;In The Rosciad, Charles Churchill wrote that "to be pleas'd with nature" was to be pleased with this man. He adapted Novelty Lethe into the farce The Lying Valet, and himself wrote Lethe, or Aesop in the Shades, while J.R. Crawford dramatized his affair with Margaret Woffington in Lovely Peggy. Richard Sheridan wrote that he "No fix'd effect, no model leaves behind!" in a funeral poem for this man, who wrote the prologue to Sheridan's The School for Scandal. In Tom Jones, Partridge is less impressed with him than with King Hamlet, since the style he pioneered as manager of the Drury Lane Theater and as a portrayer of Richard III and Macbeth seemed less work than the older, theatrical acting style. For 10 points, name this foremost actor of eighteenth-century England.;;(David) Garrick;;
Literature;;This work notes "the pomegranates rise and burst and murmur with the bees" and describes a time "when the forest glows with gold and ashen tints". The narrator calls "O fringes of a placid mere in Sicily," and discusses "chilly blue eyes...like a fountain in tears". Its protagonist talks of "sucking the gleam of grape-flesh" and imagines Venus across the very slopes of Etna after exclaiming "Try, then, to flower again, organ of flights, malign syrinx". That character also made "the thicket steeped in music" by his "flute's outpourings" and "prised apart the tousled wry kisses the gods had so deftly mingled," spoiling his desire to ravish two nymphs. For 10 points, name this symbolist poem about a mythical beast, a work of Stéphane Mallarmé adapted into an orchestral piece by Debussy.;;(")Afternoon of a Faun(")|(")L'Après-midi d'un faune(");;
Literature;;Seeing candy rabbits as a grown woman reminds her of when she and her brother Paul found a dead mother rabbit as a young girl. Later, she and her sister Maria win $100 at the races by betting on Miss Lucy, the horse owned by their deceased Aunt Amy's drunkard husband Harry. As a grown woman, she tells Nurse Tanner that her hands look like white tarantulas while fading into and out of consciousness, because, though she was able to repulse the men selling Liberty Bonds at her Denver newspaper, she was unable to keep away from influenza. She shares her name with a character who marvels, "O brave new world with such people in it!" For 10 points, give the name of this heroine of The Old Order and Pale Horse, Pale Rider, as well as the love object of Caliban in The Tempest.;;Miranda;;
Literature;;This man described moon and lantern light provoking "the splash of jumping fish" in "Overflowing". Two of his later poems respectively describe people coming helping him after he falls off his horse drunk and note "it's the greatest timber that's hardest to put to use". One of his early poems asserts that it's better to have girls than boys because the latter are "merely buried amid the grass". Many of his middle-period poems are devoted to his thatched hut, while many other works of this friend of Abbot Zan are lushi, like his two "Poems on a Bend in the River" and three "Sighs of Autumn". For 10 points, name this author of "Ballad of the Ancient Cypress" and "Song of the Wagons," a Confucian T'ang poet.;;Du (Fu);;
Literature;;This author wrote about a person who "saw upon the grass / Each footprint marked in blood, and on my door / The mark of blood for evermore" in "Despised and Rejected," one of her Devotional Pieces. Her short stories include "The Lost Titan" and "Maude: A Story for Girls," and Skene "closes the pistol to the brow" of his "pale young wife" in her poem set during the Sepoy Mutiny, "In the Round Tower at Jhansi, June 8, 1857". One of her poetry collections is named for a poem beginning "Till all sweet gums and juices flow / Till the blossom of blossoms blow / The long hours go and come and go," "The Prince's Progress". Gustav Holst set her Christmas carol "In the Bleak Midwinter" to music, and in another of her poems, sinister merchants cry "Come buy, come buy" to Laura and Lizzie. The sister of a Pre-Raphaelite painter, for 10 points, name this English poet of "Goblin Market".;;(Christina) Rossetti;;
Literature;;This character courts his wife by taking her family to see the Lamont Sisters and the "Society Contralto" at the theater, as well as accompanying them to Schuetzen Park, where August's boat sinks in the pond. He dreams of owning a small house, but is deterred when he's tricked into paying a month's rent on a house with a foot of standing water in the basement. Able to play six mournful airs on the concertina, he teams up with Cribbens after escaping a mine, but becomes easy to track because he carries a canary in a cage from his Polk Street office. This character's wife becomes obsessed with gold coins after winning five thousand dollars in a lottery, which causes the jealousy of Marcus Schouler, to whom he ends up handcuffed in Death Valley. For 10 points, name this dentist created by Frank Norris.;;McTeague;;
Literature;;In this novel an extravagant carriage is the pride and joy of the Sucklings. An anonymously sent pianoforte is believed to be a gift by Mrs. Dixon or Colonel Campbell, though it was actually sent by a Scot from Enscombe. The title character is the only one not invited to a party thrown by the Cole family and agrees to paint a portrait of her protege, who is snubbed by Philip Elton at a dance but eventually marries the farmer Robert Martin. In this novel, one character is saved from gypsies by the foppish son of Mr. Weston, who later marries Jane Fairfax. The title character takes Harriet Smith under her wing and marries her sister Isabella's brother-in-law, George Knightley. For 10 points, identify this Jane Austen novel named for the daughter of Mr. Woodhouse.;;Emma;;
Literature;;The "wise and antique" eyes of one of these animals watches "the haggard daylight steer" in a poem where one of its legs is "chewed and clipped off by a lawnmower". Mere Antoinette is the title "Mother of All" of these creatures in a  short story by Clark Ashton Smith, and a Richard Wilbur poem concerns "the death of" one. This animal appears in the title of a novel about Alexander Reschke and Alexandra Piatkowska, who found the Polish-German-Lithuanian  Cemetery Association. In addition to that Gunter Grass novel named for "the call of" this animal, one of them appears in the title of a short story about the prostitute Hermalinda, who is able to launch coins out of her vagina. FTP, name this amphibian whose "mouth" titles a short story by Isabel Allende, and names a very wealthy character in The Wind and the Willows.;;toad(s);;
Literature;;At one point in this story, a character recommends Winwood Reade's Martyrdom of Man. The narrator compares his colleague's misplaced romanticism to working a love-story into Euclid's Fifth Postulate. A young lady calls on the narrator's colleague because he had helped Mrs. Cecil Forrester; she describes the disappearance of her father, a series of pearls she has received yearly on May 4th, and a mysterious letter asking Miss Morstan to meet an "unknown friend" outside the Lyceum Theatre.  When that character returns, she brings a piece of paper from her father's desk with the names Mahomet Singh, Abdullah Khan, Dost Akbar and Jonathan Small written on it. Preceded by A Study in Scarlet, for 10 points identify this novel about Sherlock Holmes by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle named for a hieroglyphic symbol.;;(The) Sign of (the) Four;;
Literature;;A minor character in this work disdainfully recalls a Bryn Mawr euphemism for losing one's virginity, being "off the sports list". It opens with Luther L. Fliegler debating whether or not to have sex with his wife, Irma, on Christmas day, and its main character's downfall begins with an incident involving an emptied vase of flowers being converted into the "biggest highball he had ever seen". Its original working title was "The Infernal Grove," and it depicts three days in the lives of a leading couple of Gibbsville, Pennsylvania. Dorothy Parker's introduction to Maugham's play Sheppey prompted its author to change this work's title to a legend about a jostled servant in a Baghdad marketplace, who flees to the title location only to be met by Death herself. For 10 points, name this novel about the scheduled self-destruction of Julian English, the first novel of John O'Hara.;;Appointment in Samarra;;
Literature;;Allen Tate claimed that "we do not know the world by looking at it; we know it by looking at" this poem's title being. That being is described as "Blue-uncertain-stumbling," and appears after the narrator "Signed away / What portion of me be / Assignable". Its second stanza notes that "Breaths were gathering firm" and "The Eyes around-had wrung them dry," furthering the first stanza's comparison of "the Stillness in the Air-/ Between the Heaves of Storm" and "The Stillness in the Room" during the title event. That event occurs "Between the light and me," and, after it, the narrator "could not see to see". For 10 points, name this Emily Dickinson poem that notes the coincidence of her expiration and an insect's noise.;;(")I Heard a Fly Buzz When I Died(")|(No.) 591|(No.) 465;;(")The Hovering Fly(")
Literature;;Early editions of this play do not feature the appearance of Mrs. Johnson, who quotes, "Education has spoiled many a good plow hand". In the first scene of the second act, one character drunkenly dances on a table while shouting "FLAMING SPEAR!" in response to another character's cry of "OCOMOGOSIAY". That character is nicknamed "Alaiyo" by one of her suitors, whom she prefers over George Murchison. Bobo's failure to meet Willy Harris in Springfield puts an end to the male protagonist's plan to open a liquor store. That protagonist enrages his mother by deciding not to deposit $3,000 for his sister's education, but later tells Karl Lindner that his family will move to Clybourne Park. FTP, name this play about Travis, Ruth, Benethea, and Walter Lee Younger, written by Lorraine Hansberry.;;(A) Raisin in the Sun;;
Literature;;Along with Tyrone Guthrie, this author wrote a work named for a line spoken by the First Witch from Act IV Scene I of Macbeth, Thrice the Brindled Cat Hath Mew'd. This author wrote that "The world is full of people whose notion of a satisfactory future is, in fact, a return to the idealized past" in a collection of essays titled A Voice in the Attic. This author also wrote a novel beginning with Clement Hollier, Urquhart McVarish, and Simon Darcourt reading the will of a wealthy art dealer. Another of his works centers on a snowball throwing incident involving Ramsey and Percy "Boy" Staunton. He wrote a trilogy comprised of The Rebel Angels, What's Bred in the Bone, and The Lyre of Orpheus, as well as a trilogy consisting of Fifth Business, The Manticore, and World of Wonders. FTP, name this Canadian author of the Cornish and Deptford trilogies.;;(Robertson) Davies;;
Literature;;This novel asks the reader to insert Chapter 130 in between the first and second sentences of Chapter 129. In its seventh chapter, the protagonist imagines he is an illustrated edition of Summa Theologica and that a hippopotamus carries him to the beginning of time. Its narrator recounts his affair with Marcela, and accuses the main defect of the book of being the reader. Its structure was influenced by its author's reading of Tristram Shandy, and in its first section, its narrator describes his admiration for the "free form" of Xavier de Maistre and Laurence Sterne. The narrator attempts to develop a poultice for melancholy, and loves Virgilia. Its narrative is broken by the inclusion of blank pages and an account of the title character's friend Quincas Borba. FTP, name this 1880 novel narrated by the title character from beyond the grave, written by Machado de Assis.;;(The) Posthumous Memoirs of Bras Cubas|Memórias Póstumas de Brás Cubas(,)|Epitaph of a Small Winner;;
Literature;;One work by this author opens by describing Ruth and Godfrey walking on an old street which kept the "New England Sabbath" so decently, Bylow Hill. This author also depicted a soldier of Austin's brigade who wanted to be where "Shakespeare was part of the baggage, where Pope was quoted, where Coleridge and Byron and Poe were recited," in The Cavalier. He attacked Jim Crow laws in his essay "The Silent South," advocated for prison reform in Dr. Sevier, and wrote about a quadroon who swears that her daughter Olive is really the offspring of a white woman in Madame Delphine. In another of his novels, Honore struggles to reconcile the idealism of Joseph Frowenfeld with the prideful antiquated ways of his Uncle Agricola Fusilier. For 10 points, name this Louisiana-born author of Old Creole Days and The Grandissimes.;;(George) (Washington) Cable;;
Literature;;In this work, some characters while crossing a square overhear speakers "extolling the virtues of the fundamental principles of the great organized systems, private property, a free currency market, and the stock exchange," which leaves one of the main characters silent. Its sequel centers on a parliamentary election where the majority of people cast blank ballots, and in a late scene, the protagonists enter a church whose artwork is covered in bandages. One character in this novel stabs the leader of a group of hoodlums with a pair of scissors, and is consoled by a dog who licks away her tears. It opens at a traffic signal where a car does not respond to a green light, and its characters include "the doctor" and the "doctor's wife". For 10 points, name this novel which recounts a social breakdown after an epidemic of the titular condition, written by Jose Saramago.;;Blindness;;
Literature;;The narrator of this work learns a match trick from General Kuropatkin and is taught art by Dobuzhinski. In this book, a Polish medical student bicycles off to have an affair with a married woman twelve miles away; that student, Max, later courts an Irish governess. Chapter twelve is devoted to the narrator's love affair with Tamara, and chapter five focuses on the French governess Cécile Miauton. Other prominent women in this work include the narrator's love Colette and his mother Elena, and it features a passage describing timelessness while standing among exotic butterflies.  The last chapter of this reworking of Conclusive Evidence mentions the author's love of chess and follows the author around Berlin and Paris while accompanied by his son Dmitri and wife Vera. For 10 points, name this autobiography by Vladimir Nabokov.;;Speak, Memory;;
Literature;;In one story, a boy accidentally gets off the train at this locale while petitioning for his mother's retirement and is mistaken for the Wandering Jew by Father Anthony, who does not understand the significance of its suicidal birds. In another, its populace tries to stop the burial of a doctor who refuses to end his medical retirement to save Meme or a battalion of wounded soldiers. In a third story set here, a state of public disturbance is declared to allow the President to attend the two-day funeral of Nicanor's aunt, who kept three trunks of forged ballots to maintain her ninety-two-year status as its "absolute sovereign". Fernanda del Carpio arrives here to compete with Remedios in a novel that describes its settlement by the killer of Prudencio Aguilar, Jose Arcadio Buendia. For 10 points, name this setting of "Leaf Storm," "Big Mama's Funeral," and One Hundred Years of Solitude.;;Macondo;;
Literature;;This work's narrator compares a girl's breasts to "the two smoothest scoops of vanilla I had ever known," and observes that his parents pour Schlitz "in tall glasses with 'They'll Do It Every Time' cartoons stenciled on" when guests visit. It compares customers to "house-slaves in pin curlers" and "sheep," and includes a brief conversation between the narrator and Stokesie. Ending with the narrator realizing "how hard the world was going to be to me hereafter," this short story climaxes with "Queenie" being chastised by Lengel for wearing a bathing suit to purchase herring snacks, which leads the narrator to quit the title establishment. FTP, name this short story about Sammy, who runs a cash register for the title supermarket, written by John Updike.;;(")A & P(");;
Literature;;The only break in this poem's stanza pattern comes in its third section, where "evil sprites" dancing a saraband cause the speaker to exclaim "Ah! wounds of Christ!" Its fourth section imagines a red rose and a white rose growing out of a dead man's mouth and heart after describing a naked man "wrapt in a sheet of flame!" This poem's speaker pities a man who does not feel "upon his shuddering cheek / The kiss of Caiaphas," and imagines that man's room thronged with "dread figures" like a Governor "with the yellow face of Doom". Originally published anonymously under the pseudonym C33 See three three, it begins "He did not wear his scarlet coat / For blood and wine are red," and describes the death of a figure who "walked amongst the Trial Men / In a suit of shabby grey". It also asserts that "each man kills the thing he loves"; "the coward does it with a kiss / the brave man with a sword!" FTP, name this poem about a hanging in the title prison, written by Oscar Wilde.;;("The) Ballad of Reading Gaol(");;
Literature;;The prologue to this work describes Nebuchadnezzar's dream of a statue with feet of clay and steel. This work includes a story about a knight who steals a ring from the son of a Roman Emperor in order to marry a sultan's daughter, "The False Bachelor," as well as the story of  "Canace and Machaire". Its seventh book discusses Aristotle's education of Alexander the Great. Its eight book's description of Antiochus' incestuous relationship with his daughter, which is discovered by Apollonius of Tyre, inspired Shakespeare's play Pericles. Comprised "Somwhat of lust, somwhat of lore," this work's frame story consists of Genius telling examples of the seven deadly sins to a lover who desires to gain absolution from Venus. FTP, name this poem by John Gower whose title means The Lover's Confession.;;Confessio Amantis;;
Literature;;One member of this group wrote Tlooth and an epistolary novel about Twang and her husband Zachary McCaltex, The Sinking of the Odradek Stadium. Its members include Ian Monk and Jacques Robaud, and its manifesto, which asked "Should humanity lie back and watch new thoughts write ancient verses"?, was written by Francois Le Lionnais. Another of its members, Harry Mathews, developed an algorithm for producing new texts, while another member of this group wrote a book which describes 179 inhabitants of a building through the Knight's tour, Life: A User's Manual. It was founded by the author of Zazie in the Metro and One Hundred Trillion Sonnets, Raymond Queneau. FTP, name this modern French literary movement, exemplified by Georges Perec, which uses rules and constraints to produce texts, whose name is short for Workshop for Potential Literature.;;Oulipo|Ourvoir de Litterature Potentialle;;
Literature;;In this novel's third chapter, a bandy-legged student carries a cleaning woman away from the protagonist, who later becomes incapacitated by suffocating air. Captain Lanz and Fraulein Montag witness the protagonist clandestinely entering the room of a fellow tenant. On the urging of his Uncle Karl, the protagonist employs Huld; later, the protagonist visits a painter menaced by a throng of young girls, Titorelli, who recommends the option of infinite deferral. After opening a door in the bank where he works, the protagonist discovers a Whipper beating the warders Willem and Franz. In its final chapter, two men take the protagonist to a quarry and stab him in the heart "like a dog". In its ninth chapter, "In the Cathedral," a prison chaplain tells a parable about a man who comes "before the law". FTP, name this novel about a man accused of an unknown crime by a mysterious court, a book beginning "someone must have been telling lies about Joseph K". by Franz Kafka.;;(The) Trial|(Der) Prozess;;
Literature;;One character in this work is described as having a waspish female psychology similar to that of Julius Caesar, while another character gives up her memoir of Princess Palliatani to write a children's book with a moss beetle as its hero. The author of "The Light Goes Out" and "The Unseen" is told that women have ruled him with a rod of iron, such as one character who appears before the Bradmans leave. Axle grease on the stairs and a sawed ladder are among the antics of one character's former wife, who causes the death of Ruth. It is revealed that Edith, the maid, had called Elvira's specter during Madame Arcati's séance, and by the end of the play, both ghosts leave the the protagonist, novelist Charles Condomine. FTP, name this farcical drama by Noel Coward named for a line in "To a Skylark".;;Blithe Spirit;;
Literature;;One character in this work is tutored by Vizcacha, who is buried with one hand sticking above the ground. This work ends with the protagonist averting a fight with Moreno and giving advice to his two sons and Picardia. After refusing to vote, the protagonist is conscripted into the army, only to desert with his friend Sergeant Cruz. Divided into "La ida" and "La vuelta," this work is written in sextilla verse. The title payador uses a knife to kill an Indian before having a singing contest with a Negro, and protests against the government's exploitation of people living on the Pampas. FTP, name this poem by Jose Hernandez, a classic of gaucho literature.;;Martin Fierro;;
Literature;;A steel plate binds the manuscript of this author's book about a friend serving a life sentence, The Convict Bird: a children's poem. He described meeting a former machinist named Pittsburg Ed in his most recent work, Riding Toward Everywhere, and documented his adventures abroad in An Afghan Picture Show, or How I Saved the World. Published out of order, his Seven Dreams cycle depicts the arrival of various groups to North America, and he wrote about a clash between the Society of Daniel and humanoid insects who follow the Great Beetle in his experimental novel You Bright and Risen Angels. This author wrote a seven-volume treatise on violence, and adopted the perspectives of Kurt Gerstein, Dmitri Shostokovich, and General Vlasov in his fictionalized account of World War II. For 10 points, name this American author of Rising Up and Rising Down and Europe Central.;;(William) (T.) Vollmann;;
Literature;;This character's mistress sends him a message in blood to meet in her secret chamber, but is betrayed by Pero. He hits Maffe for insubordination, and the demon Behemoth is summoned to warn him of danger by a friar whose ghost's attempts to save this character are in vain. The blood of the courtiers Pyrrhot and l'Anou lie on the hands of this lover of Tamyra, who dies thanks to an alliance between Montsurry and the Duc du Guise, which is formed after this character loses the trust of his patron Monsieur. He is avenged by his stoical brother Clermont in a sequel entitled "The Revenge of" this character. For 10 points, name this favorite of Henry III, a French swordsman who appears in two plays by George Chapman.;;Bussy (d'Ambois);;
Literature;;After his host reads a troubling letter, this character tries to flatter him by asking about the genealogies of the best families in Burgundy. His death is foreshadowed when he finds a piece of paper that details the execution of man whose name is an anagram of his own. His fall off a horse while riding with Comte Norbert, the Marquis' son, and a fight at a café near a seminary in Besancon indicate his provincial upbringing. His viewing of a "bird of prey" alludes to his admiration of Napoleon, and while buying boots, this character's mentor, Pirard, warns him against becoming a Parisian fop. He is forbidden to marry Mathilde after it is revealed that he had an affair with the wife of the mayor of Verrieres. Finally executed for shooting Madame de Renal, for 10 points, name this protagonist of The Red and the Black.;;Julien (Sorel);;
Literature;;The narrator of this novel is nauseated by the "mellifluous sugarplum smell" of his visitor. Having been brought up from Cross Key by foot, the hysteria brought about by the protagonist's presence "hung over Jerusalem like thunder". In the section entitled "Old Times Past," the protagonist recalls stealing a book and then witnessing the rape of his mother by McBride. In another novel by the same author, Stingo is obsessed with the life of this book's main character. Based on a document made fully and voluntarily available to the lawyer Thomas Gray, this novel's section "Study War" describes how the title character murders Margaret Whitehead, after which his insurrection begins to fall apart. For 10 points, name this fictionalized first-person narrative of an 1831 slave revolt, a novel by William Styron.;;(The) Confessions of Nat Turner;;
Literature;;One of his poems notes that the increase of men and plants is "Cheered and cheque'd even by the self-same sky". Two longer poems dedicated to the Earl of Southampton respectively concern a woman given the "name of ‘chaste'," which "unhapp'ly set / This bateless edge on his keen appetite," and a man who "Hunting he loved, but love he laughed to scorn". An excerpt from  one of his larger works provides the subtitle for Edward Albee's The Goat and asks, "What is she / that all our swains commend her"? One of his sonnets describes "Bare ruined choirs where late the sweet birds sang," and another claims "Love is not love / Which alters when it alteration finds". For 10 points, name this author of The Rape of Lucrece and Venus and Adonis, whose song "Who is Silvia" is found in his play Two Gentlemen of Verona.;;(William) Shakespeare;;
Literature;;This is the title location of a novel where Chavez's pirates are executed for crimes committed by the Bas-Thorton children. One poet born in this nation imagined immigrants taking over England in "Colonization in Reverse," while another declared, "If we must die, let it not be like hogs". A writer who adopted it as a name wrote stories like "What I Have Been Doing Lately" and "Girl" in At the Bottom of the River. It is also the country housing the Coulibri plantation, where Antoinette Cosway lives until she marries into the Mason and Rochester families in Wide Sargasso Sea. For 10 points, name this Caribbean island, the birthplace of Louise Bennett and Claude McKay and the first name of Ms. Kincaid.;;Jamaica;;
Literature;;In this book, one of the narrator's grandfathers was deported after subversive activities during the Wet Firecracker War. That character's maternal grandmother was a Tatar born near Samarkand sentenced to "re-education" on Oktyabrskaya Revolyutsiya. In this novel's first book, titled "That Thinkum Dinkum," a character issues a paycheck to a janitor for 10 quadrillion one-hundred eighty-five dollars and fifteen cents. The title comes from an address given by Professor Bernardo de la Paz to the Federated States of Earth after a coup. This novel includes an occasionally sexually confused sentient supercomputer named Mike, nicknamed after Mycroft Holmes by the narrator Mannie, who suggests that the Loonies "throw rocks…big rocks" in order to resolve the central rebellion. It popularized the acronym "TINSTAAFL," or "there is no such thing as a free lunch". For 10 points, name this novel about a lunar revolution against the Earth by Robert A. Heinlein.;;(The) Moon is a Harsh Mistress;;
Literature;;The title of a play by Patrick Garland about this author's work, An Enormous Yes, comes from this author's poem "For Sydney Bechet". He used the pseudonym "Brunette Coleman" to write Michaelmas Term at St. Bride's and the poem sequence "Sugar and Spice," both of which are contained in Trouble at Widow Gables and Other Fictions. He wrote about John Kemp, a young Oxford student who develops an imaginary sister to help him adjust, in his novel Jill. One of his poems mentions "Postmen like doctors" who "go from house to house," and begins "I work all day, and get half-drunk at night," while in another, two stone figures prove "our almost instinct is almost true: What will survive of us is love". Those poems appear in his collections The Whitsun Weddings and High Windows. For 10 points, name this author of "Aubade" and "An Arundel Tomb" who wrote "They fuck you up your mum and dad" in "This Be the Verse".;;(Philip) Larkin;;
Literature;;One character in this novel kills Rowdy Dick Doolan, a hobo who attempts to steal his shoes by cutting off his feet with a meat cleaver. Other characters who die include Rudy, who is attacked by Legionnaires, and Sandra, whose face is eaten by dogs after freezing to death. The protagonist gets a job with Rosskam thanks to Reverend Chester, enabling him to quit working in a cemetery to pay his debt to Marcus Gorman, and feels guilt for accidentally dropping and killing his son Gerald. A former major league third baseman, the protagonist killed scab Harold Allen with a rock, forcing him to flee Albany. FTP, name this novel about Francis Phelan, which follows Legs and Billy Phelan's Greatest Game in a trilogy by William Kennedy.;;Ironweed;;
Literature;;In one poem in this collection, the narrator kisses a marble sphinx which sinks its claws into him while a nightingale sings of "Mingling of death-like agony / With every balm and blessing". A minstrel plays a delirious dance to the inhabitants of a graveyard in the first section, "The Sorrows of Youth". This collection contains a "Lyrical Intermezzo," as well as two parts which end with the poet coming to a wine cellar in Bremen, "The North Sea" cycles. Another poem in this work describes "The golden flame of summer" which "Burns in your glowing cheek" and claims "Death is the cool night". In a poem from this collection often set to music, the title character uses a golden comb on her golden hair and entrances sailors to their death with her song. Containing "Die Lorelei," for 10 points, name this poetry collection by Heinrich Heine.;;Book of Songs|Buch der Lieder;;
Literature;;In 2005, Nico Muhly composed a song cycle based on this book, which was illustrated by Maira Kalman. Its first, introductory chapter states that the reader should go on to "the study of the masters of literature". This book uses a quote from Stevenson's Walking Tours as an example of a "strong conclusion," while its second section begins by mentioning "Charles's friend" and "the witch's malice". It mentions "lose out," "factor," and "all right" as examples of "words and expressions commonly misused," and advises the reader to "make definite assertions," "put statements in popular form," and "omit needless words". Containing "elementary principles" of usage and composition, FTP, name this reference book by Strunk and White.;;(The) Elements of Style;;
Literature;;This work sees the 1st Platoon gang-rape the Polish Frania, as well as Strut being sliced in half after he leads the villagers in killing his friend's Turkish wife. One character unsuccessfully attempts suicide with a scythe after Mitka tries to seduce her, while its successful suicides include those of Krymov and Kaledin, who kills himself after losing Novocherkassk. It also sees the death of Timofei Ivanonvich, whose diary records his brief marriage to Liza Mokhova. Toward its end, Chumakov kills the traitorous Kaparin, but the protagonist leaves the company they form with his lover Aksinya Astakhov, only to be caught in the valley by the Red Army. Dealing with the village of Tatarsky and the life of Grigory Melekhov, for 10 points, name this novel about Cossacks living near the title river by Mikhail Sholokhov.;;And Quiet Flows the Don|(The) Silent Don|Tikhiy Don;;
Literature;;A second division UK soccer team gets their nickname "The Honest Men" from a line in this poem. In a footnote, the author instructs that when a "benighted traveler" "falls in with bogels," it is much more dangerous to turn back. The title character sees many instruments of murder on the "haly table," including five scimitars, five tomahawks, a garter used to strangle a baby, and a knife used to slit a father's throat, as well as a dance that is no "cotillion brand new from France". Its title character is warned by his wife not to get drunk on Sunday, because he would likely drown in the Doon or get caught by warlocks in the murk. While drunk, the title character cries "weel done, cutty-sark!" after seeing witches dancing on Alloway Kirk. For 10 points, name this poem about the supernatural vision of the title character, written by Robert Burns.;;(")Tam O'Shanter(");;
Literature;;This character is greeted by the phrase "for a star!", having first appeared catching a package of meat. On her honeymoon, this character's shoe was used by her husband to smash all the light bulbs in their hotel room. That husband claims they'd "had them colored lights going" during that time, before another character made her start acting like "the queen of the Nile". In Act I, she runs to Eunice's apartment in Elysian Fields after her husband throws their radio out their window, but returns after he screams her name in the stairwell, disgusting the sister whom she'd forced to manage Belle Reve by moving to New Orleans. For 10 points, name this wife of Stanley and sister of Blanche in A Streetcar Named Desire.;;Stella (DuBois) (Kowalski);;
Literature;;This character's foster-brother throws an iron weight at him after this character forces a trade of horses. During the journey that brings this character to the central location of the novel he appears in, a whip and a fiddle promised to other children are respectively lost and smashed. He smashes a tureen of hot applesauce in the face of a boy in revenge for derisive comments about the length of his hair, and as an adult, he is punched in the throat by a rival he calls a "milk-blooded coward". This mysteriously wealthy character teaches Hareton how to swear, and runs off with Isabella in order to gain power over her brother Edgar Linton. At the beginning of the novel he appears in, he is visited by a man renting Thrushcross Grange, Mr. Lockwood. FTP, name this orphaned gypsy whose passionate love for Catherine Earnshaw is the focus of Wutherine Heights.;;Heathcliff;;
Literature;;Its final section quotes an "Orphic poet" who asserts that "A man is a God in ruins". It discusses analogies between material and spiritual facts in its fourth section, "Language," and its third section argues that  "The world...exists to the soul to satisfy the desire of beauty". In its second section, "Commodity," the author states that steamboats realize the fable of Aeolus' bag, and discusses the "steady and prodigal provision that has been made for mankind's support and delight on this green ball which floats him through the heavens". Its first section states that "The sun illuminates only the eye of the man, but shines into the eye and the heart of the child," and argues "if a man would be alone, let him look at the stars". This essay also asserts that in the title location, the narrator is "part or particle of God" and becomes a "transparent eyeball". FTP, name this essay by Ralph Waldo Emerson about the environment.;;(")Nature(");;
Literature;;Critics disagree whether this poem's literally false claim that its speaker has "nought save homespun cloth i'th'house," is intended as a metaphor or as an attempt to pretend a pecuniary motive. Later, its speaker claims that its addressee lacks a father and has a mother whose poverty causes her to "send thee out the door". That speaker also claims its addressee was "snatched" from her side "by friends, less wise than true," and that its "errors were not lessened" when brought abroad "halting to th'press to trudge". Addressed to "thou ill-formed offspring of my feeble brain," for 10 points, name this poem written for the second edition of The Tenth Muse Lately Sprung Up In America by Anne Bradstreet.;;("The) Author to Her Book(");;
Literature;;This work describes how Sertorius demonstrated the superiority of wit to brute strength by having two soldiers attempt to pluck horses' tails. The speaker states that Gryllus was wiser than Ulysses because he remained a swine, and insists that nothing is more desirable than being young. The speaker discusses madness caused by manias for building, hunting, and gambling, and observes that Momus was kicked out of heaven for his railery, whereas Flattery is welcomed everywhere. The speaker states that every person carries her image stamped on their countenance, and recounts her upbringing in the Fortunate Islands after being born to Plutus and Youth. The title figure was suckled by Drunkenness and Ignorance, and her followers include Pleasure, Laziness, and Self-Love. Dedicated to Thomas More, FTP, name this essay structured as an oration delivered by the title character, written by Erasmus.;;(In) Praise of Folly|(The) Praise of Folly|Moriae Encomium;;
Literature;;Dore Levy wrote about the function of retributive illness and the limits of medicine in Ideal and Actual in this work. The Tso Commentary states that the entirety of this work can be summed up as a "condemnation for failure to instruct". A crimson cummerbund becomes a pledge of friendship in this work's second volume, The Crab-Flower Club. A character "with a heart like Bi Gan's, yet even more intelligent; and with an illness like Xi Zi, yet even more beautiful" is considered Xue Baochai's "double".  This work's central families live on Two Dukes Street and its central character, the heir apparent of the Rung-guo line, falls in love with the reincarnation of the Crimson Pearl Flower. Detailing the lives of two branches of the Jia clan, its title both refers to the location of its inscription near Greensickness Peak, and a character born with a piece of glowing jade in his mouth. For 10 points, name this member of the Four Great Classics attributed to Cao Xueqin.;;(The) Story of the Stone|Dream of the Red Chamber|Red Chamber Dream;;
Literature;;According to George Lukacs, this character is the ne plus ultra of "pathological human degradation". He invents a system that allows him to suck the sixteen stones in his pockets without repeating them, having earlier been taken in by Mrs. Lousse after he runs over her dog Teddy. At the beginning of a one-hundred page paragraph, he describes the chance meeting of A and C outside town, which parallels his encounter in Ballyba with an agent of Youdi whose bad leg forces his son to drive him on bicycle, Jacques Moran. The title character of the first novel in a trilogy including The Unnameable and Malone Dies, for 10 points, name this paralyzed Irish writer created by Samuel Beckett.;;Molloy;;
Literature;;An essay about the origins of this character claims that "if Poe were alive, he would not have to invent horror; horror would invent him". That essay parallels the Fascist movement in Nazi Germany with this character's call for "a nation, a flag, an army of our own," and is titled "how this character was born". This character aspires to attend aviation school, and plots with Gus, Jack, and G. H. to rob Blum's delicatessen. At the beginning of the novel in which he appears, he frightens his sister Vera by killing a rat with a skillet. This character asserts "What I killed for, I am!" after being convicted by Buckley, despite the work of his lawyer Boris Max. He chauffeurs Jan Erlone to a restaurant on the South Side of Chicago before accidentally smothering Mary Dalton with a pillow. FTP, name this protagonist of Native Son.;;(")Bigger(") (Thomas);;
Literature;;In one of this man's works, a member of the State Rent Board is remembered differently by his slum friends and his family. In another of his novels, the Horacio and Badaró families strive for control of the Sequiero Grande forest. In addition to The Two Deaths of Quincas Wateryell and The Violent Land, this author also wrote a novel about a woman who uses the profits from her bordello to obtain electricity for her village, Tieta, the Goat Girl. He also wrote a novel where Vadhino dies while dancing the samba, leading the title character to marry Dr. Teodoro, as well as a character hired at the Vesuvius Bar by Nacib Saab in Ilheus. FTP, name this Brazilian author of Dona Flor and Her Two Husbands and Gabriella, Clove and Cinnamon.;;(Jorge) Amado;;
Literature;;The "adopted son" of the protagonist of this work is described as "a young coral tree, bending its blossom clusters," and lives near the gateway arch of a palace. The protagonist meets the title character at the end of Ashadha, "arresting as an elephant stooping to strike a stream-bank in play". In this poem, the title character is warned that although the temple girls will cast sidelong glances "extending like a row of bees," it must continue to Alaka. The protagonist, a servant of Kubera exiled for an unknown transgression, provides directions so that the title character may find a woman "who shall seem the Creator's masterwork," and prays that the title character's majesty will be augmented by the monsoons. For 10 points, name this lyric poem about a yaksha who convinces the passing title character to relay a dispatch to his wife, attributed to Kalidasa.;;("The) Cloud Messenger(")|(")Meghaduta(");;
Literature;;This novel features excerpts from an operetta about a European monarch who disguises himself as a bourgeois, The Burgher King, as well as a character who says "Ich bin ein Berliner" to indicate that he is a jelly donut. In an early scene, Archduke Franz Ferdinand tells Yo Mama jokes in a ghetto bar while being watched over by a man who later investigates the death of orgy-frequenter Encarnacion, the one-time T.W.I.T. employee Lew Basnight. Its title was first used in the author's previous novel before the return of the Learned English Dog, and here refers to a state evoked by the orange sunsets created by the Tunguska Event. Beginning and ending with the airship Inconvenience and the Chums of the Chance, it also focuses on the dynamiting Traverse family and their anarcho-mathematical search for Shambhala. For 10 points, name this 2006 novel set between the Chicago World's Fair and World War I, by Thomas Pynchon.;;Against the Day;;
Literature;;One poem in this collection tells how "The glory of Greek shame" was cast "into silent Acheron" after the battle of Marathon, and another describes a man who "in God's hand has weighed / Your squeamish and emasculate crusade / Against the grim dominion of his art". In addition to "Villanelle of Change" and "Zola," it includes sonnets about a poet whose "hard, human pulse is throbbing still," George Crabbe, and a butcher who tears down his slaughterhouse in response to his wife's death, Reuben Bright. Its title poem asserts "It is the promise of the day / that makes the starry sky sublime," and implores the title group to "put off the cloak that hides the scar". It also includes poems about a character ordered to "go to the western gate," and "a gentleman from sole to crown" who "went home and put a bullet through his head". Including "Luke Havergal" and "Richard Cory," FTP, name this poetry collection by Edwin Arlington Robinson.;;(The) Children of the Night;;
Literature;;Among its recent publications are a "Comedy by the Numbers" booklet and a fictional memo on how the administration might justify invading seven more countries. Its namesake publishing house has produced Icelander and Maps and Legends by Dustin Long and Michael Chabon, who are among its Rectangulars; it also regularly publishes the Believer and Wholphin. "Mudder Tongue" by Brian Evenson and "Tale of Gray Dick" by Stephen King have appeared in its paper version, while its online version is known for its humor pieces and lists. Named for Timothy, a supposed long-lost relative of editor David Eggers, for 10 points, identify this literary magazine that shares part of its name with a character T. S. Eliot portrayed "among the nightingales".;;(Timothy) McSweeney's (Quarterly) (Concern);;
Literature;;This novel contains a digression about the history of using peacocks as food, and its protagonist becomes entangled in a sticky mess of ricecakes. That character enjoys hunting cicadas and staring at naked people in public baths. One character in this work has an uncle who carries an "iron fan" with him and is from Shizuoka, while a friend of Tofu Ochi grinds away at crystal balls to complete his PhD thesis on "The Effects of Ultra-Violet Rays on the Electro Movement Action of the Frog's Eyeball" because of a deal which would allow him to marry Tomiko Kaneda. The title character gets drunk and drowns himself in a rain barrel while praying to Buddha, and is owned by Sensei Kushami. For ten points, name this novel by Natsume Soseki narrated by the title animal.;;I Am a Cat;;
Literature;;His 1989 Jefferson Lecture in the Humanities was titled "The Fateful Rift: The San Andreas Fault in the Modern Mind". He constructed a semiotic analysis of the way Hellen Keller learned the word "water" in his essay "The Delta Factor," which appears in his collection The Message in the Bottle. His other nonfiction includes Signposts from a Strange Land and a parody of self-help books, Lost in the Cosmos. Williston Barret falls in love with Kitty Vaught in his novel The Last Gentleman, and in his last novel, Dr. Tom More encounters a "curious flatness of tone" in Feliciana, where Dr. Comeaux is heavily dosing patients with sodium. He also wrote a novel about the Kierkegaardian quest of a New Orleans stockbroker more interested in books and film than the routine of his life. For 10 points, name this American author of The Thanatos Syndrome who wrote about Binx Bolling in The Moviegoer.;;(Walker) Percy;;
Literature;;Tony Harrison notes "Sir I Ham a very Bad Hand at Righting" at the end of a poem "On Not Being" this figure. Browning's "The Lost Leader" claims this figure "was for us," while his "clear Sprite / Yet reigns o'er Earth, third among the sons of light" according to the fourth stanza of Shelley's "Adonais". Wordsworth wrote that this man "shouldst be living at this hour" in "London, 1802," and along with Washington Irving, Major Major signs this man's name in Catch-22. "Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard" mentions a "mute inglorious" version of him, while, according to Terence Hearsay, malt does more than this man can to justify the ways of God to man.  For 10 points, name this author of The Reason of Church Government and Paradise Lost.;;(John) Milton;;
Literature;;In this work, a Landlady drinks in order to refresh her memory a woman who is like "The head of a Raphael Madonna on the body of his Galatea," a description provided by Mme. de Pommeraye. In another scene, one character asserts that hanging honest men is a misunderstanding of the legal trade after his horse rides under a garret. This novel never reveals the destination of the title character, and mocks readers who wonder about the names of the main characters by asking "What's that got to do with you"? The title character learns from the Captain that everything is written up above in a great scroll. Consisting of a frequently interrupted dialogue between the title character and the nobleman he serves, for 10 points, name this novel about a valet with a resigned philosophical outlook, by Denis Diderot.;;Jacques the Fatalist (and) (his) (Master);;
Literature;;A savant who lives in the castle of Makaria explains the stars to this character, whose son injures himself after he is shoved into stones by Hersilia. He is saved by the "Amazon" Natalia, and his foster daughter, who was fathered by an incestuous priest turned harpist, uses her long hair to staunch his bullet wound. He sends word of the Nut-Brown Maid to Lenardo and meets the geologist Montan. This lover of of Philina eventually becomes a Renunciant, and throws away his poetry after weeping in front of Werner. His father encourages him to settle down and start a business, which he does only after finding out that his first love, Mariana, is cheating on him. He adopts Mignon after joining a traveling troupe, and is the father of Felix. For 10 points, name this man, whose apprenticeship and travels are the subject of a bildungsroman by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe.;;Wilhelm (Meister);;
Literature;;One character in this play has his head dunked in a bucket of cold water whenever he invents an epigram. Another character declares that his daughters must share the maid Fisher, though Tweeny tags along anyway. Besides the Honorable Ernest Wooley, characters in this play include Lady Brocklehurst and Lady Mary, who falls in love with the title character, but parts with him in its fourth act, "The Other Island". In the second act, a yachting trip gone awry strands the family of the Earl of Loam on an island causing this play's aristocrats to defer to the title character's competence. For 10 points, name this play about a butler who temporarily rules over an island, written by James Barrie.;;(The) Admirable Crichton;;
Literature;;The fairy Cherestani fall in love with Prince Farruscad in this author's play The Serpent Woman. He also wrote a play in which twins adopted by Smeraldina speak to a talking statue and the title animal courts Barbarina, The Green Bird. Deramo is tricked into reciting a verse over a corpse and becoming the title beast, but is eventually recognized by his wife Angela in his play The King Stag. In another of his works, Truffaldino helps the son of the King of Spades marry Ninetta, who is trapped in the overgrown title object. That play, which also takes some jabs at fellow Venetian Carlo Goldoni, preceded a work about Prince Calaf, who answers three riddles in order to marry the title princess. For 10 points, name this man who drew from commedia dell'arte for his fiabe, the playwright of The Love for Three Oranges and Turandot.;;(Carlo) Gozzi;;
Literature;;This author included an essay delineating his theory of static drama, "The Tragedies of Daily Life," in his collection The Treasure of the Humble. In his first play, Uglyane becomes engaged to Prince Hjalmar because of a disagreement with Princess Maleine. Another of his plays ends with the announcement of the mother's death by a Sister of Charity. This author's essays on chrysanthemums and socialism are collected in The Intelligence of Flowers, and Ygraine and Bellangère try to prevent the title event of one play from occurring in his play The Death of Tintagiles. He also wrote a work in which Yniold spies on his uncle's tryst with the wife of Golaud, as well as a play featuring Tylo the bulldog and Bérylune, which focuses on Tyltyl and Mytyl's search for the title animal. For 10 points, name this Belgian author of The Blue Bird and Pelléas and Mélisande.;;(Maurice) Maeterlinck;;
Literature;;This poet described a woman "whose subtile Art invisibly can wreath / My fetters of the very air I breath" in "The Fair Singer". The speaker of one of this author's poems laments "Thy love was far more better than / The love of false and cruel men" and compares the title animal to "Lillies without, roses within". In addition to "The Nymph complaining for the death of her faun," this author wrote "Luxurious man, to bring his Vice in use / Did after him the World seduce" in a poem attacking the unnaturalness of gardens. He wondered "how vainly men themselves amaze / To win the palm, the oak, or bays" in a poem that describes the mind "Annihilating all that's made / to a green thought in a green shade". FTP, name this English poet who wrote four poems narrated by the Mower, as well as "The Garden" and "To His Coy Mistress".;;(Andrew) Marvell;;
Literature;;The speaker of one of this author's works invites the reader to take "a little sun, a little honey," as commanded by Persephone's bees. This author of "When Psyche, Who is Life, Descends Among the Shades" applied Yakhontov's technique of litmontage for his modernist prose piece The Egyptian Stamp. The title of a Varlam Shalamov short story about this writer references one of his poems, "Sherry Brandy," and his critical essays include the collection Conversations with Dante. He penned an anti-memoir, The Noise of Time, and wrote a poem satirizing a leader who "toys with the tributes of half-men". His collected his poetry on classical themes in Tristia, and he wrote the three-volume Voronezh Notebooks after being exiled from Russia. For 10 points, name this author of the sixteen line death sentence "The Stalin Epigram," a leading Acmeist poet.;;(Osip) (Emilyevich) Mandelstam;;
Literature;;One author from this country wrote the poem "Arabesque to a Hand-Drawing by Michaelangelo" as well as a novel whose title character is a friend of Erik and son of Bartholine. Another author from this country wrote about the servant Mikkel in The Fall of the King as well as a six volume novel illustrating its author's theories of evolution, The Long Journey. A writer from this country wrote about Carsten's marriage to Maria in a novel titled "A history" of this country's dreams as well as Miss Smilla's Sense of Snow. Yet another writer from this country collected "The Invincible Slave-Owner" and "The Young Man with the Carnation" in Winter's Tales, and wrote a novel where Kamante Gatura serves as a chef for the protagonist while she lives in Kenya. For 10 points, name this country home to Jens Peter Jacobsen, Johannes Jensen, and Peter Høeg, as well as the author of Out of Africa, Karen Blixen.;;Denmark;;
Literature;;He analyzed the different ways to make metaphors between the stars and eyes in his 1967 Norton lectures, This Craft of Verse. He imagined meeting a twenty-years-younger version of himself in "August 23, 1983," and claimed the bullet that killed J.F.K. was "the stone that Cain hurled at Abel" in the "Museum" section of The Maker, which also contains a work about two similar figures ending "I am not sure which of us it is that's writing this page". He also compiled The Book of Imaginary Beings, and wrote a detective story ending with Red Scharlach killing Erik Lonnrot, "Death and the Compass". His creations include a mysterious Company that arranges an infinitely-regressive set of lotteries; Ireneo, who fails to reduce his perfect memory to 70,000 recollections; and a man who does not wish to "copy," but rather compose, the Quixote. For 10 points, name this creator of Funes the Memorious, Pierre Menard, and the Library of Babel.;;(Jorge) (Luis) Borges;;
Literature;;One character in this work states that the owner of a "pretty and white" house wants to "mix some white sweat with it". That character later causes conflict by stepping on a pile of fresh horse excrement before entering a house. This work begins with Mr. Harris asking the protagonist to testify in front of a Justice of the Peace; later, a different Justice of the Peace rules that the protagonist's father must pay ten bushels of corn for ruining a rug. After retrieving a can of oil, the protagonist warns Major de Spain about the title act, which is perpetrated out of anger by Abner Snopes. FTP, identify this short story about an act of arson in Yoknapatawpha Country, written by William Faulkner.;;(")Barn Burning(");;
Literature;;One of his essays claims "I have an almost feminine partiality for old china" and another divides humans into "men who borrow" and "men who lend". Another of his essays imagines a baby angel afflicted with a lame gait and human weakness named Ge-Urania, while the Alice of "New Year's Eve" and "Dream Children" is his first love Ann Simmons. He quotes Marvell's "The Garden" in "Old Benchers of the Inner Temple" and describes Coleridge's 'wit-combats' in "Christ's Hospital Five-and-Thirty Years Ago". He aided his sister Mary in the compilation of the prose volume Tales from Shakespeare, and another of his essays recollects giving a beggar a plum cake. In that essay, cottages burn down thanks to Ho-ti and Bobo's discovery of the pleasures of roast pig. For 10 points, name this author of the Essays of Elia.;;(Charles) Lamb;;
Literature;;In Biographia Literaria, Samuel Coleridge compares the argument over sentimental poetry to the dispute over this phrase. It clashes with "Ualu" and "Quaouauh" after the Fall in Finnegans Wake, while in a Hans Christian Anderson fairy tale, it is uttered by the kidnapper of Thumbelina as he escapes. In its original use, its final part is described as "the bass cadenza" and it is said to be beloved by the Lyric Nine and Pan. Despite this, a character who is getting blisters on his ass becomes irritated and sings it so quickly and insistently that the chorus shuts up and lets him continue rowing. For 10 points, Xanthias, Dionysus, and Charon must endure what onomatopoetic refrain of Aristophanes' frogs?;;Brekekekex koax koax(!);;
Literature;;In this work, the President of the Chamber of Commerce profits from the Stevenson Plan, but sees his relationship with Valerie break down due to a struggle over a light switch. Its author refers to the inner turmoil of this novel's characters as the "Pascalian aspect," such as Baron de Clappique's obsession with gambling, which is described as "suicide without dying". Characters who organize the central event include the Soviet emissary Katov and Kyo Gisors. This novel begins at "Twelve-Thirty Midnight" on March 21, 1927 with Ch'en Ta Erh, a Chinese terrorist, convincing himself that his target must be assassinated. Published after Les Conquerants and The Royal Way, for 10 points, name this novel about the failed Communist insurrection in Shangai, written by Andre Malraux.;;Man's Fate|(La) Condition Humane;;
Literature;;The husband of Helen Olhafen and son of Wolgemut, who plays the viola d'amore, this character comments on his frequent use of asterisks and excessively long chapters. He recalls Jonathan's love of seashells as well as his friend's interest in a book with pictures of exotic butterflies. Though not a student of theology, he later accompanies that friend to the lectures of Ehrenfried Kumpf and Eberhard Schlepfuss. He feels a shudder when the title character of the work in which he appears sleeps with the prostitute Esmeralda, and agrees to write the libretto for an adaptation of Love's Labour's Lost. This character records his friend's pact with the devil for twenty four years of inspiration and watches that friend have a stroke as he begins to play his final composition. For 10 points, name this man who chronicles the life of Adrian Leverkühn, the narrator of Thomas Mann's Doktor Faustus.;;Serenus Zeitbloom;;
Literature;;After John Harington translated the bawdy twenty-eighth section of this work, he was forced to translate it in its entirety as penance. One character in this work is stripped of all ornaments except a single bracelet in preparation for a sacrifice. A bridge is built over Isabella's tomb due to Rodomont's remorse, and this work also features a fight over the right to wear Hector's escutcheon. Alcina's spell is broken by Brunello's ring thanks to Melissa, and the cure for the protagonist's condition is found on the moon by Astolpho. This poem features two flying hippogriffs, at its end, Leo allows the marriage of Rogero and Bradamant. Focusing on the title character's passion for Angelica, for 10 points, name this epic poem about a nephew of Charlemagne by Ludovico Ariosto.;;Orlando Furioso;;
Literature;;One character in this work describes Sechita, a dancer in Natchez whose audience throws coins between her thighs. Another character attempts to run away to Haiti after reading about Toussaint L'Ouverture, only to befriend a boy named Toussaint Jones. A third character tells of Beau Willie, who dangles Crystal's children Naomi and Kwame from a fifth story window to force her to marry him, and drops them when she refuses. Inspired by Judy Grahn's The Comman Woman, this play ends with each character singing "i found god in myself & i loved her". It begins with a poem about "dark phrases of womanhood" spoken by the Lady in Brown which transitions into poems spoken by the Lady in Yellow, Lady in Blue, Lady in Red, and Lady in Orange. FTP, name this choreopoem by Ntozake Shange.;;for colored girls who have considered suicide/when the rainbow is enuf;;
Literature;;This author claims to be "a heretic in this land of football worshippers" during his travels through America recounted in his memoir, My Dateless Diary.  In one of his short stories, a palm-reader informs his last client of the day, that the man who had tried to kill him four months ago was now dead, though we discover  that the palm-reader was actually the assailant. In addition to "An Astrologer's Day," he wrote a novel in which Dr. Pal manufactures a horoscope for the titular professional, who believes "money alone is important in this world," The Financial Expert. In another of his novels, Raju is mistaken for a swami by Velan, while another involves Jagan, the owner of a candy store. FTP, name this Indian author whose novels The Guide and The Vendor of Sweets take place in Malgudi.;;(R.) (K.) Narayan;;
Literature;;The epigraph to this work quotes Samuel Johnson's assertion "He who makes a beast of himself gets rid of the pain of being a man". The narrator calls himself "a monster reincarnation of Horatio Alger," and recalls the "sense of inevitable victory over the forces of Old and Evil" before stating that the reader can "see the high-water mark--that place where the wave finally broke and rolled back". The narrator calls the title location "a society of armed masturbators," and searches for a building called The American Dream, only to learn that it had burned down in a fire. One character orders the narrator to throw a radio into a bathtub when the song "White Rabbit" peaks, and is based on Oscar Zeta Acosta. The protagonists attempt to cover the Mint 400 and pose as policemen to infiltrate a conference on "dangerous drugs" in the title city. Beginning "We were somewhere around Barstow on the edge of the desert when the drugs began to take hold," FTP, name this novel about Raoul Duke and Dr. Gonzo, written by Hunter S. Thompson.;;Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas(:) (A) (Savage) (Journey) (Into) (the) (Heart) (of) (the) (American) (Dream);;
Literature;;This man is the subject of the second historical novel by R. R. R. Dhlomo. He is referred to as an "Ancient Spirit" whose children will make the earth "free for the Palm Race" in an epic poem by Kunene, and defeats the King of the Pool in a novel where he kills Noliwa on the urging of Isanusi. H. R. Haggard's novel Nada the Lily focuses on this man's illegitimate son Umslopogaas the Axe. He patronized the court poet Magolwane, and the izibongo of this man describes him "devouring" his enemies, such as Zwide. In a Thomas Mofolo novel, this man joins forces with Dingiswayo before crushing his enemies during the mfecane and being stabbed to death by Dingane. FTP, name this Zulu leader.;;Shaka (Zulu);;
Literature;;The main character in this work refers to himself as a "water troll" after encountering a woman with a deformed face. In a subplot, Brede leaves Axel to die in the snow. Its supporting characters include Sheriff Geissler and the protagonist's son Eleseus, who leaves the central location for America. The protagonist is unaffected by the failure of a copper mine, and silently suffers the unfaithfulness of his wife Inger. Its plot was inspired by its author's concern that his home country would be no better than Switzerland if it did not return to the title entity. It focuses on Isak, a farmer who matures by tilling land in Norway. Written by the author of Mysteries and Hunger, for 10 points, name this epic novel about agrarian life by Knut Hamsun.;;Growth of the Soil|Markens Grode;;
Literature;;One of this man's poems states "Tiger got to hunt / Bird got to fly / Man got to sit and wonder, 'Why, Why, Why?'" At the end of the novel in which he appears, this character writes that if he were younger, he would compose "a history of human stupidity" before dying "lying on his back, grinning horribly, and thumbing his nose at You Know Who". Originally named Lionel Boyd Johnson, this character is ostensibly targeted by a gigantic hook erected by Earl McCabe. The namesake "books" of this character assert "All of the true things I am about to tell you are shameless lies". He founds a religion focused on a ritual where two people knead the soles of their bare feet together; that religion contrasts granfalloons with the more meaningful karass. FTP, identify this namesake of a religion based in the island of San Lorenzo, a character in Cat's Cradle.;;Bokonon;;
Literature;;Recent works by members of this group include Open Clothes and Next Life, by Rae Armantrout and Ted Benson, as well as The Grand Piano, a work collectively written by ten of its members, led by Bob Perelman. Its early major works include Progress and thirteen issues of its namesake magazine, coedited by Bruce Andrews and Charles Bernstein. In addition to Barrett Watten, it is associated with the author of The Alphabet and "The New Sentence," as well as another who added an "In the Nineties" section to a work originally begun with 37 sections of 37 sentences, My Life. For 10 points, name this movement associated with Lyn Hejinian and Ron Silliman, a late 20th-century school of poetry that emphasizes the internal interplay of words rather than referentiality.;;Language (Poetry);;
Literature;;The protagonist of this work accosts Miss Maitland and gives various accounts of the Resurrection to Mr. Shaw while living in Mrs. Jupp's house. In this novel, a game of cards is used to decide which of Mrs. Allaby's five daughters will marry the protagonist's father. The protagonist gives up his inheritance to a man who wishes to found a College of Spiritual Pathology, Pryer, and a speech by Gideon Hawke results in the protagonist joining the Simeonites. The narrator is appointed to guard the protagonist's inheritance by his aunt Alethea. This novel recounts the Calvinist upbringing of a son of Christina and Theobald, who later gives all his money to a drunkard he marries, Ellen. Never published in its author's lifetime, and narrated by Edward Overton, for 10 points, name this bildungsroman about Ernest Pontifex, a novel by Samuel Butler.;;(The) Way of All Flesh;;
Literature;;Upon surveying a caricature depicting him with giant green ears, the central character of this work dismisses it as "one of those trashy humor rags put out by the kikes". As the ostensible reward for committing the central act, one character moves out into the countryside and becomes an expert of Egyptian history. This novel was originally conceived as the second volume in the author's East and West Trilogy along with The Silver Dove. At its ending, Dudkin fulfills his oath to the Bronze Horsemen to kill the party contact responsible for the explosive device built to commit the central act, which is disguised as a can of sardines. However, Nikolai misplaces it and ends up blowing up the study of his father, Senator Apollon Apollonovich Ableukhov. For 10 points, name this Symbolist novel by Andrei Bely set in the title city.;;Petersburg;;
Literature;;After one character becomes upset that she isn't loved, this novel's omniscient narrator says, "No. Everybody deserves clean water. Not everybody deserves love all the time". It climaxes with the reappearance of a man who had used Sartre to convince another character not to execute him during the war, who is known as "Dr. Sick" due to a condition causing him to cry blood. This novel opens with its protagonist being saved from suicide by the murder of shitting pigeons by Mo Hussein; the latter joins the Islamic militant group KEVIN along with Millat, whose twin Magid works on the FutureMouse project with Marcus Chalfen. For 10 points, name this novel, whose title metaphor refers to the purity of heritage of Bengali and Jamaican immigrants to 20th-century England, by Zadie Smith.;;White Teeth;;
Literature;;At the end of this work, one character orders the destruction of his elixir of immortality, and an army ascends the slope of a mountain in order to send a message by burning a letter. One character in this work tries to deceive the main character by presenting her with a bowl, while another dies after attempting to retrieve a seashell. The main character's adoptive father becomes rich after he finds a nugget of gold in every stalk that he cuts down, and at the end of this work, the main character dons a feather robe in order to return to her home. The protagonist rejects the advances of five princes by giving them impossible tasks, and continues to reject the advances of the emperor. At the end of this work, Princess Kaguya is forced to return to the moon after being discovered as a baby in a stalk. FTP, name this oldest Japanese poetic narrative, a folk-tale named for a farmer who discovers a little girl in one of his plants.;;("The) Tale of the Bamboo Cutter(")|(")Taketori Monogatari(");;
Literature;;A daughter slaughters her brother with an axe in this author's only play, Lithuania. This author wrote about a man whose "conqueror's blood was cool as a deep river" after consummating a relationship in his poem "Libido". He listed "white plates and cups" and "the cool kindliness of sheets" as things he has loved in "The Great Lover," and his time in the South Seas inspired his poem addressed to his nurse Mamua, "Tiare Tahiti". Along with Edward Marsh, he compiled an anthology of Georgian poetry, and he implored "Blow, bugles, blow!" in the third poem of a sonnet cycle including "Treasure," "Peace," and "Safety". Another poem in that cycle begins "If I should die, think only this of me: / That there's some corner of a foreign field / That is for ever England". FTP, name this English poet killed in World War I, the author of "The Soldier".;;(Rupert) Brooke;;
Literature;;The main character comes from a place "which supplies the Union with pioneers of the mind as well as the forest" and his place of employment, while easily broken into, is not so easily broken out of, due to an idea borrowed from the architect Yost Van Houton. Its epigraph begins "A pleasing land of drowsy it was," from James Thomson's "The Castle of Indolence," and it is set in a small town near the Tappan Zee. Its central character is contested for the daughter of Baltus by a double-jointed man known for being as dexterous as a Tartar on horseback, Abraham Von Brunt, and leaves the title location partly out of fear of Hans Van Ripper and partly out of the embarrassment of being rejected by Van Tassel. Contained in The Sketchbook of Geoffrey Crayon, for 10 points, name this short story by Washington Irving about a superstitious schoolteacher's encounter with a headless horseman.;;("The) Legend of Sleepy Hollow(");;
Literature;;In a poem by D.H. Lawrence, the speaker thinks of this being after throwing a log at a snake. A poem named for it claims that a poet is like this "prince of clouds". It originally arrives after the land "cracked and growled and roared and howled / Like noises in a swound" and is greeted "As if it had a Christian soul". For "vespers nine," it comes "every day, for food or play" into a hollow; later, though, it "begins to be avenged" by "a hot and copper sky" and "slimy things" who "crawl with legs". Its blood is finally washed away by a shrieving from the Hermit of the Wood after it causes the icy, windless sea to kill everyone but the protagonist, around whose neck it is hung after being shot with his crossbow. For 10 points, name this large bird from "The Rime of the Ancient Mariner".;;(the) albatross;;
Literature;;Penkin tells the title character of this work to read The Love of the Bribetaker for the Fallen Woman. The protagonist imagines the harmonies of the universe every time the woman he loves sings the aria "Casta Diva" from Bellini's Norma, and tries to deny the truth of the word "love" while she holds a sprig of lilac blossoms out to him. The title character writes a letter renouncing his lover for her own good, and has a fondness for Asian clothing. This novel also features a bailiff who cheats the title character, Tarantyev, as well as the indolent servant Zakhar, and the title character marries the landlady Agafya after he is rejected by Olga Illyinsky, who eventually marries the protagonist's best friend, Andrei Stolz. Featuring the hero of quizbowlers, a man who refuses to get out of bed, for 10 points, name this novel by Ivan Goncharov.;;Oblomov;;
Literature;;In one section of this work, one of the central characters is buying all the beers because he just got a "ton of money from Washington Water Power". Samuel the grandfather of that character leaves to clean motel rooms in the chapter titled, "A Train Is An Order of Occurrence Designed to Lead to Some Result". James responds to his cancer mostly through bad jokes causing his wife, Norma, to leave him in the section titled, "The Approximate Size of my Favorite Tumor". Adrian and another character discuss how drinking has ruined the aspirations of many members of their community including the main character's desire to play basketball in, "The Only Traffic Signal on the Reservation Don't Flash Red Anymore". In addition to "A Drug Called Tradition," this work is comprised of 21 interconnected vignettes, and tells of a Spokane Indian Reservation through the eyes of Thomas Builds-the-fire and Victor Joseph. For 10 points, name this work by Sherman Alexie, whose title refers to two characters from a radio show sparring in paradise.;;(The) Lone Ranger and Tonto Fistfight in Heaven;;
Literature;;In one poem he speaks of "Persimmon, walnut, loquat, fig, and grape" before claiming "The mind's immortal, but the man is dead". Besides "Time and the Garden" he speaks of "a mist fine as spray/ Ready to shatter into spining light" in "On a View of Pasadena from the Hills".  He claims "Treading change with savage heel/ We must live or die by steel" in the title poem of a collection also containing "To my Infant Daughter," Before Disaster. His revial of the reputations of Frederick Goddard Tuckerman and Charles Churchill as well as his advocacy of a Post-Symbolist style of poetry were based on his dictum that a poem is a rational statement and judgment about human experience.   For 10 points, name this former Stanford professor and mentor to Edgar Bowers and J.V Cunningham, the author of Forms of Discovery and In Defense of Reason.;;(Arthur) (Yvor) Winters;;
Literature;;Throughout this work are interspersed quotes and extended passages from such figures as Robert Hemenway and assorted college students. After finding Charlotte Hunt, in Winter Park, she travels to her destination and describes herself as the niece of the title figure, "a profoundly useful lie," in order to solicit information. There she meets, Ms. Moseley and Rosalee, and afterwards she goes to the Merrit Monument Company and picks out the Ebony Mist headstone, and has the words "Genius of the South" engraved on it to mark the grave of the title figure. First published in Ms. Magazine in 1975 and collected In Search of Our Mother's Gardens, it begins by describing the author's landing in Orlando recognizing the description from the title figure's Mules and Men. For 10 points, name this essay by Alice Walker that recounts her search for the author of Their Eyes Were Watching God.;;(")Looking for Zora(");;
Literature;;In one scene, Harry manages to blow Voltaire's bust out of the bore of the six-pounder, though the main character expresses surprise that it would become jammed at all. The mere sound of the word "cholera" in this book, seemed to anger Dunstaple, as he remembered a dramatic argument he had with McNab about the causes of the disease. Later after a freak snowstorm, those inside the Residency create canister shot by stuffing ladies stockings with filed candlesticks. Mr. Hopkins, known as the Collector, while opening a dispatch box does not find the documents he expected but four biscuit-sized objects made of coarse flour called chapatis, whose mysterious distribution represented the first sign of trouble here. The title location is not a town at all, "but one of those ancient cemeteries that are called ‘Cities of the Silent'," that one comes across in northern India. The second volume in the author's Empire Trilogy, for 10 points, name this Booker Prize winning novel by J. G. Farrell about the blockade of a city during the Sepoy Rebellion.;;(The) Siege of Krishnapur;;
Literature;;While chilling on a mattress of feathers, slamming back flagons of Schiraz, the main character of this work sees Bababalouck followed by two dwarves. His mother had warned him in a message not to believe those "cubit-high messengers" or "trust their pious frauds," and instead of eating their melons he should impale their bearers. Earlier, he added five extensions to his father's palace, on the hill of Pied Horses, some of which he named "The Temple of Melody," "The Eternal or Unsatiating Banquet," and "The Retreat of Joy, or the Dangerous". In order to be brought to "a palace of subterranean fire," the hideous Indian merchant-wizard, Giaour, demands that the title character, a ruler with an evil eye and a penchant for harems, sacrifice fifty of the most beautiful children in the land.  These and other licentious deeds eventually gets him an audience with Eblis in Hell. Loosely based on Haroun al Rashid's grandson, the ninth Abbasid Caliph, for 10 points, name this Gothic novel by William Beckford.;;Vathek;;
Literature;;He suggests one "as a habit never drinks too much red wine," and in another essay this author mocks two frightfully rich English men in "On Conversations in Trains". Author of such novels as Pongo and the Bull, and The Man Who Made Gold, he grouped Islam with the Protestant Reformation as examples of great heresies of the "Church Universal," and was routinely accused of anti-Semitism because of such works as The Jews. In addition to the children's verse poems such as The Bad Child's Book of Beasts and More Beasts for Worse Children, he wrote the travelogues The Path to Rome, The Cruise of the Nona and Hills and the Sea. Considered a champion of British Catholicism along with his friend G.K. Chesterton and called "Old Thunder," by his aunt, for 10 points, name this prolific essayist, poet, economist and historian, a French-born naturalized British citizen, author of over 150 works including Europe and the Faith and The Servile State.;;(Hilaire) Belloc;;
Literature;;In one poem this man asked "Why has thou nothing in thy face, thou idol of the human race"? and in another he described how "the packed pollution and remorse of Time... reenact the horrors of unhousehold crime". This author of "Low Barometer" and "Eros" claimed "Thou art alone, fond lover" in a poem remarking "The evening darkens over" and rebuked "Joy's wisdom is attired splended for others' eyes if not for thee" in "Melancholia". He divided verse into accentual-syllabic, accentual, syllabic, and quantitative varieties in a study of Milton's prosody and he was also responsible for posthumously publishing the poems of his friend Gerard Manley Hopkins. he gained fame in his lifetime for a poem in four books beginning "Man's Reason is in such insolvency to sense". For 10 points, name this author of The Testament of Beauty.;;(Robert) Bridges;;
Literature;;One character in this work notes that "in quite illiterate minds, you will find glimpses of Artistic Truth;" at the end of the story, his body is found near the Bermondsey gas works. Upon returning to Agathox Lodge, one character is made to recite "To Homer" by Percy Bysshe Shelley, who is referenced in the beginning of this work when the protagonist is told that a young man who was expelled from the University had made a signpost pointing up a blank alley. While Sir Thomas Browne is the first one to take the protagonist out of Surbiton, it is implied that Dante is the driver for the protagonist and Mr. Septimus Bons, whose lack of belief in this Heaven causes him to fall to his death. Since he held both return tickets, however, the protagonist is left in Heaven by the title mode of transportation at the end of, FTP, which short story by E. M. Forster?;;("The) Celestial Omnibus(");;
Literature;;In Woody Allen's "Reminiscences: Places and People," this work's author claims that its main female character was once a parrot. One character reveals a dream about the mountains of Nebraska, which reminds another character of how they struck him as resembling a woman's breasts. The story of Fred Ohlson, who was unfaithful to his wife, is recalled by another character, who instituted fines and prevented others from selling their copra. His hopes of effecting similar changes in Apia have stalled thanks to an epidemic of the measles; however, he threatens to send another character to San Francisco, despite Dr. MacPhail pleas to the governor. Yet Reverend Davidson eventually succumbs to the wiles of the prostitute Sadie Thompson while the missionaries have been stranded at Pago-Pago thanks to the title weather condition in, FTP, which short story by W. Somerset Maugham?;;(")Rain(");;
Literature;;Paul P. Somers has criticized this work's ending as having "sledge-hammer obviousness," while Alexander Argyros argued for its necessity. The sight of the Big Dipper allows the narrator to recall beaches on the Atlantic and eating olives and anchovies in bars, and he later recalls the time he spent with Concha as the Belgian doctor offers to bring souvenirs to loved ones shortly. Near the end of this work, the baker Garcia reveals the results of the decision made by the narrator after he had been locked in the laundry, having earlier watched Tom Steinbock and Juan Mirbal being led away. He had decided that he would not divulge information about another anarchist, and, thus, he gives his captors false information. However, Pablo Ibbieta laughs hysterically when he learns that Ramon Gris was actually hiding in the cemetery, avoiding execution by a firing squad against the title object at the end of, FTP, which short story by Jean-Paul Sartre?;;(The) Wall|(Le) Mur;;
Literature;;The main character of this novel at one point finds himself in a prior's quarters where supposedly Doctor Faustus, who came from the nearby town of Knittlingen, had enjoyed some Elffinger wine. In that scene, the main character explains that he has always completed his assignments, to which the headmaster responds, differendum est inter et inter, and asks that he spend less time with his friend Heilner. After becoming an apprentice to blacksmith, he learns to respect butchers and bakers and intends to go to Bielach even though he had never learned to be a man. Earlier, he was sent to a Cistercian monastery at Maulbronn where he was the headmaster's most zealous student of Hebrew, but he is eventually sent back home after his friend is expelled from seminary and his work and mental health suffers. Hans Giebenrath drowns in, for 10 points, this work about the crushing pressure faced by a student prodigy, an early novel by Herman Hesse.;;Beneath the Wheel;;
Literature;;This author describes in one work a touching scene where a father places presents in the backyard to convince his children that the English are not bombing the city to pieces. Working as a correspondent for Corriere della Serra, his reports from the USSR are collected in The Volga Rises in Europe. He directed the 1953 movie Forbidden Christ and though a fascist sympathizer, he incurred Mussolini's displeasure and was sent to "internal exile" on Lipari for writing the how-to guide Technique of the Coup-d'état. One novel describes the moral degradation that occurs after the liberation of Naples, wherein the only thing people are willing to fight for is the title entity, a metaphor for people's personal flag. In another novel, this author describes with detachment trains disgorging themselves of dead bodies, and sleeping in a house with a rotting horse carcass next to it. Born Kur Eric Sukert and taking a pen-name meaning "bad place," for 10 points, name this Italian novelist of The Skin and Kaputt.;;(Curzio) Malaparte;;
Literature;;One character in this work tries to catch will-o-the-wisps in bottles and is fond of cancarone; to that character, chickens tied to a terrace railing represent diarrhea and a row of snails signifies heart disease. Another character in this work is courted with daisies stripped from stalks and bits of jellyfish and bats. The title character exiles his nurse Sebastiana to live with a group of merry people who, like Galateo, use garlands of flowers to hide the deformities of leprosy and live in Pratofungo. This work is narrated by the title character's nephew and Dr. Trelawney is responsible for healing the man who will marry Pamela. The narrator fights himself to a bloody draw before the Good 'Un and Bad 'Un are reconciled, and this work begins when Medardo of Terralba is shot by a Turkish cannon. For 10 points, name this novel about a disabled nobleman by Italo Calvino.;;(The) Cloven Viscount;;
Literature;;In one scene, a character is rescued by Mithridates after Polycharmus accidently mentions the title character's name. The title character is then sent to Queen Statira for safekeeping while the Great King tries to figure out who the real husband is. The beauty of the daughter of Hemocrates, is described as being divine, not just Nereid or mountain nymph hot, but Aphrodite hot. After she is taken by the graverobber Theron to Ionia, she is sold to the richest man in Miletus, who enlists the help of Phocas and Plangon to win her over. The action of this novel begins when that rescued character kicks her so hard that the title character is sent into a death-like coma. The author introduces himself as a clerk of the lawyer, Athenagoras, and informs us that he will relate a love story that took place in Syracuse involving the title character who shares her name with a naiad, the mother of Geryon. For 10 points, name this early historical novel by the first century author Chariton.;;(Chaireas) (and) Callirhoe;;
Literature;;One character in this work attempts to escape a burning by threatening the child of a bystander, but the child turns out to only be a wineskin.  One character in this work complains that she was able to sell religious idols until the population stopped believing in gods.  The protagonist's father-in-law is tied to a post and guarded by an illiterate Scythian archer, who is eventually bought off with the promise of sex with a flute-girl. Agathon refuses to help the main character by dressing as a woman to infiltrate the proceedings, so Mnesilochus agrees to do so. Centering around a gathering at the temple of Demeter, FTP, name this play in which the women of Athens put Euripides on trial for repeatedly insulting their sex, a farcical comedy by Aristophanes.;;Women Celebrating the Thesmophoria|Thesmophoriazusae;;
Literature;;One character claims this work's protagonist is one of "these fools who think they were born to carry suffering like a hat," but still "break first".  Another character requests a buba to put onto her effigy from the protagonist, who decides not to take the lorry away from the village. While stripped and covered in flour, that protagonist later sees a flashback of his tutor's encounter with his doomed betrothed Omae while running from Oroge and Jaguna, for whom he'd agreed to replace the mute Ifada as the "carrier" of curses at the New Year's Festival. For 10 points, name this play where teacher Eman, despite thinking he belongs to the title stock, cannot avoid his ritual murder, by Wole Soyinka.;;(The) Strong Breed;;
Literature;;One character asks if he could play a Dvorak fantasy, to which another responds that "music is far too indefinite," but is glad that it sounds nothing like German. Set in the library of a house in Picadilly overlooking Green Park, one character claims that the difference between literature and journalism is that journalism is unreadable and literature isn't read and Gilbert then suggests that the Greeks were a nation of the title profession as evidenced by the badly written, yet perfectly tempered Poetics by Aristotle. This work argues that the product of the first title profession should count and be judged along similar lines as the second title profession's work. Subtitled "With Some Important Remarks upon the Importance of Doing Nothing," for 10 points, name this work of meta-criticism in the form of a dialogue between Gilbert and Earnest, by Oscar Wilde.;;("The) Critic as Artist(");;
Literature;;In a review of this work John Updike wrote that, "It feels less like a survey than a curiously ornate harangue". This work suggests that such Hawthorne stories as "The May-Pole of Merry Mount" and "Rappaccini's Daughter" deal with Christianity's uneasiness with a particular aspect of nature, and that Poe was deeply afraid of nature and the feminine. It also claims that Sade, who is the most unread major writer in western literature, represents a comprehensive and satiric critique of Rousseau in his understanding of nature.  One chapter in this work, dedicated to Coleridge is titled "The Daemon as Lesbian Vampire," and this work claims that the bulk of "Western Culture"  are literary and artistic manifestations of men's fear of vaginas and an obsessive-compulsive desire to valorize the penis. Comparing the Belle of Amherst to a homosexual cultist draped in bondage gear, for 10 points, name this work of literary criticism subtitled, "Art and Decadence from Nefertiti to Emily Dickinson" written by Camille Paglia.;;Sexual Personae;;
Literature;;Ernest Fenollosa's Essay on the Chinese Written Character is noted as the first essay that employs the method of analysis the author wishes to employ in this work. It demands that those who are unwilling to master the small glossary to understand Chaucer should be "shut out from the reading of good books forever". This work stipulates that no man is prepared for modern thinking without understanding the anecdote of Agassiz and the fish, and that the proper method of studying "poetry and good letters" is the method of contemporary biologists. According to the author, Stendhal's epiphany in "Poetry with its Obligatory Comparisons," caused "the great turning," whereby poetry was vastly inferior to prose until it caught up with Flaubert and Stendhal, on the basis that "DICHTEN=CONDENSARE". It is impersonal enough, according to the author to serve as a textbook and includes such slogans as "Artists are the Antennae of the race," and that "Great Literature is news that stays NEWS," for 10 points, name this work of criticism whose title refers to the fundamentals of the title action written by Ezra Pound.;;ABC of Reading;;
Literature;;In this work, we meet Gregorievich, who "looks like Pluto in the Mickey Mouse films". After saying good-bye to Constantine at the end of the Easter trip, it mentions a number of other texts that were rejected as reference resources including F.W. Fodor's South of Hitler. It was initially published in five installments for the The Atlantic Monthly, and after discussing the possible poisoning of Stefan Dushan, the author mentions going "to a lavatory of the Turkish kind". The author describes touching the black and desiccated hand of headless man lying in state at Vrdink monastery, Prince Lazar. Violence was all the author knew of the region and it devotes significant pages to the Battle of Kosovo and the assassination of Archduke Ferdinand.  The first title symbol is seen initially being held in the arms of a peasant in Belgrade, while the second refers to an enigmatic figure in a Slav folksong. Subtitled "A Journey through Yugoslavia," for 10 points, name this half-million word travelogue and ethnography written by Dame Rebecca West.;;Black Lamb and Grey Falcon;;
