Philosophy;;He posited that technology was fundamentally enframing, and claimed that facticity was the "thrownness" of existence.  A notable lecture by this man dealt with Sophocles' Antigone and "Poeticizing the essence of rivers," and was named after Friedrich Holderlin's poem "Der Ister".  He denied a change in his thinking in a letter published by William Richardson, and that so-called "turn" is exemplified by his Contributions to Philosophy (From Enowning).  Other works by this man include Kant and the Problem of Metaphysics and Off the Beaten Track.  FTP, name this philosopher who posited a "being for whom being is in question," dasein, in his work Being and Time.;;(Martin) Heidegger
Geography;;This city is the namesake of a volcanic field that deposited lava fields near its suburb of Three Kings.  Its Harbour bridge connects this city with Northcote and spans the Waitemata Harbour, which opens into Hauraki Gulf, and another large harbor near this city is Manukau.  An 850-foot shield volcano on Rangitoto Island is an iconic image of this city, which straddles a narrow isthmus between the Pacific Ocean and Tasman Sea.  It served as the capital of its nation until 1865, when the head of government was moved to the more centrally-located Wellington.  FTP, name this most-populous city of New Zealand.;;Auckland
Chemistry;;In ionized regions of HII galaxies, 2+ and 3+ ions of this element are indicated by wavelengths of 7136 and 4740 angstroms, respectively.  A radiometric technique used to date materials minerals over 100,000 years old measures potassium 40's decay to an isotope of this element.  The Huygens probe found the 40 isotope of this element in Titan's atmosphere, and the 39 isotope is synthesized on earth via cosmic ray activity.  In 2000, it became the lightest known element in Group 18 to form a chemical compound when Finnish scientists created its fluorohydride.  FTP, name this noble gas that makes up around 1% of the earth's atmosphere, with atomic number 18 and chemical symbol Ar.;;Argon
World History;;During this period, a national road system was established and the length of wheel axles was standardized for the first time.  Its founder’s chancellor Li Si instituted the policy of fenshu kengru, in which all non-legalist works were burned, and that founder also ordered the buryingalive of several hundred scholars.  The Battle of Julu was the beginning of the end for this dynasty, which saw the first unification of the country it ruled and a barbarian invasion which led to the beginning of the construction of the Great Wall.  FTP, identify this dynasty whose first ruler was Shi Huangdi, builder of the terracotta army and the first emperor of China.;;Qin|Chin
Literature;;This character's eyes are alternately described as brown, dark blue, and having "layer upon layer of colors".  This character becomes ill with brain fever for several months after nearly throwing herself out a window.  She goes to Yonville to prepare for childbirth, and this character's husband's first wife Heloise died suddenly when her fortune turned out to be nonexistent.  After she loses a bunch of her husband's money buying jewels from Monsieur Lereaux, she commits suicide by drinking arsenic.  FTP, name this title character who has affairs with Leon and Rodolphe in a Gustave Flaubert novel.;;(Madame) Bovary|(Emma) Bovary
Music;;The composer's notes on this composition note that "All painting in instrumental music is lost if it is pushed too far".  The allegro fourth movement of this piece sees the only appearance of the piccolo, and its second movement is a B-flat Andante molto mosso in sonata form in 12/8 time.  This symphony is notable for its uncharacteristic use of five movements, including Happy gathering of country folk and Storm.  It premiered alongside its composer's previous symphony that begins with the "Fate knocking on the door" motif.  FTP, name this symphony of in F major, originally subtitled "Recollections of Country Life," Beethoven's sixth.;;Pastoral (Symphony)
Physics;;Matter-antimatter oscillation in one of these, measured in Fermilab, raised the estimate for the lower bound of the mass of the top quark.  Exotic members of this group include quarkless balls of self-interacting gluons known as Glueballs.  Upon discovery, the muon was originally misclassified as belonging to this group of particles.  Those that consist of a quarkonium pair are classified as flavorless, while those that consist of a quark and a different antiquark are classified as flavored.  FTP, name this subgroup of the hadrons that, in contrast to baryons, are comprised of a quark-antiquark pair, examples of which include kaons and pions.;;meson(s)
Religion/Mythology;;It was first fully translated into English by John Martin Crawford, and Robert Ekman has painted a number of scenes from it. Written an octosyllabic meter that has come to be named after it, its first canto features the creation of heaven and earth from the fragments of eggs that had fallen off of Ilmatar’s knee. One episode features the defeat of Untamo’s tribe in battle, after which their killer Kullervo commits suicide. Its main story follows three heroes’ journey to Pohjola to woo the beautiful daughter of Louhi. Compiled by Elias Lönnrot and starring Ilmarinen, Lemminkainen, and Vainamoinen, FTP, name this national epic of Finland.;;(the) Kalevala
World History;;This culture developed into the "cemetery H" culture, which notably cremated its dead.  The derogatory term mleccha may have originally been a reference to these people, as the similar Sumerian term meluhha seems to refer to their homeland.  They left behind bronze statuettes such as the "dancing girl" and their ruins are evidence of urban planning and complex water and sanitation systems.  Their complex cities included settlements like Harappa and Mohenjo-Daro.  FTP, name this ancient Indian civilization named for the valley of the chief river of Pakistan.;;Indus (River) (Valley) (Civilization)|IVC
Literature;;In this work, a clerk named MacGowan supplies a woman with bogus abortion medication in hopes of seducing her.  A pivotal event in this novel is contrasted with the death of a fish, and Dr. Peabody is too late to stop it.  The novel ends with one character buying new false teeth and acquiring a wife after returning borrowed tools.  Reverend Whitfield fathered Jewel in this work, and Cash's leg has been moldering underneath a makeshift plaster cast for days.  The novel centers around the central family's return to Jefferson to bury Addie.  FTP, name this work about the Bundrens, a novel by William Faulkner.;;As I Lay Dying
Pop Culture;;A fiery monster prompts this character to helpfully posit "Maybe it's an arm" before instructing another character to "Aim for the arm!"  He often chides himself during lapses in combat by noting "They're onto me!  I'm getting careless!"  He inspires a colleague by telling him "You're becoming more like your father," and he instructs a certain character to "get back here!" in his first appearance in 3D.  He often interjects "Don't mess up that Arwing," and his most notable command can be followed with instructions to "press Z or R twice".  FTP, name this general who instructs Star Fox to "do a barrel roll".;;Peppy (Hare)
United States History;;Holm Bursum lost his Senate seat in the wake of this event, and John Kendrick introduced the resolution that led to its investigation.  Thomas Walsh led the investigation of this event, and Edward Doheny was eventually acquitted of bribery in its aftermath.  Robert La Follette had his office ransacked after supporting the investigation of this, and Secretary of the Interior Albert Fall was jailed for his involvement.  FTP, identify this scandal of the Harding administration that involved government leasing of Elk Hills and the namesake Wyoming oil field.;;Teapot Dome (scandal)
Noncomputational Math;;Sylvester’s theorem of them is used to generate a Bayes estimator for multivariable Gaussian distributions, while the Cauchy-Binet formula generalizes their multiplicativity to non-square inputs. For a linear transformation, it represents the factor by which the transformation scales n-dimensional volume; thus, when changing variables during integration, the Jacobian one of these is introduced as a multiplicative factor.  Other examples include the Fredholm and the Wronskian, and they are central to Cramer’s rule. Most often evaluated using the Laplace expansion, FTP, name this function which, when applied to a 2 by 2 matrix a, b, c, d, equals a d minus b c.;;determinant (function)
Pop Culture;;He was drafted by the Colorado Rockies in the 30th round in 2000 despite the fact that he hadn't played baseball since middle school.  He finished third in Heisman voting as a freshman in 1999, and that year he led his team to the BCS national title game but lost to Florida State.  In his breakout NFL game, he rushed for 173 yards, including a game-winning 46-yard overtime run that caused two Viking defenders to collide.  He set the all-time record for yards per carry with 8.4 in 2006, and in that year he became the first player at his position to break 1,000 yards rushing.  FTP, name this dog-fighting hard-throwing Falcons quarterback.;;(Michael) (Dwayne) Vick
World History;;As a rear admiral in his homeland's navy, this man created the Port of Trieste and was a viceroy to the Lombardo-Venetian kingdom.  This man was captured at the siege of Queretaro along with his generals Miguel Miramon and Tomas Mejia.  He was crowned in the Catedral Metropolitana, and the wide avenue he had built from his palace to the city center was later renamed the Paseo de la Reforma.  He adopted Agustín de Iturbide's grandchildren, and his execution in 1867 led to Benito Juarez becoming ruler of Mexico.  FTP, name this archduke of Austria and emperor of Mexico.;;Maximillian (I)
Religion/Mythology;;Before this man's birth, his father sacrifices a goat and an angel jumps into the flames to ascend to heaven.  He loses a riddle to his groomsmen about a lion that he killed and leaves in a rage only to return and find that his wife has been married to one of the groomsmen.  He sets fire to 300 foxes and unleashes them upon the town.  Later he kills 1,000 men with the jawbone of an ass, and after he was blinded he sacrificed himself by pushing down the two central pillars of the Philistines' temple, killing a bunch of them.  FTP, name this man that got his mystical strength from his hair, a Biblical character married to Delilah.;;Samson
Religion/Mythology;;Its opening features an attempt by a king to avenge the death of his father by ridding the world of snakes, and the body of the work is told to that king by a disciple of its author.  The action comes to a peak at the battle of Kurukshetra, a clash between two groups led by Duryodhana and Yudhisthir.  One notable episode in this work features the princess Draupadi being won by the archery talents of Arjuna.  Featuring the war for succession between the Pandavas and Kauravas and ending with the death of Krishna, FTP, name this Sanskrit epic written by Vyasa, which contains the Bhagavad Gita.;;(The) Mahabharata
Biology;;Ectromelia is used to model this disease in mice, and a vaccine against this disease was developed from a New York City Board of Health seed-virus strain.  A less virulent strain of the disease-causing agent causes the alastrim version of this disease, and a hemorrhagic version of this disease causes skin to take on a blackish look.  Sores caused by this disease are described as either discrete or confluent depending on whether they merge.  A slave named Onesimus owned by Cotton Mather taught Americans how to prevent this disease, and Lady Wortley Montagu brought inoculation of this disease to Europe.  FTP, name this now-eradicated disease that Edward Jenner created a vaccine for using the related virus cowpox.;;smallpox|Variola (vera)
Geography;;Morris Taylor discussed this road's importance as the only major route not controlled by stagecoach lines.  This route followed parts of the Osage Trace, and it was first traversed by William Becknell.  It split near present-day Garden City, with the longer northern branch passing by Bent's Old Fort and the shorter, more treacherous southern branch continuing on to Watrous.  This route that contained the Cimarron cutoff became a convenient military avenue during the Mexican-American War.  FTP, name this trail of the American west with a western terminus in a namesake New Mexico city.;;Santa Fe (Trail)
Art;;Susan Vreeland wrote a novel with this title that claims that this work was painted to impress Emile Zola.  The artist's future wife Aline Charigot plays with a small dog in the foreground of this painting.  A still-life in the foreground features crystal glasses and a fruit plate with a bunch of purple grapes.  A man in a top hat converses with a man in brown in the background, while a beefy-armed dude with a full orange beard and a blue-brimmed straw hat leans on the balcony under the awning of this work.  FTP, identify this 1881 work by Pierre-Auguste Renoir, depicting a meal eaten on the waterfront.;;(The) Luncheon of the boating party|Le déjeuner des canotiers
Miscellaneous;;In 2003, this man worked as a lobbyist for the reinsurance company Equitas, Ltd.  In taking over a position previously held by Harlan Mathews, this man ran against state Congressman Jim Cooper, who criticized him for campaigning in a red pickup truck.  As minority counsel during the Watergate hearings, he gained notoriety for informing Fred Buzhardt of the committee’s knowledge of the so-called "Watergate tapes".  He is perhaps most famous for replacing Steven Hill and Dianne Wiest.  FTP, name this former Tennessean US Senator and actor, a current Republican Presidential candidate.;;(Freddie) (Dalton) Thompson
Literature;;This man wrote a poem with rhyme scheme ABABBCBC with 26 stanzas known as his "ABC".  He addressed an unfinished work to "Lyte Lowys my sone," his "Treatise on the Astrolabe".  The speaker falls asleep reading Cicero when Scipio Africanus comes to him in a dream in one of his works, while another was based on Boccaccio's Il Filostrato and recounted the love between a Trojan prince and the daughter of Calchas.  In addition to "The Parliament of Fowls" and Troilus and Criseyde, he wrote about a group of travelers exchanging stories at the Tabard Inn.  FTP, name this author of The Canterbury Tales.;;(Geoffrey) Chaucer
Miscellaneous;;Herbert S. Terrace led a group that trained a chimp named after this man to attempt to replicate Project Washoe.  The name of Marco Schutzenberger is sometimes appended to this man's namesake containment hierarchy.  He revised his government and binding theory in his work The Minimalist Program, and with Morris Halle he wrote a book that separated phonology from grammar, The Sound Pattern of English.  His master's thesis was on Morphophonemics of Modern Hebrew, and he nonsensically posited that "Colorless green ideas sleep furiously".  FTP, name this author of Syntactic Structures, an MIT linguist.;;(Avram) (Noam) Chomsky
Pop Culture;;This person's college football career ended after he accidentally killed his team's deaf quarterback during practice. After a stint in the Marines he became a "member of the elite agency that's been thanklessly defending this big-ass country since the second American Revolution.... the invisible one". He was trained in that role by Colonel Hunter Gathers, whom he was later forced to kill. He has a Swan Song Records tattoo on his right bicep, and Led Zeppelin's "In Through The Out Door" reminds him of the only woman he ever loved, a Russian mercenary named Molotov Cocktease. FTP, name this Bowie knife-wielding character, voiced by Patrick Warburton, who routinely saves the lives of Hank, Dean and Dr. Venture.;;Brock (Samson)|(Brock) Samson
Noncomputational Math;;Cantor used these in lieu of Dedekind cuts for a constructive definition of the reals, and in Banach space, every one of these is convergent.  A metric space is called complete if every one of these has a limit.  The Bolzano-Weierstrass Theorem can be used to prove that, over the real numbers, every one of these is equivalent to a converging sequence.  Their formal definition posits that for any epsilon, there exists a point after which all points lie within epsilon of each other.  FTP, name this type of sequence, in which after a certain point, the elements of the sequence become arbitrarily close.;;Cauchy (sequence)|Cauchy (criterion)
Literature;;This character appears strolling in the riverside district followed by a disgustingly fat man whose whole body shakes like a dead jellyfish.  This character's mother is accused of having 42 ruined daughters when arrested for drunkenness, and the story in which this character "of the crimson legions" appears opens detailing a rock-throwing fight between the Rum Alley and Devil's Row neighborhoods.  Mary claims that this character has "gone teh deh Devil" when she leaves home to live with the bartender Pete, who leaves her for the conniving Nellie.  After her brother Jimmie recounts that she is dead, her mother laments "I'll fergive her" at the story's end.  FTP, name this "girl of the streets," the title character of a Stephen Crane novella.;;Maggie (Johnson)|Maggie(:) (A) (Girl) (of) (the) (Streets)
World History;;Ingram de Umfraville fought for the losing side of this battle that John Coyme the Younger participated in to avenge his father's murder by its victorious commander at Dumfries.  Sir Philip Mowbray commanded the besieged forces during this battle, and Thomas of Lancaster contributed the minimum legal number of troops.  Robert Keith led a 500-man cavalry charge around a swamp that scattered archers during this battle, and the losing forces were jointly commanded by the Earls of Gloucester and Hereford, who failed to break the siege of Stirling Castle.  FTP, name this 1314 battle in which Edward II's English forces lost to Robert the Bruce, strengthening his claim to the Scottish throne.;;(Battle) (of) Bannockburn|(Blàr) (Allt) (a') Bhonnaich
Geography;;A large amphitheater known as Hell's Hole can be found on the western side of one feature of this name, while the sunrise can be seen over another example on the State Seal of Ohio. A more famous example is located in the Kluane National Park and Reserve. It is presumed to have the largest base circumference of any mountain in the world, and due to tectonic uplifting, its elevation is still increasing. It is the source of a namesake glacier, as well as the Hubbard glacier, and is the highest mountain in the St. Elias range. Named after the founder of the Geological Survey of Canada, FTP, name this second tallest mountain in North America, the tallest mountain in Canada.;;(Mount) Logan
Religion/Mythology;;This figure was shown in a Johannes Gehrts illustration beside the goddess with which he is most often associated, and a refrain that occurs thrice in the Voluspa describes this figure's marking of three important points of a major battle. This character lived in the cave Gnipahellir, and he could be mollified by cake if the giver had previously given bread to the poor. He is often depicted with four eyes, and the section on his meeting with Odin in the Vegtamskvida describes his blood-covered chest. After breaking free and joining the giants at Ragnarok, he is fated to kill and be killed by Tyr. FTP, name this mythical dog, the Norse equivalent to Cerberus, guardian of the gates of Hel.;;Garm(r)
Literature;;He wrote of Ugla, a rural girl who works as an aid for parliamentarian Bui Arland, in a work that details the Prime Minister's secret dealings to open an American air force base.  This author satirized Mormons in Paradise Reclaimed, and an orphan becomes obsessed with "world singer" Garoar Holm in his The Fish Can Sing.  Another work by this author features a protagonist who buys a dilapidated sod house and marries Rosa and Finna, a crofter named Bjatur, and a historical novel by this author contains three sections including "The Bright Jewel" and "Fire in Copenhagen".  FTP, name this Nobel Laureate who wrote Independent People and Iceland's Bell.;;(Halldór) (Kiljan) Laxness|(Halldór) Gudjónsson
Literature;;This president of the Iron Clad Manufacturing Company created a design for the steel barrel still in use today, before driving that company into bankruptcy.  This investigator's exposé of Porfirio Diaz's treatment of journalists was titled Six Months in Mexico.  She put on a German accent and accused boarding-house residents of trying to kill her in order to write an exposé inspired by the work of Dorothea Dix that involved being admitted to the Blackwell's Island Insane Asylum.  FTP, name this reporter of Joseph Pulitzer's New York World whose attempt to best Phineas Fogg's feat is chronicled in Around the World in Seventy-Two Days, the author of Ten Days in a Mad-House.;;(Nellie) Bly|(Elizabeth) (Jane) Cochran
World History;;This period saw the rise of feudal estates called shoen, which replaced the old ritsuryo system; this change also gave rise to the so-called "wave people". Its namesake capital was designed to resemble the Tang Dynasty capital at Chang'an, and government reforms of this era led to it being its country's first permanent capital. Literary works dated to it include a large compilation of poetry called Man-yoshu, as well as both the Kojiki and Nihon Shoki. Notably featuring the unofficial adoption of Buddhism as the state religion at the instigation of Emperor Shomu, FTP, name this era of Japanese history, lasting from 710 to 794 CE, which ended when Emperor Kammu moved the capital to Heian-kyo.;;Nara (period)|Nara(-jidai)
Art;;Before moving into John Everett Millais' old house and studio, this man produced paintings based on existing photographs of Nazi leaders; Goebbels was the model for Man in a Cap and Hitler figured into both Figure Getting Out of a Car as well as Seated Man / Man Standing. The suicide of his lover George Dyer is depicted in his Triptych May-June, 1973. A triptych based on the Furies is regarded as his first mature piece, while alternate versions of his most famous work include Head VI and Figure with Meat.  FTP, name this Irish painter famous for his grotesque imagery in such works as Three Studies for Figures at the Base of a Crucifixion and Study after Velazquez's Portrait of Pope Innocent X.;;(Francis) Bacon
Pop Culture;;After missing by a single steal on March 3, this man became the third player to record a quadruple double against the Bucks on March 29, 1990.  Shaq claimed that this man had five moves and four countermoves, giving him twenty in total, and his signature move was the soccer-inspired "Dream Shake".  He was a member of "slam dunk fraternity" Phi Slama Jama while playing with Clyde Drexler.  In 1994, he became the only player in NBA history to win the MVP, defensive player of the year, and Finals MVP in the same year.  Early in his pro career, he teamed up with Ralph Sampson to form the "Twin Towers," and he holds the all-time record for career blocks.  FTP, name this seven-foot Nigerian center who wore number 34 for the Houston Rockets.;;(Hakeem) (Abdul) Olajuwon|(Akeem) (Abdul) Olajuwon
Physics;;Superheavy elements in the 7p series have electronic structures predicted to approximate jj-coupling, and thus their structures can be determined by applying this formulation to Dirac-Fock orbitals.  It doesn't work for cases of holes, nor does it suffice when two or more Schrodinger wave functions in the same shell have the same energy, a case known as degeneracy.  A common counterexample to this formulation is copper, and its mechanism can be augmented with Hund's Rules and the Pauli Exclusion Principle.  FTP, name this principle of electron addition that takes its name from the German for "building up".;;Aufbau (Principle)
Literature;;He claimed that "one could lead two lives" amidst the "malarial enervation" of his home country in his essay "What the Twilight Says".  His most recent play is a collaboration with Paul Simon about a Hell's Kitchen murderer named Salvador Agron, The Capeman.  He wrote a long poem in alternating rhyming couplets about a painter contrasted with Camillo Pissarro.  In addition to Tiepolo's Hound, this author wrote a work that detailed Hector and Achille's fight over Helen's love, a work in which Philoctete suffers from a leg wound healed by the proprietress of the No Pain Café, Ma Kilman.  FTP, name this poet of Omeros, an epic poem set on his native St. Lucia.;;(Derek) (Alton) Walcott
Literature;;One of this man's works says that the speaker will "luve thee still, my dear, / While the sands o' life shall run," and another work opens questioning "Is there for honest Poverty".  The speaker of one of his poems stops to observe Alloway Kirk bathed in light, where he watches several witches performing an erotic dance in front of the church, and exclaims "Weel done, Cutty Sark!," Tam O' Shanter.  One of his poems is dedicated to an "ugly, creepin, blastit wonner," while another talks about "The best-laid schemes o' mice an' men" that often go awry.  Another of this man's poems begins "Should auld acquaintance be forgot / and never brought to mind".  FTP, name this poet of To a Louse, To a Mouse, and Auld Lang Syne.;;(Robert) Burns
Astronomy;;Brian Clegg called it "The God Effect" in his 2006 book of the same name. It can be quantified by entropy, providing a connection between thermodynamics and quantum information theory. Bell's inequalities show how predicted experimental results assuming this property violate local realism. It cannot be used to transmit classical information at faster-than-light speeds, although it can be used to transmit two bits in one qubit [CUBE-it] via superdense coding, and has potential applications in quantum computing. FTP, name this quantum phenomenon that was inadvertently proven in a 1935 paper by Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen, who ridiculed it as "spooky action at a distance".;;(quantum) entanglement
Literature;;Like Chinua Achebe, he wrote of Joseph Conrad's influence on his writing in his essay "Conrad's Darkness".  One of his works features such do-nothings as a carpenter named Bobo and a poet named B. Wordsworth, while a gay government official named Bobby rides with Linda to the capital of the Southern Collectorate in the title story of one of his collections that also contains "One out of Many" and "Tell Me Who to Kill".  Another of his works features the meddling Tulsi clan who badger the title character Mohun into buying a shoddy shack to get away from the Hanuman House.  FTP, name this author of In a Free State, A Bend in the River, and A House for Mister Biswas.;;(Sir) (Vidiadhar) (Surajprasad) (V.S.) Naipaul
Religion/Mythology;;It is symbolized in Hindu temple dances by Shiva raising his right leg.  Svetambara and Digambara Jains disagree as to whether this is available to women.  Surat Shabda Yoga claims that the Jivan form results from self-realization.  It makes up one of the four artha in Hinduism along with dharma and kama.  The Baha'u'llah claims that jnana and bhakti or wisdom and devotion are the best path to its achievement.  In Jainism, it is preceded by kevala and the same as nirvana, and its attainment requires the annihilation of all karma. With sufficient enlightenment, a soul can escape samsara and, FTP, achieve what release from the cycle of suffering?;;Moksha|Mukti|Apavarga
Music;;Simultaneous C major and F sharp major triads are known as this type of chord, as they announce the entrance of the title character of this work.  A comic scene in this work depicts one character determining that his coconut is a god, and this ballet opens during a Maslenitsa carnival celebration.  Scenes in this ballet with a libretto written by Alexander Benois include the Wet Nurses' Dance to the folk song "Down the Petersky Road".  The protagonist declares love for the ballerina, gets hacked to death by the Moor, and returns as a ghost to haunt the Old Wizard, his maker.  FTP, name this 1911 ballet by Igor Stravinsky about a living puppet.;;Petrushka
Miscellaneous;;This man's brother Seth was arrested with $142,000 in cash and his brother's records, and the man he was with claimed to have been hired as a prostitute.  A 2006 manhunt failed to nab him in Colorado City, Arizona, but this man was arrested while riding in a burgundy Escalade carrying computers, disguises, 16 cell phones, and $55,000 in cash, with his wife Naomi and his brother Isaac.  He was wanted on charges that he had arranged a marriage between a 19-year-old and his 14-year-old cousin.  FTP, name this leader of the Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, captured in 2006 after being on the FBI's top ten most wanted list for several months.;;(Warren) (Steed) Jeffs
United States History;;Martin Van Buren argued that the New York anti-Masonic movement made the passage of this law necessary.  This law was passed after a delegation of Pennsylvania farmers met to draft a memo to Congress at the Harrisburg Delegation.  The pseudonymous "Mr. X" decried this law as "unconstitutional, unequal, and oppressive," and complained that it legalized "protection of one branch of industry at the expense of others" in the South Carolina Exposition and Protest, whose true author was John C. Calhoun.  FTP, name this highest peacetime U.S. tariff, replaced by the Tariff of 1832, that spurred the Nullification Crisis when John Quincy Adams signed it into law in 1828.;;Tariff (of) Abominations
Biology;;Dysbindin and neuregulin are the two genes currently most strongly linked with it, while a recent study by Torrey and Yolken suggest that it may be caused by the parasite Toxoplasma gondii. The main character of a Peter Handke novel is based on a study of this condition which focused on apophenia. The validity of diagnoses of it was famously called into question by the Rosenhan experiment. fMRI analyses have backed up the successes of cognitive remediation therapy in dealing with this disorder, which is most commonly thought to be caused by an overabundance of dopamine. FTP, name this psychiatric disorder which comes in disorganized, catatonic, and paranoid varieties.;;Schizophrenia
Pop Culture;;He made his major league debut in 1997 and finished the season with 14 saves and a 2.90 ERA in 31 innings pitched in 27 relief appearances.  He saved 38 games with an uninspiring 4.27 ERA in 2002, his last year exclusively as a reliever.  In the 2005 AL Division Series against the Yankees, he pitched four games and allowed just two hits in seven innings.  Since signing as a free agent with his current team in 2003, he has been primarily a started and has never posted an ERA above four.  He won a career-high 17 games this year, putting him in the Cy Young race with teammate John Lackey.  FTP, name this current Anaheim Angels pitcher, a Venezuela native.;;(Kelvim) (Jose) Escobar (Bolivar)
Literature;;Some critics theorize that this work was meant to improve the reputation of the family of the Earl of Castlehaven, who had been executed for sodomy.  The title character is freed from a magic chair by a spirit called Sabrina.  Previously, she was brought to a pleasure palace by the title character, who repeatedly urged her to drink from a magic cup, and she is rescued with the help of the Attendant Spirit.  The music for this work was composed by Henry Lawes, and it ends with the line "Heav'n it self would stoop to her".  FTP, name this work that describes a sister and her two brothers who are lost in the forest.  masque by John Milton.;;Comus|A Mask Presented at Ludlow Castle(,) (1634)
Psychology;;This concept is contrasted with the "Collective effervescence" of the spiritual in The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life.  In Social Theory and Social Structure, Robert Merton based his Strain Theory on this concept.  This concept was formulated by Jean-Marie Guyau, who contrasted it with autonomy, while another sociologist believed it was the reason that Protestants were disenchanted.  FTP, name this concept posited to arise from modernization in The Division of Labour in Society, the weak regulation of societal norms in the individual, that Emile Durkheim posited was one of the four types of suicide.;;anomie|anomic
Chemistry;;Modifications of one reaction named for this man include the Aromatic, Ireland, and Eschenmoser.  The synthesis of dibenzylideneacetone is an example of a reaction between a ketone and aldahyde, or two aldahydes, named after this man and Schmidt.  One reaction named for this man can also have "Hetero" varieties that utilize iminium, such as the Overman and Chen-Mapp variations.  Another reaction named after this man creates a carbon-carbon bond between two esters or an ester and a carbonyl in a strong base, and its intramolecular analog is the Dieckmann reaction.  FTP, name this German chemist, the namesake of a rearrangement that yields a gamma-delta unsaturated carbonyl and a condensation that yields a beto-keto-ester.;;(Rainer) (Ludwig) Claisen
Music;;Some of this man's later works were created for television, including a score for the 1942 adaptation of his opera The Pilgrim's Progress as well as an adaptation of his seventh symphony for Scott of the Antarctic. His first choral symphony is a setting of parts of five Walt Whitman poems, including "A Song For All Seas, All Ships". This man’s operas also include one featuring a prize fight between the title character and John the butcher, as well as a direct adaptation of a J.M. Synge play. Hugh the Drover and Riders to the Sea were composed by, FTP, which British composer, who also created The Lark Ascending, the London Symphony, and Fantasia on a Theme of Thomas Tallis?;;(Ralph) Vaughan Williams
Philosophy;;He argued that DNA manipulation could lead to political chaos in Our Posthuman Future.  He calls for a change to overlapping institutions of international politics, what he dubs "multi-multilateralism," and the end of his book that criticizes the Bush administration's planning of the Iraq invasion, America at the Crossroads.  In that book he draws upon Georg Hegel and Karl Marx and discusses the end of the Cold War, and posits that the universalization of Western liberal democracy will be the final form of human government, this ushering in the title time period.  FTP, name this neoconservative American philosopher of Japanese descent who wrote the influential book The End of History and the Last Man.;;(Yoshihiro) (Francis) Fukuyama
Literature;;One of them wrote the book Greenfield Hill about his hometown neighborhood, while another published a mock epic whose hero was Tom Brainless.  More famous works of this group starred Honorius, a caricature of John Adams, and another that dealt with a uniquely American food item.  This group collaborated on a poem subtitled A Poem of the Restoration of Chaos and Substantial Night that criticized states slow to ratify the Constitution.  FTP, name this literary group whose writings include The Progress of Dulness, The Anarchiad, Hasty Pudding, and M'Fingal and whose members included John Trumbull and Joel Barlow.;;Hartford Wits|Connecticut Wits
Religion/Mythology;;Their longstanding debate over whether or not to have bishops was elucidated in the 2005 document What Sort of Bishops?  In their Twenty-Five Articles, ministers are allowed to marry, and the independence of the United States is recognized.  Their founder adapted his "Covenant Prayer" that begins "I am no longer my own, but thine".  This denomination disregarded the idea of predestination, arguing that salvation is achieved by doing good works and helping all others achieve salvation, and one of their founders was Francis Asbury.  FTP, name this sect of Christianity that practices only the sacraments of baptism and communion and began with the preaching of Charles and John Wesley.;;Method(is(m|ts){1}?)
United States History;;He wrote an opinion that invoked the thirteenth amendment's ban on slavery to overturn a certain state's peonage law in Bailey v. Alabama,  He claimed that activities intrastate in nature in separate could interact and become controllable by Congress under the commerce clause in his opinion for National Labor Relations Board v. Jones and Laughlin Steel Corp.  He invalidated the NIRA's ability to allow the president to issue "codes of fair competition" in what came to be known as the "sick chicken case".  FTP, name this politician who resigned the Supreme Court to run for president against Woodrow Wilson, only to be reappointed to the Court as Chief Justice in 1930.;;(Charles) (Evans) Hughes (Sr.)
World History;;Jimmy Carter blasted this group for their "crime against humanity," and they take their name from a word of Persian ancestry.  They were founded in part because of Hisséne Habré's ascent to power, and by 2006 they had mostly been absorbed into the Border Guards, Popular Defense Forces, and other such groups.  The National Islamic Front promised to outlaw this group that Musa Hilal allegedly controls, and Security Council Resolution 1556 demands that be disarmed.  FTP, name these Arab militiamen from Chad and Sudan, major players in the Darfur conflict.;;Janjaweed
Literature;;Mark Twain said he would rather go to John Bunyan's heaven than read this novel.  The protagonist's protégé is being courted by several minor characters, including a journalist named Matthias Pardon and a college student named Henry.  The death of Miss Birdseye is overshadowed by another character's upcoming oratory performance, and at the novel's end the protagonist rebukes Olive Chancellor for exploiting Verena Tarrant to advance the women's rights cause.  FTP, name this work featuring Basil Ransome, a novel by Henry James about titular residents of a New England city.;;(The) Bostonians
Biology;;A team led by Clarke, Duarte, and Elena showed evidence for this using vesicular stomatitis, while other proponents include John Jaenike and W.D. Hamilton. Agrawal’s fitness model lends support to it by assuming nonrandom host-parasite interactions, rather than the random interactions  proposed by the "Vicar of Bray" model, which fails to show gene-level adaptive benefit. First proposed by Leigh Van Valen and stating that an organism must continually evolve just to maintain equivalent relative fitness, FTP, name this evolutionary hypothesis that shares its name with a character in Lewis Carroll’s Through The Looking Glass.;;Red Queen (Hypothesis)|Red Queen (Effect)|Red Queen(’s) (Race)
United States History;;This man's uncle Chief Smoke helped raise him, and when he was young he fought against the Crow and Pawnee Indians.  In 1871 he went to Washington D.C. to meet with President Grant, and his namesake agency was created on the Platte River in that same year.  His forces of a few thousand were repelled by 31 soldiers with fast-loading Springfield rifles at the Wagon Box Fight.  The greatest Indian victory of his namesake conflict was the Battle of the Hundred Slain, also known as Fetterman's Massacre, and that conflict ended with the 1868 Treaty of Fort Laramie.  FTP, name this Oglala Sioux leader who led a namesake 1866-1868 war in the Wyoming and Montana territories.;;Red Cloud|Makhpiya Luta
Religion/Mythology;;This man's name was given to a work of criticism directed at Johann Winckelmann. He was the son of Acoetes and the father of Thrymbraeus and Antiphantes. He once angered Poseidon by having sex with his wife in the presence of a cult image of that god, though at the time of his death he is said to be  sacrificing a bull to that god. In anger at his countrymen’s acceptance of Sinon’s lies, this priest threw his spear at a suspicious structure. His suspicions were rewarded by being crushed to death along with his two sons by sea serpents sent by Athena. FTP, name this Trojan dude who quite rightly feared Greeks bearing gifts.;;Laocoön|Laocoon
Noncomputational Math;;In Poisson algebras, Poisson brackets are analogues of this construct in Lie algebras, as they both obey the Jacobi identity. In quantum mechanics, if an observable has no explicit time dependence, it is conserved if its corresponding operator yields zero when undergoing this operator with the Hamiltonian, and there exists a nontrivial uncertainty principle for any two variables whose corresponding operators yield a nonzero value for this. FTP, name this operator which for two operators A and B, calculates the difference between AB and BA, so named for the case when it equals zero.;;Commutator(s)
Literature;;In one of this author's works that features a kidnapping and a strange terrorist organization called the "Screwery," the protagonist Andres is identified as the dead body at the end by a blackish stain.  In one of his short stories, a blonde woman seduces a teenage boy for the pleasure of a man in a parked car, but Roberto takes a photo and interrupts the event, which is later reenacted in the enlargement on his wall.  Another of his works sees the protagonist fall in with the Serpent Club and discuss the anti-novel with a bedridden author, while major characters include La Maga, Rocamodour, and Horacio Oliveira.  FTP, name this author of A Manual for Manuel, Blow-Up, and Hopscotch.;;(Julio) Cortazar
Pop Culture;;This Colorado native has an identical twin named Dan, who once posed as him at a movie premiere for the benefit of a reporter. Briefly rumored to have been  killed in a car accident after leaving the  wrap party for Moving McAllister, this man’s most famous role came in an adaptation of Peluca, a short film he also starred in. He is scheduled to star alongside Anna Faris in 2008’s Mama’s Boy and has done recent voice work in movies like Surf’s Up, in which he played Chicken Joe, and Monster House.  Also appearing in Just Like Heaven, The Benchwarmers, and Blades of Glory, this is FTP which actor, best known for his role as Napoleon Dynamite?;;(Jonathan) (Joseph) Heder
Geography;;Its original colonial capital, Villa de la Vega, was burned during the English conquest. This island became a Crown colony shortly the 1865 Paul Bogle-led Morant Bay rebellion was brutally put down by troops under governor Edward Eyre. Its Taino natives knew it as Xamayca, or "land of wood and water"", while Spanish colonists under Juan de Esquievel first dubbed it Santiago. A namesake coffee is produced in its eastern Blue Mountains, while its international airport, named after former prime minister Donald Sangster, is located in its fourth-largest city, Montego Bay. Its one-time capital of Port Royal was historically used as a base by Captain Henry Morgan. FTP, name this island country with capital at Kingston.;;Jamaica
World History;;In the lead-up to this event, a significant fraction of one of the concerned parties, led by Christian de Bonchamps, was held up in the Baro Gorge and was unable to meet the expedition coming from Brazzaville. The other side had recently achieved a victory at the battle of Omdurman, where its forces were commanded in part by Horace Smith-Dorrien. When the flotilla of English gunboats arrived at the namesake fort, the situation became tense, but negotiations between Major Marchand and Lord Kitchener averted a war. FTP, name this 1898 incident that occurred during the Scramble for Africa and is named after a Sudanese city.;;Fashoda (incident)
Literature;;His long discussion of aesthetic beauty is interrupted with a lengthy digression on whether to use the word "tundish" or "funnel".  He is beaten with a stump for defending the poetry of Lord Byron over Lord Tennyson, and the word "FOETUS" carved on a university desk causes him to temporarily forget his name.  Wells pushed this character into a cesspool, causing him to get sick, and in the infirmary he learns that Charles Stewart Parnell has died.  His early compatriots at the Jesuit school Clongowes include Rody Kickham and Nasty Roche, and at university he converses with Lynch and Cranly.  FTP, name this protagonist of James Joyce's A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man.;;Stephen (Dedalus)|(Stephen) Dedalus
Noncomputational Math;;In quantum mechanics, Koopman’s theorem can be used to provide an interpretation of these, with regard to a Fock operator, as ionization potentials. If an operator is Hermitian, these are real, and the set of these is referred to as an operator's spectrum. The determinant of a finite matrix is equal to the product of these, and the sum of these is equal to its trace. FTP, name these roots of a matrix’s characteristic equation that are defined as the solutions of the characteristic polynomial of a matrix.;;Eigenvalue(s)
Noncomputational Math;;David Hilbert's seventh problem dealt with constructing these entities and was partially answered by the Gelfond-Schneider theorem.  Their existence was first proven by Joseph Liouville, while Charles Hermite and Ferdinand von Lindemann were the first to prove that two members belonged to this class of numbers.  Examples of these numbers include Chapernowne's Number, Feigenbaum Numbers, the Euler-Mascheroni Constant, and the natural log of 2.  FTP, name this type of non-algebraic number, other examples of which include e and pi, which are not a solution to any non-zero polynomial equations with rational coefficients.;;Transcendental (Numbers)
Literature;;In one notable episode, the main character of this work angers an earth goddess by beating his youngest wife during the Week of Peace.  In order to avoid appearing weak, that protagonist ignored advice not to take part in the ritual sacrifice of Ikemefuna; later, a misfiring of that protagonist's gun causes his exile.  This work's protagonist's favorite child is his daughter Ezinma; he is especially ashamed when his son Nwoye converts to Christianity.  Taking its title from Yeats's The Second Coming, it is set in the fictional village of Umuofia.  FTP, name this novel about Okonkwo written by Chinua Achebe.;;Things Fall Apart
World History;;Novels that describe this describe this event include The Liberators by Viktor Suvorov, and Professional Foul and Rock 'n' Roll.  A manifesto written "at the behest of scientists and intellectuals," "The Two Thousand Words," was written by Ludvik Vaculik during this event.  It started when Antonin Novotny lost power of the KSC and Ludvik Svoboda became president.  Alexander Dubcek ascended to first party secretary during this event, and it ended later that year when the Soviet Union invaded.  FTP, name this period of political liberalization in Communist Czechoslovakia.;;Prague Spring
Biology;;Various derivatives of its chiral nematic phase are found in temperature-sensitive dyes and paints, and intermediate steps in its synthesis include mevalonate and squalene.  It contains a hydroxyl group off one of its three six-carbon rings, and a heptyl chain with an attached methyl group off of its five-carbon ring.  As it is insoluble in blood, it must be bound to lipoproteins to circulate.  It is synthesized in the liver from acetyl coA, after which it is excreted in the bile, and it is a precursor to all steroid hormones.  FTP, name this biomolecule whose levels in blood are characterized in terms of HDL and LDL.;;cholesterol
Philosophy;;The minimalist composer Steve Reich has set several of this man's works to music in pieces such as Proverbs.  His lesser known works include Remarks on Color and Culture and Value, and he and Emil Post are independently credited with the development of the modern truth table.  In one notable work, this man claimed that many philosophical problems are merely "bewitchments" rising from the misuse of language, while his most famous work contains seven major propositions, including "The world is everything that is the case".  FTP, name this philosopher whose most notable works include Philosophical Investigations and Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus.;;(Ludwig) (Josef) (Johann) Wittgenstein
Literature;;This author wrote five novels, including Voices in the House and The Long Love, under the pseudonym of "John Sedges". Another work by this author centers around the love between Bettina, a former slave, and Tom, a Civil War veteran.  In addition to The Angry Wife, she also wrote a novel starring a bondmaid of the Ezra ben Israel family, Peony.  Her first novel was East Wind: West Wind, while Sons and A House Divided are the middle and final parts of her "The House of Earth" trilogy.  FTP, name this recipient of the 1938 Nobel Prize in Literature and author of The Good Earth.;;(Pearl) (Sydenstricker) Buck|(Pearl) (Comfort) Sydenstricker
Geography;;The Marmes Rockshelter, a notable archaeological site, is located at this river's confluence with the Palouse.  That site was flooded by Lake Herbert G. West, created after this river's Lower Monumental Dam was constructed.  The American Falls Dam was built where this river meets the Portneuf, and to the west of that dam one can find Massacre Rocks State Park.  Other tributaries of this river include Henry's Fork and the Hoback rivers, while the Perrine Bridge spans its namesake canyon near the city of Twin Falls.  FTP, name this largest tributary of the Columbia River, which flows through Hells Canyon and forms much of the Idaho-Oregon border.;;Snake (River)
Art;;This man, who studied under Charles Gleyre early in his career, was depicted Painting at the Edge of a Wood in a work of John Singer Sargent.  He was so impressed by the work of an associate that he would produce his own version of Le Déjeuner sur l'herbe in 1865, while other early works by this man include The Woman in the Green Dress and On the Bank of the Seine.  While staying at the Savoy Hotel he produced a series of seven paintings featuring the Houses of Parliament, while other works include Haystacks and Water Lilies.  FTP, name this French impressionist who also painted the Rouen Cathedral and Impression Sunrise.;;(Claude) (Oscar) Monet
World History;;This man worked on a road building project in Yugoslavia, and in France he joined the Cercle Marxiste.  Only seven of the 14,000 men who entered this leader's death camp known as S-21 survived.  He was preceded as Prime Minister by Khieu Samphan, and he came to power through opposition to Nodorom Sihanouk.  He served as Prime Minister after forcing Lon Nol out of power.  FTP, name this ruler who started a revolution to rid his country of educated people and return to an agrarian society, the Cambodian leader of the Khmer Rouge.;;Pol Pot|Saloth Sar
Physics;;The general form of this equation includes a term that includes thermodynamic energy per unit mass, also known as "sie".  That form of this equation can be written as v-squared over two plus phi plus omega, where v is velocity, phi is gravitational potential energy per unit mass, and omega is enthalpy per mass.  A special case of this is known as the Venturi effect, and this equation can be written v-squared over two plus gh plus pressure over density for incompressible flow.  FTP, name this equation from fluid dynamics named after a Swiss dude that helps explain flight.;;Bernoulli('s) (Equation)|Bernoulli('s) (Principle)
Literature;;This work was the basis for both Terence McKenna's ideas of novelty theory, as well as Carl Jung's theory of synchronicity.  The first of the mythical Three Sovereigns is said to have discovered the principles behind it, though it was not actually compiled until the Zhou dynasty, when King Wen developed his namesake sequence for ordering its contents.  The fact that one result is three times more likely than the other led to the end of the yarrow-stalk method of implementing it; three coins are used instead, with the two sides representing yin and yang.  Legendarily divined from marks on the back of a turtle, FTP, name this ancient Chinese book of divinations that contains 64 hexagrams.;;I-Ching|Book of Changes|Classic of Changes|I Jing|Yi Ching|Yi King|Yi Jing
Religion/Mythology;;Ignatius Donnelly published a book with this title subtitled The Age of Fire And Gravel, while a short story with this title by Borges features characters including Thoth and Janus interrupting an election and getting shot by revolvers.  It will be preceded by the disappearance of morality after three consecutive winters, as well as the crowing of three cocks and the devouring of the moon and sun by Hati and Skoll.  Hymir and Surt will lead their giants towards Vigrid, and seeing their approach, Heimdall will blow the Gjallerhorn.  FTP, these events lead up to what climactic confrontation of Norse mythology between the armies led by Odin and Loki?;;Ragnarok
United States History;;A sea shanty about this entity describes its "being laid in the yard of Jonathan Laird...in the town of Birkenhead".  Along with its most famous counterpart, it was the subject of a painting by Edouard Manet, and the commanders of those two ships had shared a cabin while fighting in the siege of Veracruz.  It destroyed the Hatteras off the coast of Galveston and sunk 61 other ships, but its most famous action took place in 1864 in the harbor of Cherbourg, where it was sunk by the USS Kearsage.  FTP, name this Confederate sloop-of war, commanded by Raphael Semmes, which took its name from a southern state.;;(CSS) Alabama
Physics;;The NOvA project will shoot these objects from Fermilab to northern Minnesota to study their mixing angles and CP-violating phase.  A major unresolved question is whether these are Majorana Particles, and the MINOS experiment studied their oscillation.  Positron emission always results in a neutron and one of these particles, and in single beta decay one of these particles or its antimatter counterpart is emitted.  FTP, name this class of extremely weakly interacting leptons that do not carry electric charge and that come in electron, muon, and tau varieties.;;neutrino(s)
Pop Culture;;Its director references David Copperfield in a scene in which the protagonist shakes with her wrong hand.  A dress intended for a formal dinner party is ruined when the protagonist ventures under the roots of a tree in the rain to retrieve a key.  One character places a mandrake root in milk under the bed of her mother to facilitate childbirth, and that character is tantalized into eating a grape, causing a white-skinned man with eyes in his hands to chase her.  That character's stepfather is an evil officer trying to root out rebels during the Spanish Civil War.  FTP, name this 2006 Guillermo del Toro movie featuring Ofelia's adventures in the titular maze.;;Pan's Labyrinth|(El) Laberinto del Fauno
Literature;;The protagonist's mother sees a soggy horsehead filled with eels and subsequently dies from starving herself.  One of the most important jobs for the main character is one working at a place called "The Onion Cellar" with his friend Klepp.  Eventually, he finds the severed finger of a woman he loves, is turned into the officials for her murder, and sent to a mental institution.  Herbert Truczinski is a neighbor of this work's central family, and the protagonist's father died after swallowing a Nazi party pin.  FTP, name this the first book of the Danzig Trilogy featuring Oskar Matzerath, a work of Günter Grass?;;(The) Tin Drum|(Die) Blechtrommel
World History;;An essay by Henry David Thoreau about this man quotes Sir Thomas Browne in saying "Offer not only peace-offerings, but holocausts, unto God". This man wrote that heaven "sits and marks still who doth act amiss" in a poem called "What is Our Life," while another of his poems is a response to Marlowe's "The Passionate Shepherd to his Love". In 1595 he searched Venezuela for the legendary city of Manoa and was wounded in the 1596 capture of Cadiz.  His final words were said to be "Strike, man, strike" and he was executed for supposed involvement in the Main Plot.  FTP, name this Englishman who is also credited with establishing the first English colony in the Americas at Roanoke.;;(Sir) (Walter) Raleigh
Music;;A lesser-known work by this name is the seventh in a series, following works titled Will o' the Wisp and Vision, and this title also names Glazunov's Fifth Symphony.  A more famous work of this name opens with a theme based on the opera Bastien et Bastienne.  Its finale features a theme originally found in this composer's ballet The Creatures of Prometheus, while Strauss's Metamorphosen is based on a theme from this work's second movement, which contains a notable funeral march.  FTP, name the symphony dedicated "to a great man," the third of Ludwig van Beethoven.;;Eroica
Miscellaneous;;Chapter eight of this work is titled "The Power of Words in Magic-Some Linguistic Data," while the seventh chapter is titled "Departure of an Overseas Expedition". The author of this work claimed it contradicted Radcliffe-Browne's ideas of structural functionalism, arguing that culture functioned for the benefit of individuals, rather than all of society.  Marcel Mauss's The Gift discussed this work's description of the Kula exchange ring among the Trobriand Islanders.  FTP, name this anthropological work by Bronislaw Malinowski.;;Argonauts of the Western Pacific
World History;;Aelred of Rievaulx wrote a notable biography of this person, and the "Winchester style" of art gained popularity under this ruler.  His appointment of Robert of Jumièges to the archbishopric of Canterbury was the cause of great conflict with the Earl of Wessex, who later refused to punish rioters in Dover, leading to the Earl's exile at the hands of this man.  His great nephew Edgar Aetheling was never able to take the throne, as this man's successor was defeated and overthrown by William of Normandy.  Taking the throne after his half-brother Hardecanute died, FTP, name this son of Ethelred the Unready and last king of the house of Wessex, who would be canonized in 1161.;;(Saint) Edward the Confessor|Eadweread III
Literature;;In one work by this man, the reader is entreated to "view the haunts of nature;" one figure mentioned in that work is "the squirrel," which "chirps merrily".  In addition to that poem, "Inscription for the Entrance to a Wood," he published a blank-verse translation of the Iliad, as well as a poem about "one who in her youthful beauty died," "The Death of the Flowers". He gave Thomas Cole's funeral oration, and was later depicted standing next to Cole in a painting by Asher Durand entitled Kindred Spirits.  FTP, name this longtime New York Evening Post editor, an American poet who also penned "To a Waterfowl" and "Thanatopsis".;;(William) (Cullen) Bryant
Astronomy;;This constellation is the home of a namesake elliptical dwarf galaxy with little star formation that was discovered by A.G. Wilson in 1954.  This constellation was once known as Cynosura or "dog's tail" by the Greek poet Aratus.  Its beta star is Kochab, and in ancient times this constellation was called Draco's wing.  Its alpha star is a Cepheid variable whose most notable function will eventually be taken over by Thuban and Vega because of the Earth's precession.  FTP, name this constellation containing Polaris, the smaller neighbor of the "big bear".;;(the) Little Dipper|Ursa Minor
Religion/Mythology;;The Harivamsa, Bhagavata Purana, and Padma Puranas are the sources for the details of his life, and he is seen as the god of the common people.  The eighth son of Devaki and Vasuveda, at birth he was switched with the child of Yasoda and Nanda, and as a child he slew several demons, including Putana and Bakasura.  Brahma tried but failed to assert his authority over him by stealing his cattle, and Indra tried to flood his village, but he held up Govardhana mountain as an umbrella.  Gandhari cursed him to die alone, and he is seen as the eighth avatar of Vishnu.  FTP, identify the Hindu deity who slew Kamsa and appeared in the Bhagavad Gita as Arjuna's spiritual advisor.;;Krishna
Philosophy;;One of this man's works examined such diverse forms of expression as a child's drawing and the "specter of pure language," The Prose of the World.  His first work was a repudiation of behavioral psychology and defined existence as consisting of physical, vital, and mental components.  In addition to The Structure of Behavior, he dissed Arthur Koestler and Leon Trotsky in Humanism and Terror: An Essay on the Communist Problem.  His most famous work argued for dissolution of prejudices that prevent people from experiencing "things" themselves, and this man worked with Sartre as an editor of Les Temps Modernes.  FTP, name this twentieth century French philosopher, author of The Phenomenology of Perception.;;(Maurice) Merleau(-)Ponty
World History;;His father, who was illiterate, notably repealed a law preventing senators from marrying lower-class women. Rebuilding projects during this man’s reign included the Church of the Holy Apostles and the San Vitale in Ravenna, which featured mosaics of him and his consort Theodora. While his reign was marked by conflict with the Papacy over the handling of the monophysite heresy in Syria, it also saw the recompiling of the Corpus Juris Civilis, which became known as his namesake code.  He had the Hagia Sophia rebuilt after it was burned down in the Nika riots, which were put down by his general Belisarius. FTP, name this Byzantine emperor, the last leader of the Eastern Roman Empire.;;Justinian (I)| (the) (Great)|(Flavius) (Petrus) (Sabbatius) Iustinianus
World History;;Some of the responsibility for the protection for this region recently shifted from Georgia to Bulgaria, and its namesake café was bombed and then seized for government use.  An arch consisting of two hands holding gigantic crossed swords known as the Hands of Victory is located in this area, as is the so-called Assassin's Gate or Golden Dome.  It contains such monuments as its country's Tomb of the Unknown Soldier, and it comprises about four square miles.  In the southern part of this area, the United States has constructed a permanent embassy.  It was mostly established in 2003, after soldiers captured the Republican Palace and surrounding buildings.  FTP, name this allegedly safe part of Baghdad, contrasted with the unsafe "Red Zone".;;(The) Green (Zone)|International Zone|Emerald City
Biology;;Coombs tests detect these bodies bound to erythrocytes, and a technique that uses these entities is ELISA. These molecules have a namesake fold, in which two beta sheets are held together by amino acid charges.  These adaptable molecules can somatically recombine in a process called V(D)J recombination and are also capable of changing isotype by altering conformation of their heavy chains.  Like enzymes, they operate via a a so-called "lock-and-key" mechanism, as verified by Linus Pauling.  FTP, name these characteristically y-shaped immune molecules exploited in vaccination and produced by B cells in response to specific antigens.;;antibodie(s)|i(mmuno)g(lobulins)
Music;;While the first three themes are in minor keys, D, B-flat, and C respectively, the fourth and fifth sections are in E and D major.  That third section represents a woman's decision to carry the child of a man she does not love, while the fourth represents the man that she does love forgiving her.  Muted strings and heavy use of harmonics represent the moonlight, and both figures are characters in a poem by Richard Dehmel.  Consisting of only one movement, this work is in rondo form, and was written by the man who propagated the twelve tone school.  FTP, identify this tone poem for string sextet by Arnold Schoenberg.;;Transfigured Night|Verklarte Nachte
Literature;;A tricky character in this work gets his comeuppance when three cronies, including Bardolph, steal his horses.  Its protagonist uses a pair of stag horns to disguise himself as Herne the Hunter, but ends up being pinched by people dressed as fairies and elves.  Meanwhile, Anne's father plots to have Slender seize her and marry her, while her mother plots for Dr. Caius to do the same thing, but in the end she sneaks off and marries Fenton while the protagonist is being ridiculed for writing almost identical letters to two potential lovers.  FTP, identify the Shakespearean play that centers around the antics of the Ford and Page households and the rogue Sir John Falstaff.;;(The) Merry Wives of Windsor
United States History;;Its erstwhile headquarters in Philadelphia now serves as an art gallery containing portraits of prominent early Americans. Alexander Dallas was an early champion of it, while another man connected with it produced a "Commercial Digest" of the various laws and trade regulations of the world. That man took control of it upon Langdon Cheves’s resignation. Originally chartered after President Madison was unable to stabilize the dollar in the wake of the War of 1812, it enjoyed prosperity through the 1820s until it was finally undone by the rivalry between its president and Andrew Jackson.  FTP, name this organization, which lost its charter and fell into bankruptcy under the leadership of Nicholas Biddle.;;(Second|2nd){1}? Bank of the United States|(Second|2nd){1}? National Bank
Literature;;This man moves in with a prostitute and gets her pregnant after asking Marth Tothero for advice.  He gets a job in a used-car lot after his wife gives birth, but his wife gets drunk and drowns their daughter when trying to give her a bath.  His in-laws try to hold his marriage together, and all agree that this man will garden for Mrs. Horace Smith, play golf with the minister, and still live with Ruth Leonard.  His regular job consists of selling a household contraption known as the "Magipeel," and after he is accused of drowning Rebecca and subsequently rejected by Ruth, he runs away again.  FTP, identify the protagonist of Rabbit, Runby John Updike.;;Harry (Angstrom)|(Harry) Angstrom
Physics;;The probability that this rule does not hold is given by the fluctuation-dissipation theorem.  Loschmidt’s paradox was posited as a challenge to one form of this axiom, the H theorem. A better-known statement of it is that the imperfect integral of inverse absolute temperature with respect to heat transfer is non-negative, the Clausius inequality. A better-known challenge to it was provided by a construct that seemingly can increase the availability of an isolated system, Maxwell’s demon.  FTP, name this fundamental law of thermal chemistry, according to which the entropies of isolated systems increase.;;(the) second law (of) thermodynamics|(the) 2nd law (of) thermodynamics
Pop Culture;;In the song "Live By Your Rep," they accused Bone Thugz-N-Harmony of stealing their style, and former member Koopsta Knicca left due to a money dispute.  They have branched out into movies, producing the film Choices as well as its sequel, and one of their big hits opens with a sample from "Tell Me Why Has Our Love Turned Cold" by Willie Hutch.  Collaborations with Lil Flip and Pimp C can be found on the 2003 album Da Unbreakables, while Young Buck, 8-Ball and MJG contributed verses to their hit "Stay Fly".  Jon Stewart once noted "For those keeping score, Martin Scorcese zero, [this entity] one".  FTP, identify the rap group from Memphis comprised of DJ Paul and Juicy J that won an Oscar for the song "It's Hard Out Here for a Pimp".;;3 6 Mafia|Three Six Mafia
Religion/Mythology;;A maggot fell from this person's nose before burial, after which a memorial statue with lapis lazuli hair was constructed. Initially known for prodigious consumption of shepherd’s beer, this "bolt" is seemingly initiated into a cult of female devotees of the sun by Ninsun. Created from clay at the behest of an oppressed people, this warrior is initially envisioned as a meteor. A trapper causes this warrior to be led to "the Sheepfold" by the harlot, Shamhat. This participant in the slaying of the Bull of Heaven and Humbaba eventually falls victim to Ishtar’s rage. FTP, name this wildman companion of Gilgamesh.;;Enkidu
Physics;;Materials of this type often form sheathes that satisfy a criterion named for Bohm.  The namesake frequency of these substances is given in mks by the electron charge times the square root of the quantity number density over permittivity times electron-ion reduced mass and their namesake waves are also named for Langmuir, who discovered them.  They are quasi-neutral in a Debye sphere, the radius of which, the Debye length, characterizes their charge shielding; however, many of the atoms in matter of this phase are ionized. FTP, name these collections of dissociated electrons and ions, the so-called fourth phase of matter.;;plasma(s)
World History;;Among the successful delaying actions fought in this campaign were the Battle of Westerplatte, in which 182 men held the eponymous island for a week against several thousand opposing soldiers, and the Battle of Krojanty, after which the 18th Pomeranian Uhlans Regiment was decorated for valor shown in covering the retreat. That battle also featured a cavalry charge by one side that, after some initial success, was taken apart by Lt. General von Wiktoren’s artillery fire Despite that and similar small-scale holding actions, the defending armies were either destroyed or forced into retreat in battle after battle until they were eventually wiped from existence at battles such as Bory Tucholskie, Modlin, and Warsaw. FTP, name this first German campaign of WWII.;;Invasion of Poland|Polish Campaign|Fall Weiss
Geography;;This river is named for the first ship to have been documented traveling down it, one captained by Robert Gray. The original Bridge of Gods was created when the Bonneville Slide dammed it, while Hanford Reach is the only American section of it that is currently undammed. After rising in the lake that shares its name, the river runs to Lake Windermere and the Arrow Lakes, before being joined by the Pend Orielle River as it crosses into Washington. It also forms a confluence with the Wilamette River near Vancouver, but its largest tributary is the Snake. FTP, what river forms a famous scenic gorge passing through the Cascade Mountains before finally dumping into the Pacific as Astoria, Oregon?;;Columbia (River)
Noncomputational Math;;This object produces an irrotational dyadic field from a vector field and its terms have coefficients of root one over the metric factors.  A theorem named for this operator states that the change in a function between two points is equal to the line integral between the points of this operator acting on that function.  The dot product of this operator with a unit vector is a directional derivative, its curl vanishes, and its dot product with itself is the Laplacian.  FTP, name this operator that produces a vector field pointing in the direction of steepest change from a function; a multi-dimensional derivative symbolized by a down-pointing triangle.;;grad(ient)|del|nabla
Literature;;This character felt that the Germans should share the guilt for World War I, and when eating with a professor and his wife, the couple complimented an editorial attacking him.  A patron of the Black Eagle Tavern pokes fun at his inability to dance and chides his obsession withIndian myths.  He had thought about killing himself when he turned fifty, but his introduction to Maria and Pablo keeps him in good spirits.  After a ball, he is taken to the Magic Theater and stabs Hermine, and he is comforted by Mozart and is sentenced to eternal life.  FTP, identify this protagonist of Herman Hesse’s Steppenwolf.;;(Harry) Haller
Art;;The artist later depicted the same scene with some angels looking on in the upper left as men with spears descend the central steps from a columned building.  On the far right of this painting, an old woman grasps for an object that a man wearing a blue sash holds high above her head.  On the left, an old woman bites the ass of a soldier who pulls on the hair of a woman, while in the center, a soldier skewers a woman who is protecting a small child.  Originally attributed to Jan van der Hoecke or Brueghel the Elder, this painting depicts the events of Matthew 2:1-18.  FTP, name this recently reattributed Peter Paul Rubens work that depicts the killing of a lot of babies by soldiers on Herod's command.;;(The) Massacre of the Innocents
World History;;The effects of this battle were overshadowed by a naval defeat for the victors two days later at Beachy Head. Early actions included Meinhardt Schomberg’s defeat of Neill O’Neill’s dragoons at Roughgrange. Both Meinhardt’s father and George Walker, the Defender of Derry, would later die in this battle. Though the conflict would not end until Godert de Ginkell crushed the forces of the Marquis de St. Ruth at Aughrim the next year, this battle was the first important victory for the League of Augsburg. Directly preceding the first siege of Limerick and taking place outside of the coast town of Drogheda, FTP, name this battle, in which William of Orange drove James II’s army back over an eponymous Irish river.;;(Battle) (of) (the) Boyne
Physics;;In a general RLC Circuit, this occurs when the reactance of the capacitor cancels the reactance of the inductor, which maximizes the parallel impedence. In a damped system, the degree to which this occurs is inversely proportional to the quality factor. If the system is undamped, the frequency at which this occurs reduces to the natural frequency of the oscillator, called the pure variety of this effect, and the amplitude of oscillation of the system increases without bound. FTP, name this physical effect, which explains how a small amplitude driving force at the natural frequency of a system can have drastic consequences.;;(amplitude) resonance|(electrical) (amplitude) resonance
United States History;;This town was the site of the first meeting of the Niagara Movement, at its historically black Storer College.  This town on the intersection of the Potomac and Shenandoah Rivers changed hands eight times during the Civil War.  The Civil War battle named after this city was a major victory for Stonewall Jackson, who captured over 12,000 soldiers at its garrison before moving on to Antietam.  Another notable event here saw 22 men, including five blacks and a fugitive slave, take refuge in an engine house in this city.  FTP, name this Virginia, and later West Virginia town, whose armory John Brown led a raid against.;;Harper(')s Ferry
Chemistry;;Cyclic ones can be created from hydrolysis of salts via the Ruzicka cyclization, and peroxides and a base can be used to synthesize them in the Kornblum-DeLaMare reaction.  In infrared spectroscopy, aldehydes and this class of chemical compounds will display a large peak around 1700 cm. Aromatic ones can be produced via the Friedel-Crafts reaction, and by the oxidation of secondary alcohols. Polarity of this class of chemical compounds results from the carbonyl group linked to two other carbon atoms.  FTP, name this class chemical compounds, the most basic of which is acetone.;;Ketones
Literature;;In a 1958 essay titled this work "revisited," its author proposes "Education for Freedom".  One character is described as having old-fashioned sensibilities due to having too much alcohol in his prenatal bottle, and the novel opens with a description of the Bokanovsky process during which the word "mother" is used scandalously.  A vacationer in this work named Thomakin impregnates Linda but leaves her in New Mexico, and their offspring is named John.  Other characters in this work include Mustapha Mond, Lenina Crowne, and Bernard Marx.  FTP, name this novel in which time is measured "After Ford" that features a drug called soma, a work of Aldous Huxley.;;Brave New World
Pop Culture;;In the Bloodhound Gang song "Mope," this character makes an appearance, freebasing crack and calling the band "pussies".  Billy Mitchell is the only man verified to have achieved a perfect score of 3,333,360 in this game.  In the episode of Futurama where life resembles a video game, he is portrayed as the General.  One of the bonuses found in his namesake game is a Galaxian flagship, and a man who earned this nickname from his propensity to drink milk is a suspended cornerback for the Tennessee Titans.  FTP, name this yellow video game character who eats pellets and ghosts.;;Pac(-)Man
World History;;Early kings of this civilization may have been mythical, such as Alulim, and Etana is generally regarded as its first king after a great deluge.  This civilization's early periods included the Ubaid, which carbon dating of its Tell Awayli suggest transitioned to the Uruk period around 4500 BC.  The culture of this ancient civilization was centered around the northern city of Nippur and the southern Eridu.  Its mythology believed in a depressing afterlife as a ghost called a Gidim, and some of its deities included Anu, Ki, Enlil, and Enki.  FTP, name this civilization whose principle city was Ur, notable for its large temples called ziggurats.;;Sumer(ian) (Civilization)
Geography;;This city's oldest bridges include the Frisco and Harahan spans, and the Hernando De Soto Bridge carries Interstate 40 into this city.  Notable neighborhoods in this city include Chickasaw Gardens and Hollywood, and U.S. 78, formerly known as "Pigeon Roost Road," runs from this city to Birmingham.  Because Hurricane Katrina made the original site impractical, this city hosted the Voodoo Music Festival in 2005.  This city is home to the National Civil Rights Museum, the Overland Shell Auditorium, and the jazz-rich Beale Street.  FTP, identify this large Tennessee city, located along the Mississippi River, with a name taken from an ancient Egyptian capital.;;Memphis
Literature;;A minor character in this work explains that two odious looking casts are faces of former clients of the firm for which he works.   The protagonist of this novel works with a day laborer named Orlick, who he suspects of attacking his sister, and meets a good-natured girl named Biddy.  A man named Wemmick is an underling for the lawyer Mr. Jaggers in this work, and another character in this work kills Compeyson during a fight in the water and goes by the alias Mr. Provis.  The protagonist's brother-in-law is Joe Gargery and his roommate is Herbert Pocket, a relative of his former employer Miss Havisham.  FTP, name this novel about Abel Magwitch and Phillip Pirrip by Charles Dickens.;;Great Expectations
Astronomy;;This object's northern atmosphere is not visible from Earth, but appears blue due to Rayleigh scattering.  This body releases 2.5 times the amount of energy it takes in from the sun via the Kelvin-Helmholtz mechanism, and the Hubble telescope has revealed that once per its year it generates a large storm, dubbed the Great White Spot.  Two of its moons are Mimas and Enceladus, which features ice volcanoes thought to contribute to its most distinctive feature, and its largest moon is the only one in the Solar System with a dense atmosphere, Titan.  FTP, name this planet which features the Cassini division in its large system of rings.;;Saturn
Philosophy;;An early work of this thinker advocated "curing the mind" of a desire for material things, On the Improvement of Understanding.  One of his works treats an interpretation of the Old Testament to show that it is compatible with free speech.  The first volume of another of his works deals with an a priori God, while the second book examines the nature and origin of the human mind.  In addition to Tractatus Logico-Politicus, this man wrote a work whose final book concerns "the Power of Understanding" and whose fourth book is titled "Of Human Bondage".  FTP, name this Dutch Rationalist, author of the five-volume Ethics.;;(Baruch) (de) Spinoza|(Benedict) Spinoza
Literature;;This character was intended to attend St. Chad's school, and he marries a pregnant 16-year-old in a ceremony presided over by Father Vincent.  Johannes Pafuri has this character's gun blessed as the ringleader of a gang planning a robbery.  Although his cousin is involved in this character’s crime, this character's uncle John ensures that his cousin does not share his fate.  This character's father and Theophilus Msimangu find him in prison for killing the white man Jarvis, and he is sentenced to death by hanging.  FTP, identify this character from Cry, the Beloved Country, the son of Steven Kumalo named for a Biblical character who hangs by his hair.;;Absalom (Kumalo);;Kumalo
Music;;One of these pieces calls for the "echo flute," an instrument that may have been a soprano recorder, and the last one has no violin parts.  The first of these pieces includes a polonaise in its four and last movement titled Menuet, and beings with a hunting horn.  Notable harpsichord parts are included in the fifth and the third of these pieces, which were dedicated to Christian Ludwig.  The first two are in F major, the third and fourth in G major, and the sixth and final in B-flat major.  FTP, name this set of six concerti grossi by J.S. Bach.;;Brandenburg (Concertos)
United States History;;This event inspired a musical farce called The Volunteers by Susanna Rowson.  The first shots in this event were fired at Oliver Miller's Homestead in South Park Township, and a man named Philip Vigol was pardoned from being hanged.  Early in this event, an anonymous rabble-rouser named Tom the Tinker urged participation.  The militia that put down this event was led by "Lighthorse Harry" Lee, Alexander Hamilton, and George Washington.  FTP, name this rebellion whose participants were mostly western Pennsylvania Farmers who objected to the namesake tax on a certain alcoholic beverage.;;(the) Whiskey (Rebellion)
Physics;;This man is the namesake of a paradox sometimes appended with the name of Michael Hart that is alternately called the Great Filter.  The electron cloud in metals is an example of his namesake quantum ideal gas.  His namesake surfaces are derived from periodicity and symmetry of crystalline lattices and result from the Pauli Exclusion Principle.  His namesake energy is the energy of the highest occupied quantum state at absolute zero of his namesake particles, which have half-integer spin.  FTP, name this physicist, the namesake of a lab in Illinois, who was from Italy.;;(Enrico) Fermi
Pop Culture;;This man's brother Jeremy was drafted by the Cubs out of the University of North Florida, and his brother Joshua is a minor league sidearm reliever in the Red Sox organization.  A former relief ace at Mississippi State, he was drafted in the fourth round and made his major league debut in 2005, going five and 2/3 innings against the Twins.  This runner-up to Justin Verlander for the 2006 Rookie of the Year remained a reliever in 2007 despite playing spring training as a starter.  He set a rookie record with ten saves in a month in April 2006, and finished the year with a point-nine-two ERA and 35 saves.  FTP, name this flame-throwing Red Sox closer.;;(Jonathan) (Robert) Papelbon
World History;;One of the first orders of business for this ruler was to repeal a law steered through Parliament by Thomas Cromwell, the anti-homosexual Buggery Act.  The Revival of the Heresy Acts took place under this monarch, who suffered from two "phantom pregnancies" and never produced an heir.  She married Charles V's son, Philip II of Spain, and ascended to the throne after Edward VI's death and Lady Jane Grey's imprisonment in the Tower of London.   FTP, name this Queen of England, succeeded by Elizabeth I, whose persecution of protestants led to her informal epithet, "Bloody".;;(Queen) Mary I|Mary Tudor|Bloody Mary
Religion/Mythology;;A tradition that involves throwing pieces of bread into a large body of flowing water generally occurs on the afternoon of this holiday.  On the evening before this holiday, it is custom to perform hatarat nedarim, declaring one's self to be free from the previous year’s vows.  The Talmud states that people are judged yearly on this holiday, and the shofar horn is blown several times during the day.  It falls on either the first or second of Tishri, and this holiday begins a ten day long period of reflection that ends with Yom Kippur. FTP, name this Jewish holiday, which celebrates the new year.;;Rosh Hashanah
Biology;;A section of its genome called gag codes for p6 and p7 proteins as well as a protein used in Western blotting to detect infection with this, p24.  The SU/TM complex, containing gp120, allows it to bind to human cells, and cdc25 deletion may cause immunity to it.  The 2 variety of it may have originated from Sooty Mangabeys, and previous names for it include HTLV-III and LAV.  Kaposi’s sarcoma is the most common type of tumor found in patients infected with this disease-causing agent.  This retrovirus destroys CD4+ T-cells, which are vital in the body for fighting infection. FTP, identify this virus that causes AIDS.;;Human Immunodeficiency (Virus)|HIV
Art;;This work was originally sketched on graph paper with pencil, and this work's creator also painted its subject seated and scowling in a later work.  Two ladders lead up the side of the two-gabled Olson house in this work, and a dilapidated fence marks out a yard near a shed.  In the distance of this work, two ruts lead up to an abandoned cart.  The foreground in this painting contains darker grass than in the background, where four buildings stand, the barn significantly separated from the rest.  FTP, name this painting of a crippled woman looking towards her house, a work of Andrew Wyeth.;;Christina’s World
Miscellaneous;;This man’s only written work is a one month religious devotional entitled Building Dyamic Faith.  In the 1990’s, he sold a movie dubbing Bill Clinton an "ungodly liar," the Clinton Chronicles, and later declared that gays and feminists were partially responsible for the September 11th attacks.  This leader of the Thomas Road Baptist Church noted that a certain lovable children's character had a triangle on his head, was purple, and carried a purse.  FTP, name this recently deceased televangelist who questioned the Teletubby Tinky Winky's sexuality, the founder of the Moral Majority and Liberty University.;;(Jerry) (Lamon) Falwell(,) (Sr.)
Literature;;A comic argument in this play turns on whether an available sofa was yellow or green.  An attempted seduction goes awry when a woman reveals she is wearing clothes in mourning, but her seducer suggests she just take off her dress.  A procurer leaves because she is scandalized by the presence of the mother of one of her former prostitutes.  In addition to Madame Pace, other characters include one found dead in the fountain, the Girl, and the Boy, whose death from a mysterious gunshot causes the remaining figures to argue with the director over whether he's really dead or just pretending.  FTP, name this play about the unnamed title figures who interrupt a rehearsal, a work by Luigi Pirandello.;;Six Characters in Search of an Author|Sei personaggi in cerca d'autore(:) (Commedia) (da) (fare)
Religion/Mythology;;This man is offered a lapis lazuli and gold chariot with horns of copper, but he turns it down as a wedding gift.  He proclaims that wherever no man's name is written, he will erect a monument to the gods, and he obtains the prickly plant that will restore youth, but on his way back it is stolen by a serpent.  He is challenged to sleep for six days and seven nights by Utnapishtim, and he promises Shamash an offering of praise if he returns from the Land of Humbaba.  FTP, identify this close friend of Enkidu and the subject of a Sumerian epic.;;Gilgamesh
World History;;It attempted to implement such changes as the banning of private property and the shift to a solar calendar, and one theory holds that the game of Mah-jongg was created during it by bored army officers.  Its king was eventually dethroned by the Xiang Army led by Zeng Guofan and Zuo Zongtang, a man more famously known as General Tso. Its leader, a member of the Hakka ethnic group, added a third book to its official Bible.  FTP, name this rebellion whose leader, Hong Xiuquan, believed he was Jesus Christ's younger brother, an uprising that was finally suppressed in 1871 by forces including Charles Gordon's Ever-Victorious Army.;;Taiping (Rebellion)
Literature;;Lawrence Ferlenghetti's "I am waiting" references the Age of Anxiety, Childe Roland, and this poem's "Fleeing lovers".  The fourth stanza of this poem questions "Who are these coming to the sacrifice"? of a heifer with "garlands on her flanks".  The speaker instructs soft pipes to play on because melodies unheard are sweeter.  The title object is called a "Sylvan historian" and an "unravished bride of quietness," before the speaker closes the poem by noting "all ye need to know" is that "Beauty is truth, truth beauty".  FTP, name this poem of John Keats about some pottery "with an Attic shape".;;Ode on a Grecian Urn
Literature;;One character in this work calls his horses "Long-ear'd lightning, tail'd tornado,/Griffin-hoof in hurricane" when they suddenly disappear, which leads to his encounter with a character who laments the "theatre of woe" in which he lives.  The recognition of a long-lost sword saves the life of a cross-dressing muscovite, who eventually marries the cousin of Estrella.  Estrella and Astolfo had been vying for the throne rightfully belonging to the protagonist, who is drugged by Clotaldo and placed upon it, leading him to believe he has experienced the titular phenomenon.  King Basilius tries to justify bestowing the Polish throne on the long-imprisoned Segismundo in, FTP, what play by Pedro Calderon de la Barca?;;(La) Vida es Sueno|Life is a Dream
Religion/Mythology;;The heroine of The Feather of Finist the Falcon meets and receives gifts from three characters of this name, while Vasilissa the Beautiful is forced to earn fire from this character. In that story, this character’s house was patrolled by three riders representing Day, the Sun, and Night. She gained an epithet meaning "bone legs" from her skinny frame, though her mouth is said to stretch from Earth to Hell. Her house, which was only accessible through a trapdoor, was fenced by human bones and stood on four chicken legs, and she flies through the air on a mortar, steering with her pestle and removing her tracks with a broom. FTP, name this wild old hag and magician of Slavic folklore.;;Baba Yaga|Jezi Baba
Noncomputational Math;;Studies by Zukowski et al and Kenneth Ross have shown the advantages of using the "cuckoo" method for error-checking these. In 1987 Rabin and Karp developed an algorithm that uses a rolling one of these to perform string searches, while HMACs make use of the cryptographic variety of these. Bloom filters make use of several of them at once, and ideal ones should be as close to being purely injective as possible. FTP, name this type of function, common examples of which include MD5 and LOOKUP3 and which are used to produce namesake tables.;;hash (functions)
United States History;;Nathanial Pitcher preceded this man as the governor of his homestate, and Edward Livingston succeeded him as Speaker of the House.  He split his party on the idea of an "Independent Treasury," and this man was a member of a body Thurlow Weed said "possessed so much power and used it so well," the Albany Regency.  He beat out William Person Mangum, who received only South Carolina's votes, in the year he was elected president, and he sent troops to the Canadian border as president during the Aroostook War.  FTP, name this U.S. President nicknamed the "Little Magician" who initiated the "Trail of Tears" after succeeding Andrew Jackson.;;(Martin) Van Buren
Economics;;Joseph Juran and Kaoru Ishikawa popularized this man's namesake chart, which is a bar chart with the bars arranged in descending order.  His namesake index is the alpha in the formula that sees the quantity x-sub-m over x taken to the power of alpha, and it measures breadth of wealth.  His namesake distribution is also called the Bradford distribution, and it can be used to display his eponymous principle.  That principle states that 80% of the effects come from 20% of the causes, and is naturally also known as the 80-20 rule.  FTP, name this man who also has a namesake efficiency or optimality in economics.;;(Vilfredo) (Federico) (Damaso) Pareto
Literature;;In the author's note accompanying this work the author claims that it can only be fully realized "through an evocation of music from the abyss of transition". The title character is compared to a cockerel that leaves his tail behind, and he asks "Who does not know his rasp of reeds"? when telling the story of the Not-I bird. The phrase "eaters of left-overs" is used as a slur used in this play, the climax of which centers around the actions of Simon Pilkings upon the failure of Amusa to arrest the title character. That character's son, Olunde, ultimately takes his place as a messenger to the dead Alafin, leading to Elesin's jail cell suicide. FTP name this play by Wole Soyinka.;;Death and the King's Horsemen
Physics;;Contradictions arising from the classical Drude model of conduction led to one of the early discrepancies in this theorem, while studies by Dewar and Weber explained another discrepancy arising from the Dulong-Petit law. It’s not the virial theorem, though Sinai’s billiard is one of the few systems rigorously proven to actually meet this theorem’s requirement of ergodicity. It begins to show its weaknesses at low temperatures, and it notably fails for electromagnetic radiation, resulting in the ultraviolet catastrophe. FTP, name this theorem, which states that a system at equilibrium at absolute temperature T will have an average energy of one-half k T per degree of freedom.;;Equipartition (Theorem)|(Law) (of) Equipartition
World History;;Cornelius Nepos holds that his father Neocles disowned him, and after he was banished, this man was made a governor of Magnesia on the Maeander River by Artaxerxes I.  This man vied for power with Aristides after Mitiades died, and he likely rose to power as an archon sometime around 485 BC.  Herodotus reported that this man interpreted the oracle's call to defend his hometown with "wooden walls" as a sign to order the construction of 200 triremes, which fought indecisively at Artemisium.  FTP, name this leader of the Athenian democracy during the Persian Wars who oversaw victory at Salamis.;;Themistocles
Geography;;The Arcadia Bluffs are the highest point along the shoreline of this body of water.  Washington Island is the largest of a group of islands in this body that the French dubbed Porte des Morts, or death's door, because of all the shipwrecks that occurred there.  The Big Sable Point lighthouse is located on this body of water, within Ludington State Park.  Its northern end is home to Grand Traverse Bay, and at its southern tip rests Indiana Dunes National Lakeshore.  FTP, name this largest lake by surface area entirely within the United States, a body that is connected to Lake Huron by the Straights of Mackinac.;;(Lake) Michigan
Pop Culture;;One of this band's songs posits that the addressee will "make the winter springtime and the [titular] sing time".  Besides "Jingle Jangle," this band's hits include one in which the speaker wonders "How much do you love me," and upon hearing "This much," the speaker replies "Mmm heavy!"  One of their songs begins tells of the speaker who's just trying to walk down the street and escape the city heat, when he sees a girl walking by and his heart undergoes the titular palpitations.  In addition to "Bang Shang A Lang," this band put out a mega-hit in which the singer claims that "You are my candy girl / and you've got me wanting you".  FTP, name this group comprised of Veronica Lodge, Reggie Mantle, Jughead Jones, and friends, the artists behind "Sugar Sugar".;;(The) Archies
Literature;;This work was depicted on a broadside poster designed by Cledie Taylor.  In a reading of this monosyllabic trimeter work, its poet explained that she chose "a nice, gentle, uncontroversial, enjoyable, pleasant, fragrant [entity] that everybody loves" to represent "the establishment" but denied that the phrase has sexual overtones. Its epigraph explains that the speakers are seven youth "at the Golden Shovel," who "left school". The speakers lurk late, strike straight, sing sin, and thin gin at the pool hall, even though they realize they will die soon. FTP, name this work containing the line "We / Jazz June," an eight-line poem by Gwendolyn Brooks.;;We Real Cool
Chemistry;;The Goldman Equation is a generalized form of this equation for multiple ion species, and the last step in its proof of this equation is the fact that the Gibbs Free Energy change is equal to the opposite of the product of the number of electrons transferred per mole, the quantity related by this equation, and Faraday’s Constant, and one if its most important applications is finding the potential across a cell membrane. For ten points, name this equation from electrochemistry that states the change in electric potential of a chemical electrode is proportional to the log of the ratio of the concentrations of the reducing ion and the oxidating ion.;;Nernst (equation)
Literature;;One character in this work, due to his affection for vintage claret, prevents another character from visiting Lucy Darleton.  Minor characters in this work include Harry Oxford, who disrupts the engagement announced at the beginning of the novel, and the central character's best man, Colonel de Craye.  Several characters concern themselves with Crossjay’s opportunity to join the marines, which is facilitated by the tutelage of Laetitia Dale.  The central character thwarts several attempts to flee to Europe by his betrothed, Clara Middleton, who eventually marries Vernon Whitford.  FTP, name this novel about the selfish Sir Willoughby Patterne by George Meredith.;;(The) Egoist
World History;;Troops under this man perpetrated the 228 massacre, during which thousands of civilian deaths resulted from military force used.  Financial aid to this man's troops was stymied under the Harry Dexter White led IMF, and his country signed into effect a new constitution mandating a five-branch system of government in 1947.  This man called for the Northern Expedition, and the Zhongshan Warship incident helped him overtake his political rival Wang Jingwei.  FTP, name this leader of the KMT who took over for Sun Yat-Sen and led the Republic of China until 1975.;;Chiang (Kai-shek)
Art;;This building was designed as a replacement for one that was destroyed in WWII bombing raids.  The sloping roof of this building provides an overhang for outdoor shelter, and its designed said that its walls were "absurdly yet practically thin".  Several pinhole windows perforate the east wall of this building, and the sloping, seemingly massive roof sits on small metal columns and allows a crack of light through.  This building's most distinctive feature may be the silo-like projection on its east end.  FTP, name this church on a hill outside of Ronchamp, a work of Le Corbusier.;;Notre Dame du Haut
Religion/Mythology;;Immanuel Velikovsky put for the controversial theory that this man corresponded with Akhenaton, but Emmet Sweeney that the real contemporary to this man was Tutankhamen.  The Biblical story of this man fighting the battle of Karkar is supported by writing on the Kurkh stela of Shalmaneser III, which says that this man send 2,000 chariots and 10,000 soldiers.  This man didn't get punished because he humbled himself before Elijah, but his son Joram incurred the wrath of God.  This man succeeded his father Omri when that man died, and this man married a worshiper of Malkart who plotted to kill Naboth to steal his vineyard.  FTP, name this King of Israel who married Jezebel.;;Ahab|Ach'av
World History;;When five of the perpetrators were hanged, the ropes frayed and broke before they died, but in lieu of tradition the five were hanged again.  This event arose from the machinations of the Union of Salvation, a derivative of the Semyenov Guard.  After the election of Prince Trubetskoy as interim dictator, and his failure to show to give a speech and Mikhail Miloradovich was assassinated by Peter Kakhovsky, sparking this event.  Sergey Muravyov-Apostol was able to convert Vasilkov's soldiers, and this event saw the capture of St. Petersburg before it was suppressed.  FTP, name these Russian revolters who took their name from a winter month.;;Decembrist (revolt)
Pop Culture;;He suffered a high ankle sprain against Kansas State in 2005, sidelining him for parts of four games, and he injured himself on a celebratory dive into the end zone against Iowa State in 2006, an injury that cost him a chance at Billy Sims's yardage record.  He slipped to seventh overall in the 2007 NFL draft because of concerns about his lingering collarbone injury, but his performance last week against the Bears yielded 224 yards and three touchdowns.  He set a freshman record with 1925 yards as a freshman en route to finishing runner-up to Matt Leinart while playing for Oklahoma.  FTP, name this running back nicknamed "A.D". for "all day," number 28 for the Minnesota Vikings.;;(Adrian) (Lewis) Peterson
Art;;This work was created while the artist was staying in Cotswald Village, and it took several months to create because the painter refused to work at any time except at exact moments of sunset in between breaks of his tennis game.  This work takes its name from a Joseph Mazzinghi song, and scattered red and orange globes illuminate the scene.  The young brown-haired Polly and Dotty Barnard are up to their knees in foliage, and they wear frilly white dresses amidst giant white flowers.  FTP, name this aesthetic study depicting two girls lighting Chinese lanterns in a garden at twilight, a work of John Singer Sargent.;;Carnation(,) Lily(,) Lily(,) Rose
Literature;;Among this man's poems are two addressed to a woman who swims in water that "folded the wings of icarus" and a series describing a certain angel as a surveyor, a mechanic, and a telagraphist.  Protagonists of his novels include a wireless radio operator aboard the Aldebaran, a World War II gunner, and a machinist in a bicycle factory.  In addition to The Widower's Son and The Lost Flying Boat, he wrote a novel in which Gyp's husband beats the crap out of the womanizing Arthur Seaton, Saturday Night and Sunday Morning.  Best known for a short story about the pensive athlete Smith, this is, FTP, what author of The Loneliness of the Long Distance Runner?;;(Alan) Sillitoe
World History;;Al-Umari reported that this man would not kiss the ground in Cairo before the local ruler until his minister whispered something in his ear.  Leo Africanus claimed that his capital was the place of six thousand hearths and the most civilized people on earth.  This man was a benefactor of the Sankore University, and his capital was at Niana.  He was famed for his hajj, and he may have had to take out a loan just to pay his way back.  He walked to Mecca giving away a vast fortune and causing hyperinflation in Egypt.  FTP, name this grand-nephew of Sundiata Keita, ruler of the Mali empire when it controlled lots of gold.;;Mansa (Musa)|(Mansa) Musa
Literature;;In one of this author's short stories, a young man contemplates what he should tell a girl, eventually deciding on a story about fate, but she passes him before he can speak. That story, "On Seeing the 100% Perfect Girl One Beautiful April Morning" appeared in this author's collection, The Elephant Vanishes. One of his novels tells the stories of a Calcutec whose brain has been split and of a man who lives with villagers whose shadows have been destroyed. That novel, Hard-Boiled Wonder Land and the End of the World followed A Wild Sheep Chase and Pinball, 1973. FTP, who is this Japanese author, best known for the novels The Wind-Up Bird Chronicle, Norwegian Wood and Kafka on the Beach?;;Murakami (Haruki)|(Haruki) Murakami
Religion/Mythology;;In the Orthodox tradition, non-adherents to the doctrine established here applied the "Trisagion hymn" to Christ, an interpretation expressly banned in the 81st Canon of the Council of Trullo. Justinian I sanctioned the use of the hymn "Ho monogenês" with the controversial Theopaschite formula in the Divine Liturgy in an attempt to reconnect with those alienated by this council. The Marionite Church of Syria broke with the Syrian Orthodox Church over this church council, which established the invalidity of the Eutychian form of monophysitism. FTP, what is this fourth ecumenical council, held in 451 CE, which established a namesake creed declaring the dual-nature of Christ?;;(Council) (of) Chalcedon
Physics;;The precision of one type of this effect has led to the definition of the von Klitzing constant, while the current density associated with it is often measured using the van der Pauw method. The Rigghi-Leduc effect helps describe the thermal version of this, while the Corbino effect is its analogue in metal discs. The basic principle underlying it is the Lorentz force, and this effect offered proof that moving electrons, not protons, are mobile charge carriers in materials. FTP, identify this effect named for an American physicist, in which a magnetic field applied perpendicular to an electric current creates a potential difference on opposite sides of an electrical conductor.;;Hall (effect)
World History;;This man is believed to have been behind the agrarian reform bill proposed by Gaius Laelius Sapiens during the latter's praetorship in 145 BCE. He was married to Sempronia, the elder sister of Tiberius and Gaius Gracchus, two men who formed the core of a rival political faction. He won his second consulship in 134 and led Rome to victory against the Celtiberians of Numantia. After serving under his father at Pydna during the Third Macedonian War, he was adopted into a powerful family and won his first election to the consulship, despite being too young. FTP, name this Roman general and statesman, best known for the destruction of Carthage at the end of the Third Punic War.;;(Publius) (Cornelius) Scipio Aemilianus (Africanus) (Numantinus)
United States History;;In Adarand Constructors, Inc. v. Pena, Sandra Day O'Connor disagreed with this case's ruling but referenced this case in establishing an understanding of "equal protection" in the Fifth Amendment.  In his dissent to Hugo Black's majority opinion, Frank Murphy cites Sterling v. Constantin and Charles Evans Hughes's claim that questions of military necessity versus the rights of citizens fall to the judiciary. Centered on Exclusion Order No. 34 and Executive Order No. 9066 and upholding the earlier Hirabayashi v. United States, this is, FTP, what Supreme Court case which found constitutional the government detention of Japanese-Americans?;;Korematsu (v.) (United States) (323) (U.S.) (214) (1944)
World History;;The US dispatched the Trescot Mission to negotiate an end to this conflict, while the conduct of the Crédit Industriel caused considerable scandal for the then departing Secretary of State, James G. Blaine.  Capt. Arturo Prat became a hero for one side when he was killed after leaping aboard an enemy vessel alone, after his Esmeralda was rammed during the Battle of Iquique. One side completely controlled the seas after the Cochrane captured the Huascar and promptly began a ground invasion. FTP, name this war between the forces of Chile and those of Peru and Bolivia, which is named for the coastal gains the Chileans made at its conclusion.;;War of the Pacific|Saltpeter War|Guano War
Religion/Mythology;;In an inscription attributed to Niarchus which is found on the tomb of Telephanes, this man is included in a list of master artists along with Homer and Orpheus. In Book XII of the Metamorphoses, he relates the story of Caeneus to Achilles, while in another work he is often referred to as the "Gerenian horseman".  His son Thrasymedes once donated his sword and shield to Diomedes, while this man was saved from death at the hands of Memnon by another of his sons, Antilochus. In the Odyssey, Telemachus travels to this man's land of Pylos for advice.  FTP, name this king who made several long-winded attempts to reconcile Achilles and Agamemnon in the Iliad.;;Nestor
Chemistry;;A proposed mechanism for this reaction involves radical anions and zinc carbenoid intermediates, and pinacols are often produced as side products. An amalgamated mercury is present, with the mercury acting only as a clean surface for the reaction, while the metal it binds with functions as the reductant in a hydroxyl solution of HCl or another mineral acid. Commonly used after a Friedel-Crafts acylation to produce an alkyl final product, this acidic counterpart to the strongly basic Wolf-Kishner reduction uses amalgamated zinc. FTP name this reaction named after a Danish-American chemist, which is the reduction of a carbonyl group of a ketone to a methylene group.;;Clemmensen (Reduction)
Pop Culture;;In one game in which this character appears, he is played primarily as a boxing specialist, though his jump-S and LLL sword attacks are considered useful. In another appearance, he is the only male character able to equip Ribbons, and in that game the technique Cherry Blossom is added to his repertoire. His escape from the laboratory of Professor Hojo with Zack Fair is detailed in the OVA Last Order, an expansion of a flashback from the game he starred in, while in its sequel movie, this character defeats Bahamut SIN and the triplets Kadaj, Yazoo, and Loz, along with an incarnation of his greatest foe, Sephiroth. Born and raised in Nibelheim, FTP, name this spiky-haired Buster Sword-wielding protagonist of Final Fantasy VII.;;Cloud (Strife)|(Cloud) Strife
Art;;A lutist and the girl for whom he is playing in this painting are the subject of a description by Sylvia Plath in the second stanza of her poem "Two Views of a Cadaver Room," and are found in the lower right corner of this work. Near them are strewn playing cards and a backgammon board, while to their left a banquet has been disturbed. In the upper left corner, the sky is filled with smoke, while in the upper right, several raised breaking wheels can be seen towering over a man on the gallows and another man about to be beheaded. In the center an army of the dead herds many of the living into what appears to be a large box in, FTP, what 1562 painting by Pieter Brueghel the Elder?;;(The) Triumph of Death
Literature;;Bertolt Brecht left an adaptation of this play unfinished at his death; that adaptation was completed by Wekwerth and Tenscher and staged in 1962.  In this work's opening scene, one man is called "the great toe of this assembly... being one o' the lowest, basest, poorest / Of this most wise rebellion," after another relates Aesop's fable of the body's revolt against the stomach. Act II, scene iii sees Sicinius and Brutus set their plot in motion among the masses, eventually leading the title character to side with his enemies, the Volsces. After entreaties from his mother, Volumnia, that character is killed by Aufidius's conspirators in, FTP, what Shakespeare tragedy about a Roman general who leads an enemy army against Rome to seek revenge?;;Coriolanus
Biology;;The presence of this hormone promotes the creation of cardiomyocytes from stem cells and it also stimulates blood pressure regulation through release of ANP. It alters the role of GABA in fetal neurons and reduced potential anoxic damage during delivery. Recent research indicates that nasal application of this hormone in humans results in greater "trust" and less social anxiety. Produced in the paraventricular nucleus, this hormone is, like the structurally similar ADH, released via the posterior pituitary gland from the hypothalamus. FTP, name this hormone, which results in contractions of the uterus during childbirth and in the ejection of milk during breast-feeding.;;Oxytocin
United States History;;The New York Minerva, a Federalist paper, published Jefferson's politically damaging "Mazzei Letter," which was written in response to this; while it also prompted attacks from Benjamin Franklin Bache in his Republican Philadelphia Aurora against Washington. The Directory interpreted it as an alliance against France, but it resulted in but one gain, namely the British evacuation of forts in the northwest. Moreover, it failed to address such concerns as impressment and the opening of British ports to American trade. FTP, name this agreement which avoided war with Britain in 1795 and which was named for its chief U.S. negotiator, the then Chief Justice of the Supreme Court.;;Jay's Treaty|Jay Treaty|Treaty of London
Religion/Mythology;;This character was said to own a magic hound which could turn spring water into mead by bathing in it. He spared the life of one of his predecessors, Bres, when he promised to teach his people to plow. After Nuada Argétlamh's death, he rallied his army at the Second Battle of Magh Tuireadh and defeated Balor, whose giant, destructive eye he shot through the back of his skull. He received his sword, Retaliator, from either Urias or Manánnan Mac Lir, but he was more associated with an insatiable spear, the Red Javelin, which he took from Tuirenn's sons as payment for his father's murder.  The son of Cian and Ethniu, FTP, name this Irish deity, whose name means "bright," the leader of the Tuatha dé Danaan and the father of Cúchulainn.;;Lugh (Lamhfada)|Lugh (of) (the) (Long) (Arm)|Lleu (Llaw) (Gyffes)|Lleu (of) (the) (Skillful) (Hand)
Philosophy;;Near the end of this work, the main character urges his attendants to speak accurately, for not to do so is both unharmonious and even damaging to the soul. Earlier in this work, the main character explains that Aesop should have composed a fable explaining that pleasure and pain are connected by a single head and thus always present together. In one of his arguments, the main character demonstrates to Simmias that the bodily senses cannot be trusted and uses this to argue in favor of his view that philosophers are right to seek death, because the afterlife will be pleasant. FTP, name this Platonic dialogue, which tells of the death of Socrates as told to Echecrates by the title character.;;Phaedo
Noncomputational Math;;For small values of x, the nth one of these can be represented by the quantity x over 2 to the nth power times one over the gamma function of n plus 1. The first spherical one is known as the unnormalized sinc function, while the second kind of these are also referred to as Neumann functions, and complex linear combinations of the first and second kind are called Hankel functions. The Riccati variety of these are used to deal with problems arising in Mie scattering, while the graph of the first and second kinds resemble decaying oscillations. Used for many problems in wave propagation, such as modeling the vibrations of a drum head, FTP identify these functions named after a German astronomer and usually represented by the letters Y and J.;;Bessel (functions)
Literature;;The ninth chapter of this work was published independently in Contemporary Review in 1849 as the title character's "Dream" and features vivid descriptions of that character's childhood home.  One character in this work is so forgettable even to the other characters that the narrator decides to call him Alexeyev.  Other characters in this work include the protagonist's manservant Zakhar and his one-time fiancée Olga, who cancels their wedding after a series of delays.  The vivacity of the title character's best friend, Stolz, is in stark contrast to the protagonist's laziness, who does not leave his bed until well into the novel. FTP, name this novel about the titular superfluous man par excellence, a work of Ivan Goncharov.;;Oblomov
Music;;Dimitri Sitkovetsky has transcribed this work for string trio and string orchestra, Arthur Frackenpohl has transcribed it for brass quintet, and the Canadian Brass released a CD consisted solely of this work. Its sixth part contains a "canon at the second;" it also contains a four-voice fughetta, while the quodlibet near the end includes two popular songs. To restore order, the work ends with the opening aria, which is from the Anna Magdalena Notebook. Originally published in the fourth volume of Clavier-Übung, the name comes from a harpsichord virtuoso who was perhaps this work's first performer. FTP, name this set of 30 variations composed by Johann Sebastian Bach.;;Goldberg (Variations)|BWV 988
Earth Science;;The upward propagation of Rossby waves of exceptionally long wavelength is responsible for sudden warming in this region. The absorption of high levels of solar energy with wavelengths between .2 and .31 µm near its apex is responsible for its internal temperature maximum, a feature which helps to distinguish Earth from Venus and Mars, the atmospheres of which feature isothermal regions below their thermospheres. Photodissociation of diatomic oxygen in this atmospheric layer, coupled with its relatively high density, results in the formation of the Earth's ozone layer here. FTP, name this layer of the atmosphere found between the mesosphere and troposphere.;;Stratosphere
Literature;;Carl Van Doren edited a collection of this writer's shorter works entitled Twenty Stories, and this man dedicated his first poetry collection to Hamlin Garland.  A poor child steals a toy fire truck from a rich child in this man's The Ominous Baby, while his poems include "A Man Said to the Universe" and a one which includes the lines, "Great is the battle-god, great, and his kingdom– / A field where a thousand corpses lie".  The latter, "War Is Kind," was the namesake of his second poetry collection.  In one short story, this author observes that "every sin is the result of a collaboration" and tells of the murder of the Swede.  Author of The Blue Hotel and The Open Boat, this is, FTP, what author, best known for The Red Badge of Courage?;;(Stephen) Crane
United States History;;It was chosen by Philip Amadas and Arthur Barlowe, who were introduced to the location by Granganimeo, and the fleet that brought colonists there was led by Richard Grenville.  The colonists here left a message for former governor John White in the form of the carved word CROATOAN. FTP, name this island, site of a failed English colony in North Carolina, the loss of which remains a mystery.;;Roanoke (Island)
Religion/Mythology;;In Gallic myth, Taranis was responsible for this, while Aboriginal myths held that Mamaragan controlled it. The double axe on the Yoruba god Shango’s forehead was said to represent this, and in the Andaman Islands, this phenomenon is represented by Biliku’s thrown pearl shells. In Taoist mythology, it was first created when the Jade Emperor was beaten in a game and resulted from the striking of the yin and the yang, while victims of its best-known mythological representation include Capaneus, Semele, and Asclepius. FTP, name this meteorological phenomenon, which is better known as the weapon forged by the Cyclopes for use by Zeus.;;Lightning|Thunder(bolt)
United States History;;Hiram Runnels, Robert J. Walker, and other politicians were implicated in scandals involving the purchase of land from this tribe in Yalobusha County. Those purchases were tied to treaties signed by leaders of this tribe, including Hat-choo-tuck-nee, also known as Peter Pitchlynn, and Pushmataha. Two treaties secured their removal to Indian Territory, first at Doak's Stand in 1820 and then at Dancing Rabbit Creek in 1830, while 1837's Treaty of Doaksville granted the Chickasaw some of their lands. FTP, name this Native American tribe, whose language provided the name for the state of Oklahoma, and which was the first of the "Five Civilized Tribes" to be relocated to there.;;Choctaw|Chahtas
Philosophy;;Apollonius, citing a lost work by Aristotle concerning this person’s followers, claims that while in Tuscany, this man once killed a snake by biting it. In his Triads, Ion of Chios claims that this man forged several works ascribed to Orpheus, while his theory of "eternal recurrence" was mentioned in the works of his pupils Eudemus and Hippasus, who was also credited with discovering the fundamental musical ratios. His postulation of metempsychosis led his followers to abstain from beans and meat. FTP, name this Pre-Socratic philosopher with a namesake theorem regarding the hypotenuse of right triangles.;;Pythagoras
Psychology;;Robert Yerkes utilized these to collect data on 1.75 million US soldiers during World War I, using the method devised by Henry Goddard as well as his own "alpha" and "beta" versions. Wilhelm Stern devised the modern method for calculating results for these, improving on the ambiguities of the subtraction method first used in 1908. The most famous example of these was adapted by Lewis Terman, a professor at Stanford, from work done by a French psychologist. FTP, name this examination to determine mental ability, first successfully developed by Alfred Binet.;;IQ Test|Intelligence Test
Literature;;As many as seven of the choreunts are named in this playwright's fragmentary Ichneutae, which Dana Sutton uses to argue that satyric drama is not a direct descendant of tragedy. In one of his complete plays, the character of Iole is mute and one main character, Deianira, is never on stage with the protagonist Heracles at the same time. In another play, Chrysothemis urges her sister to accept the murder of her father as the easier course of action. Author of Trachiniae and Electra, this is, FTP, what ancient Greek playwright, best known for the plays grouped by modern scholars as the Theban Cycle, including Antigone and Oedipus the King?;;Sophocles
Biology;;The genus Phacops is noted for being the only group of these with schizochroal eyes, as opposed to their typical holochroal variety, a fact which has served as a major argument for punctuated equilibrium. Members of the family Olenidae made use of chemoautotrophic ectosymbionts to process sulphides into usable nutrients, a process which resulted in the first hard evidence of their biramous limb structure, as discovered in 1893 by C.E. Beecher in his namesake "beds" of Utica shale. FTP, name this class of early arthropods, ubiquitous in the fossil record, whose closest living relatives are thought to be horseshoe crabs.;;Trilobite(s)|Trilobita
United States History;;Passage of this law led to the Wais Act in Spain, and Robert Pastor has argued that the passage of this bill represented enactment of an age-old Republican platform plank. James Bonbright of Columbia organized a petition against the signing of this legislation featuring over 1000 signatures from economists. It followed 8 years after the Fordney-McCumber Act, which one of its sponsors, a Republican Senator from Utah, had actively supported in 1922. FTP, name this 1930 tariff, which, due to its excessively high duties, exacerbated the Great Depression.;;Hawley-Smoot (Tariff) (Act) (of) (1930)|Smoot-Hawley (Tariff) (Act) (of) (1930)|US Tariff Act of 1930
Pop Culture;;This album contains a song in which the singer claims "I feel hung up but I don't know why," and another song deals with a title physician who will let you "Take a drink from his special cup".  The U.S. release omitted a song in which the singer pleads "please don't spoil my day, I'm miles away," while both the British and stateside versions lead off with a track that chides Mr. Wilson and Mr. Heath and claims the title figure allows "one for you, 19 for me".  Notable lyrics on this album include "I was alone, I took a ride, I didn't know what I would find," and "Ah, look at all the lonely people".  FTP, name this album that contains the tracks Good Day Sunshine and Eleanor Rigby, the 1966 follow-up to Rubber Soul by the Beatles.;;Revolver
Literature;;The image of the "crystal palace" in this work echoes a concept discussed in the author’s article "Winter Notes on Summer Impressions".  That concept is derived from a section of N.G. Chernyshevsky’s novel What Is to Be Done?, to which this entire novel is a response. The narrator recalls being rejected by Olympia, whom Zverkov claims he will have after a dinner party held in his honor by Ferfichkin, Trodolyubov, and Simonov moves to a local brothel. In the end, the nameless narrator insults and is rejected by the prostitute he meets there, Liza, despite having made overtures to "save" her. FTP, name this novel by Fyodor Dostoevsky.;;Notes from Underground|Notes from the Underground|Letters from the Underworld|Zapiski iz Podpolya
Geography;;The United Nations Mission to this country is known as MONUC, and recently urged all troops here to join the country's army in a process known as "brassage".  In 2003, Patrick Masunzu led members of its Banyamulenge minority in an uprising in this country’s South Kivu province.  Its 2003 transitional constitution provides for an unusual executive branch, headed by a president and four vice presidents. On July 30, 2006, this nation held its first multi-party election since independence, with Jean-Pierre Bemba taking second in the subsequent presidential runoff. Bemba lost to current president Joseph Kabila in, FTP, what large Central African nation?;;D(emocratic) R(epublic) (of) (the) C(ongo)|Congo-Kinshasa|Dr. Congo
Religion/Mythology;;John A. Miles claims that the psalm in the second chapter of this man's namesake book in which the title figure claims weeds were wrapped around his head is a parody of Psalms. In Matthew, Jesus refuses to give a sign, claiming that only this man's sign will be given, and in Luke, Jesus claims that he is fulfilling a role analogous to this man's role in Nineveh. His namesake book ends with the appearance and then destruction of a castor oil-plant, and he attempts to flee from Joppa to Tarshish before the crew casts him overboard. FTP, name this later prophet from the Old Testament who was swallowed by a "great fish".;;(Book) (of) Jonah
World History;;One man by this name served as satrap over Lydia, Phrygia, and Cappadocia during the Peloponnesian War, and funded the Spartan fleet. That same man was also accompanied by Xenophon and 10,000 Greek mercenaries in his attempt to overthrow his brother Artaxerxes. Another man by this name was a king of Anshan and the grandson of Achaemenes. Following the fall of the Assyrian empire, that man’s kingdom fell under the sway of the Medes, a position which it held until the rise of his grandson. FTP, what is this name, which was also held by that man’s grandson, the "great" founder of the Persian Empire?;;Cyrus
Geography;;Much of the geology of this area is evidence of the Variscan orogeny, including its "North Variscan Foredeep" which dates to approximately 415 million years ago. Its highest point is Brown Willy, which is located in Bodmin Moor, the tors of which are evidence of the earlier mountain building episode. The Lizard forms its southernmost point and is also the only location of exposed oceanic crust in Great Britain. The Islands of Scilly are located off of its western tip, while the River Tamar forms much of its eastern border with Devon. FTP, name this region, the westernmost English county, which is home to Land’s End.;;Cornwall
Literature;;This novel’s protagonist has the peculiar habit of picturing his deceased dog, Rex, while he masturbates with a rubber glove.  He once saw his favorite lumber jacket stolen while he was using a public restroom, an event so traumatic that he has not left his home city since.  George is the courier for Lana Lee, distributing porn to local children.  In the end, Lana is arrested, leading to a front page article in the newspaper which leads to Jones getting a job, and forces the protagonist to go on the lam with his only friend, Myrna Minkoff.  FTP, name this novel that earned John Kennedy Toole a posthumous Pulitzer.;;(A) Confederacy of Dunces
Chemistry;;In IR spectroscopy, these can be differentiated from other similar compounds by their unique adsorption at 1735 inverse centimeters. Nitriles and an alcohol are combined to synthesize these in the Pinner reaction, and the Baeyer-Villiger oxidation is another synthesis reaction of these compounds. Like carboxylic acids, they can be reduced using lithium aluminum hydride to give primary alcohols. The beta-keto variety of these are created in the Dieckmann and Claisen condensations. FTP, name this type of compound that often have distinctive smells, which contains a carbonyl group adjacent to an oxygen which is bound to another organic group.;;ester(s)
World History;;It was followed by similar pronouncements from the Italian ambassador Marchese Imperiali and Jules Cambon, secretary-general of the French Foreign Ministry. Its exact meaning was clarified in Churchill's White Paper of 1922 and it was in conflict with earlier agreements, such as those expressed in the McMahon-Husayn Letters and the Sykes-Picot Agreement. Nahum Sokolov is credited with securing the inclusion of the term "homeland," a reference to Theodore Herzl’s speech in 1897 at the First Zionist Congress. FTP, name this letter that announced British support for the creation of a Jewish state in Palestine.;;Balfour (Declaration)|Balfour (Letter)
Music;;This musical work consists of ten numbered movements and five shorter interludes. The sixth movement depicts an argument between two men, one represented by a high, insistent solo trumpet, and the title of the ninth movement refers to the home of the witch Baba-Yaga. In addition to those movements, "Samuel Goldenburg and Schmuyle" and "The Hut on Fowl's Legs," this work includes "The Old Castle" and the majestic finale, "The Great Gate of Kiev". FTP identify this suite, inspired by the art and premature death of Victor Hartmann, orchestrated by Maurice Ravel, and originally composed for piano by Modest Mussorgsky.;;Pictures at an Exhibition
Pop Culture;;This team sucked under its second and third head coaches, Leeman Bennett and Ray Perkins, neither of whom lasted for more than two years. Its first draft pick, a defensive end out of Oklahoma, teamed with his brother, Dewey, the team's third pick, for seven sacks in their first season. That player, Lee Roy Selmon, became their first ever selection to the NFL Hall of Fame. Behind such players as Chidi Ahanatou, John Lynch, and Warren Sapp, this team became the template for the Cover 2 defense under Tony Dungy, before his move to the Colts. FTP, name this NFC South team, which Jon Gruden led to its first Super Bowl victory over the Oakland Raiders in 2002.;;Tampa Bay (Buccaneers)|(Tampa Bay) Buccaneers
Earth Science;;It is precipitated by the advance of a Kelvin wave, which disrupts Walker circulation. It has been linked with the Madden-Julien Oscillation, which occurs in the ICZ, and, with the disruption of Ekman Spiral-induced upwelling, may also be associated with the longer period Pacific Decadal Oscillation. It produces higher rainfall in the southwestern United States and is also associated with fewer hurricanes during the following Atlantic hurricane season. It is part of the constantly alternating pattern known as Southern Oscillation.  FTP, name this oceanic-atmospheric phenomenon, which takes its name from its usual appearance in December.;;El Niño|El Nino
Literature;;George Arms compares the title figure of this poem to Tennyson’s Sir Galahad from Idylls of the King.  The protagonist identifies two of his predecessors, Giles and Cuthbert, whom we are left to presume "view the last of [him]" arranged around the hills "in sheets of flame" as the protagonist arrives at the titular location.  Its 13th stanza speaks of a "hateful cripple" who was called a "hoary cripple, with malicious eye" in the first stanza.  It closes with its own title, which in turn comes from a line in King Lear.  FTP, name this poem by Robert Browning that ends with the title character blowing his horn.;;Childe Roland to the Dark Tower Came
Religion/Mythology;;When displayed at the Salon of 1872, a statue of this turbaned figure earned Antonin Mercié the cross of the Légion d'Honneur. Another statue of this figure, by Nicholas Cordier, can be found in the Borghese Chapel of the Basilica di Santa Maria Maggiore. Verrocchio’s statue of him reportedly used Leonardo da Vinci as a model. He’s caught in the midst of motion in Bernini’s depiction, while the first unsupported standing bronze of the Renaissance, a work of Donatello, sees him holding the sword of his enemy and standing on that enemy’s head. FTP, name this biblical figure, the best known depiction of whom was a large nude with his sling by Michelangelo.;;David(s)
Literature;;The speaker posits that elves are likely to be offended by the title action, but the fact that there are no cows leads him to question its effectiveness.  A character in this poem is described as a "old-stone savage" who "moves in darkness".  One place in this poem is described as "all pine" and is contrasted with an apple orchard.  The title action is called an "out-door game" played between two owners of New England farms, who are performing maintenance after winter and hunters have damaged the title entity.  FTP, name this poem that concludes "Good fences make good neighbors," a work of Robert Frost.;;Mending Wall
Philosophy;;One member of this school of philosophy was exiled to Gyarus after being accused of joining the Piso conspiracy, Musonius Rufus.  One of its members posited the motion-causing pneuma and the universal reason logos to expound on its theory that the universe was a cosmos.  In addition to Chrysippus, noted philosophers of this school include Epictetus and Seneca the Younger, and another member of the school wrote the Meditations.  FTP, name this philosophical school founded by Zeno of Cetium, whose notable adherents included Marcus Aurilius.;;Stoic(ism)
Chemistry;;Edwin Wilson and Jane Worcester posited that this law applies in epidemiology, and it can be used to determine the effect of fertilizers on creating new chemical compounds in plants.  Guldberg and Waage first proposed this law, but their work wasn't recognized until Van 't Hoff did similar work.  It can be used to derive the equilibrium composition of a mixture, or it can be applied to determine the relative speed of reaction in either direction.  FTP, name this chemical law, which states that the rate of a reversible reaction depends not only upon the reactants themselves, but also the relative concentrations of each.;;(Law) (of) Mass Action
Miscellaneous;;Jean Aitchison argued that push and drag chains caused this to happen in China, while Kemp Malone and Thomas Pyles agree on an unusual distinction of 'glides' in discussing it.  Roman Jakobson believed that this phenomenon was an insignificant allophonic adjustment.  This event was first studied by Otto Jespersen, who coined the term for it, and diphthongization as well as repositioned tongue height ultimately led to this event.  FTP, name this linguistic phenomenon in English, a massive long-term change in the pronunciation of certain sounds.;;(The) Great Vowel Shift
Literature;;In one poem, he asked "A Simple Child / That lightly draws its breath, / And feels its life in every limb, / What should it know of death"?  In another, he wrote of "a boy of five years old" who prefers to be in Klive because there is no weather-cock there.  In addition to "We Are Seven" and "Anecdotes for Fathers," he wrote an autobiographical poem recounting how he crossed the Alps and climbed Snowdon, The Prelude, and of a "host of golden daffodils" in "I wandered lonely as a cloud".  FTP, name this poet who composed a few lines above Tintern Abbey and collaborated with Coleridge on Lyrical Ballads.;;(William) Wordsworth
Noncomputational Math;;Its Mukai variety is useful in defining abelian varieties, and the essentially identical Plancherel theorem and Parseval’s theorem show that it is unitary and applying one of these to a Dirac comb will result in another Dirac comb.  It is integral to the Nyquist-Shannon sampling theorem, and both Bluestein's algorithm and Rader's algorithm compute a form of it by transforming it into a convolution, while runtime big-O of n log n for one variety of them is achieved by recursively breaking it down into smaller ones, a technique known as the Cooley-Tukey algorithm. Commonly used in signal and image processing, FTP, name this mathematical operation that breaks a function down into a spectrum of its component sinusoidal frequencies.;;Fourier (transform)|Fourier (operator)
World History;;A major British objective in this war was the destruction of a pontoon bridge across the Genitchi Strait.  Jacques Leroy de Saint Arnaud was one major commander in this war, as was Lord Raglan for the British.  Major battles included Alma, Inkerman, and Eupatoria, which led to the dismissal of commander Menshikov.  Only the Taif escaped for the losers during the hour-long naval rout at Sinope in this war.  This war saw the siege of Sevastopol, and it was ended by the Treaty of Paris in 1856.  FTP, name this war that saw the Battle of Balaklava and the Charge of the Light Brigade.;;Crimean (War)
Literature;;This play ends with the drunken main character abducting a flute-girl and challenging three crabs to a dancing contest.  It opens with two slaves of the main character discussing each other's dreams; those men are Sosias and Xanthias.  Under house arrest, that protagonist presides over a trial, during which his son tricks him into acquitting a dog of stealing a piece of Sicilian cheese.  Bdelycleon hopes to cure his father, Philocleon, of his consuming love of disputation.  FTP, name this Aristophanes play whose title refers to the chorus, a swarm of old men.;;(The) Wasps
Miscellaneous;;He claimed that a ghostwriter of his personal newsletter maligned Barbara Jordan and accused Bill Clinton of doing coke and fathering illegitimate children.  He defeated Greg Laughlin for his party's nomination to his current seat, and took down Lefty Morris and Loy Sneary in the general elections.  He finished third behind George H.W. Bush and Michael Dukakis in the 1988 presidential election on the Libertarian ticket.  He raised more money in summer 2007 than any Republican candidate, and he features a plethora of YouTube subscribers.  FTP, name this Texas congressman and Republican presidential candidate.;;(Ron(ald)) (Ernest) Paul
Music;;This man wrote an Album for the Young that contained 43 minute-long pieces for beginners.  His only opera sees Brabante leave to join Charles Martel's campaign against the Saracens, only to have Golo frame his wife for adultery.  In addition to Genoveva, this man's Opus 2 was used as the theme for the Grandfather Dance in Tchaikovsky's Nutcracker Suite.  As well as Papillons, he composed a symphony inspired by the vernal poems of Adolf Boettger, and his third depicted life on a certain river.  FTP, name this German Romantic composer of the Rhenish and Spring symphonies.;;(Robert) Schumann
Religion/Mythology;;Plutarch wrote a treatise about this character explaining his supposed Greek origin; however, that idea has since been proven untrue. This son of the "Great Cackler" became associated with the hawk-headed Seker at Abydos, the location of a stele on which much of the information about his mystery festival is found. His ba was worshipped separately as the ram god Banebdjed, who also carried the crook and flail often associated with this god. After the merging of the Ennead and the Ogdoad, he was considered the father of Anubis by Nephthys. Famously avenged by his son Horus after his death at the hands of Set, FTP, name this Egyptian god of death and the underworld, the consort of Isis.;;Osiris
Literature;;One of the narrators of this novel is attacked by Julio, who suspects that the narrator kidnapped his sister, but the narrator escapes punishment by paying a seven-dollar fine.  That narrator also recalls falsely admitting to incest, when in fact Dalton Ames is the father of Caddy's baby.  Both of these recollections take place on June 2nd, 1910, but most of the action of this novel takes place on Easter weekend of 1928.  Narrated by Benjy, Quentin, Jason, and an unnamed third person narrator, this is, FTP, which four-part work concerning the downfall of the Compson family, written by William Faulkner?;;(The) Sound and the Fury
United States History;;On the first day of this battle, General Johnston's right flank attack stalled in front of Sarah Bell's peach orchard, and much of the heavy fighting took place in the "Hornet's Nest".  The Confederates withdrew to the site of this battle after the losses of Forts Henry and Donelson in February, and the CSA army hoped to attack before reinforcements led by Don Carlos Buell arrived.  General Halleck ordered Grant's forces at Pittsburg Landing to advance, and Confederate General Johnston was killed at this battle.  FTP, name this April 6th and 7th,1862 Civil War victory for the Union in Tennessee.;;(Battle) (of) Shiloh
Earth Science;;One measurement of this is the Janka test, which can be measured on pounds-force, kilograms-force, or newtons.  A Shore device can be used to test for this property, and the Knoop test measures this property on a micro scale.  The rebound variety can be tested using a scleroscope, and measured on the Bennett Scale, while the Brinell, Vickers, or Rockwell Scales are often used to test the indentation variety.  FTP, name this property of minerals, whose scratch variety is usually tested for using the Mohs Scale.;;hardness
Geography;;The widest point in this body is between the villages of Onguryon and Ust-Barguzin.  A settlement at Bolshiye Koty is located on its shores, and it is located in the federal subject of Irkutsk Olbast.  It is fed by over 300 rivers, including the Uda, Barguzin, and Selenga, and contains 22 islands including Olkhon, the largest.  Its only outlet is the Angara River, which drains into the Yenisei, and this body's namesake mountains are the source of the Lena River.  FTP, name this body that contains nearly 20% of earth's liquid freshwater, the deepest freshwater lake on Earth, located in Siberia.;;(Lake) Baikal
Religion/Mythology;;Hjalti Skeggjason claimed "I don't like barking gods; I consider [this deity] to be a bitch".  In an anecdote in the the Song of Thrymr, she shook with an anger so intense that she lost the necklace Brísingamen, but in another story it was returned to her by Heimdall.  She rides a chariot pulled by cats and has a cloak made of feathers, and her room within her realm was known as Sessrumnir.  She and Odin split half of the dead lost in battle, and she receives her half in her realm Fólkvangr.  FTP name this highest goddess of the Vanir, the daughter of the god Njord and sister of Freyr, the Norse goddess of beauty and love.;;Freya|Freyja
Literature;;His first published work was a translation of James Baikie's history of his country, and that ancient history was the subject of his first novel Mockery of the Fates.  The title character cavorts with the prostitute Nur and dies in a cemetery in his The Thief and the Dogs, and Hamida leaves her fiancée to become a prostitute in his Midaq Alley.  He traced the tradition of monotheistic religions in Children of Gebelawi, while another of his works was split up into three novels: Palace Walk, Palace of Desire, and Sugar Street.   FTP, name this author of The Cairo Trilogy.;;(Naguib) Mahfouz
United States History;;This tribe holds that Blanca Peak, Mount Taylor, Hesperus Mountain, and the San Francisco Peaks mark out their homeland.  They first signed a treaty with Europeans at Canyon de Chelly, and their Tribal Police were first created in an 1868 treaty.  They were forced to embark on the Long Walk to Bosque Redondo, where their leader Barboncito signed a treaty.  Their mythology holds that they sprung forth from three previous underworlds into this "Glittering world," and they call themselves simply "The People" or "Diné".  FTP, name this American Indian Nation, a Southern Athabaskan tribe that is the largest in the U.S.;;Navajo
Art;;In 2000, this architect took on the Confluence Project, a series of installations along the Columbia and Snake Rivers.  This designer of the "Wave Field" at the University of Michigan was the eponymous subject of a 1994 Academy Award-winning documentary subtitled "A Strong Clear Vision".  Serving on the selection committee for the World Trade Center Site Memorial Competition and designing the Civil Rights Monument in Montgomery, Alabama, she is more famous for designing a memorial consisting of a black granite wall.  FTP, name this architect of the Vietnam Veterans’ Memorial.;;(Maya) (Ying) Lin
Biology;;Rick Strassman theorizes that this body may produce a compound he suggests causes near-death experiences and alien abduction hallucinations, the "Spirit Molecule" DMT.  It is located behind the stria medullaris and dorsal to the superior colliculus.  Early vertebrates sometimes had a foreamen corresponding with this body, and in reptiles it is often known as the "third eye".  In humans, this body produces melatonin and regulates circadian rhythms and was the last of the endocrine glands to be determined.  FTP, name this pea-sized gland located in the geometric center of the brain.;;Pineal (gland|body){1}?|epiphysis (cerebri)
Literature;;An author from this country wrote a book in which the title character is contrasted with his half-brother Mort and kills the Newby family.  In addition to The Chant of Jimmie Blacksmith, an author from this country wrote of a titular artist named Hurtle Duffield Courtney and a titular German explorer who dies while trekking in this country.  Those works, The Vivisector and Voss, were written by Patrick White, an author from this country.  FTP, name this country, the setting of the Peter Carey work Oscar and Lucinda, which documents an attempt to move a glass church into the outback.;;Australia
Pop Culture;;In one early appearance, this character was responsible for covering the heads of other characters with such items as buckets and jellyfish, making it necessary for Wanda the fairy to guide them to safety. In 1994, he clashed with Bomberman, while in another game featuring this character, the player is forced to rearrange bombs and monsters in order to prevent him from taking over that game's titular locale. He now owns his own company, where his subordinates include Mona, Jimmy T., and 9-Volt; that company produces hundreds of microgames. Making his first appearance in a game subtitled 6 Golden Coins, FTP, name this yellow-clad antagonist of the Mario universe.;;Wario
World History;;A coup against this man saw his supporters bombed by naval aircraft in the Plaza de Mayo, and he was forced into exile after the Revelución Libertadora.  His initial supporters were lampooned as "black heads," "fats," and "descamisados" or "shirtless ones," and his regime was criticized for providing "ratlines" to Nazi war criminals.  After his return from exile in 1973 and death a year later, his wife Isabel seized power and began a "dirty war" against political opponents.  FTP, name this Argentine general and president, whose second wife was the beloved Evita.;;(Juan) (Domingo) Per(ó|o){1}?n
Literature;;One character in this work believes that religion is "bad sex," while another responds to any question with common advertising slogans in an attempt to avoid confronting his pathological religious obsession.  The protagonist gets up the nerve to ask out a girl under the influence of a placebo "truth pill". Dr. Martin Dysart theorizes that the protagonist's obsession originated began with the replacement of a picture of the Crucifixion with one of the titular animal, and the protagonist blinds six of those animals after he fails to get an erection with Jill Taylor.  FTP, name this 1973 play written by Peter Shaffer, in which Alan Strang is obsessed with horses.;;Equus
Pop Culture;;Xander Crews of Frisky Dingo believes these, rather than man, to be "the most dangerous game," while one of these created by Sanrio wears an apple hat and has a pet caterpillar named Imomushi. One stage in We Love Katamari has the Prince raising money to save the red variety of this creature, which is actually more closely related to the raccoon than its namesake. A character named Kuma has a crush on one of these; that one works as a bodyguard for Ling Xiaoyu and made her debut in Tekken 3. FTP name this mammal, often seen mauling Brent Sienna in the webcomic PvP and which was anthropomorphized as a race in the Warcraft universe.;;Panda(s)
Chemistry;;Similar to the Blanc chloromethylation reaction, a variant of it used to created fused rings is called the Scholl reaction. The Gatterman-Koch synthesis involving carbon monoxide is a specific form of this reaction, while the similar Fries rearrangement is applicable to phenyl esters. It cannot proceed if a substituent group is electron withdrawing but is also hindered by hydroxyl and amine groups, and it requires a Lewis acid like aluminum chloride or iron chloride as a catalyst. Named for the two scientists who discovered it in 1877, FTP, identify this reaction which is an electrophilic aromatic substitution existing in the alkylation and acylation forms.;;Friedel-Crafts (reaction)|Friedel-Crafts (alkylation)|Friedel-Crafts (acylation)
Literature;;Paul Kroll argues that this man's "The Lady of the Highest Prime" cannot be properly read without understanding the deific implications of a "caftan of red frost".  An anecdote about this author recounts how he compared writing to catching giant fish, using "any man lacking in righteousness" as bait.  Most of his poems such as Drinking Alone by Moonlight are in the "music bureau" form, while others are in a form of five- or seven-line quatrains known as the Jueju form.  His most famous work opens with the speaker recollecting when her "hair was still cut straight across [her] forehead," and that speaker's husband has gone to Ku-to-en on "the river of swirling eddies".  FTP, name this author of The River Merchant's Wife, a Chinese poet notably translated by Ezra Pound.;;Li Po|Li Bai
United States History;;This measure inspired similar efforts which led to Initiative 200 in Washington and Proposal 2 in Michigan. Its first major proponent was Ward Connerly, whose American Civil Rights Institute grew out of efforts to pass this initiative, and that institute continues to combat policies such as the ones this measure sought to prohibit.  Its most important section reads "The state shall not discriminate against, or grant preferential treatment to, any individual or group on the basis of race, sex, color, ethnicity, or national origin". FTP, identify this 1996 California ballot measure, which sought to ban state-sponsored affirmative action programs.;;Proposition 209
Earth Science;;Anderson and Perkins suggested that volcanism in western United States is characteristic of magma produced in this region, and it is conventionally believed to have a temperature gradient with the region above it. One evidence for its existence is the formation of island arcs near deep sea trenches, and its existence was proved when it slowed down waves that passed through it during a 1960 earthquake in Chile. It can be called the "plastic region" because of its low density, and it decouples the lithospheric plate from the mantle. Also known as the low velocity zone, this is, FTP what upper layer of the mantle on which the tectonic plates move?;;Asthenosphere
Philosophy;;Tara Smith wrote about it in her book Viable Values: A Study of Life as the Root and Reward of Morality, Moral Rights and Political Freedom as well as a work regarding its founder and the "virtuous egoist". Its outright rejection of David Hume's idea that "No is implies an ought" is based on this founder's belief that life itself is provides this ought. The axioms of this philosophy are that consciousness exists, existence is identity, and A is A by stated by its fictional spokesman, John Galt. FTP, name this philosophical school centered around existence and reason, first postulated by Ayn Rand in Atlas Shrugged.;;Objectiv(ism)
Literature;;One character offers to free the protagonist if he pays 30,000 monetary units, but the protagonist's lawyer simply rakes up scandals against all his accusers. The protagonist is inspired by the resourcefulness of Konstanzhoglo and intends to buy an estate in the Kherson province. Exposing the poshlost of provincial people such as Plushkin and Nozdrev, this work begins with the protagonist paying visits to Manilov and Sobakietvitch to acquire the titular entities. FTP, identify this novel which describes Pavel Tchitchikov's humorous transactions as he purchases the titles to deceased serfs, a work by Nikolai Gogol.;;Dead Souls|Myortyve dushi
World History;;A man involved in this event dubbed himself "Mr. John Johnson," and many involved in this event were captured by Richard Walsh.  Several others participants in this event were eventually killed or captured at Holbeach House.  Oswald Tesimond related news of this to Father Henry Garnet, who was executed for being aware of this event, and Everard Digby, Ambrose Rokewood, and Robert Catesby were plotters in this event, but it was betrayed by Francis Tresham to Lord Monteagle before it could be carried out.  FTP, name this plot to assassinate James I that was with explosives prepared by Guy Fawkes.;;(The) Gunpowder (Plot)
Physics;;Shinbrot's conjecture states that the "weak solutions" of it possesses fractional derivatives of orders less than one half.  The Reynolds-averaged type yield time-averaged models for laminar flow, and integrating them over its streamline results in Bernoulli's principle. It is derived from the principles of conservation of mass, momentum, and energy, and it has been widely used to study Newtonian fluids which are assumed to have incompressible flow. FTP, identify this non-linear partial differential equation named after a French and an Irish mathematician, which is the most general model of fluid dynamics.;;Navier(-)Stokes (equations)
Art;;One of these paintings sees three cloaked figures, a man, woman, and boy with his hand on the man's leg, looking towards the ground on the beach.  In addition to The Tragedy, one of these paintings depicts a woman with a hood and one crusty eye, Celestina.  Another of these works shows a nude woman embracing a nearly nude man while a fully clothed mother and child look on, and three figures in the background are huddled in the fetal position, La Vie.  The most notable one inspired a poem about a man who "does not play things as they are" by Wallace Stevens, and bends awkwardly over the title instrument.  FTP, name these period paintings of Picasso exemplified by The Old Guitarist.;;Blue Period (Paintings)
World History;;In the aftermath of this conflict, Isokyro was burned to the ground.  An early treaty in this war saw one side agree not to intervene and cede territory to Holstein-Gottorp, the Peace of Travendal.  One side in this conflict scored its first ever naval victory at Gangut, while a land victory for the opposing side saw Charles Eugene de Croy defeated by a force one fourth the size of his.  Carl Gustav Rehnskiold commanded for one side in the bloodiest battle of this war, Poltava.  FTP, name this war during the time of Charles XII and Peter the Great, which saw the downfall of the empire of Sweden.;;(The) Great Northern (War)
Literature;;The protagonist of this work is attracted to a woman he imagines to be "clean to the hollows of her toes" and as translucent as a silkworm.  This work is an extension of the story "The Mirror of an Evening Scene," which featured a similar scene in which the protagonist observes a woman in a reflection.  The protagonist trips and observes the Milky Way while rushing to a movie-house fire, and his pastimes include collecting chijimi cloth and critiquing western ballet.  One of the protagonist's love interests, Yoko, nurses the sickly Yukio, the son of his other lover Komako's music teacher and possibly her former fiancé.  FTP, name this novel about Shimamura's relationship with two geishas in the hot springs region of Niigata Prefecture, a work of Yasunari Kawabata.;;Snow Country|Yukiguni
United States History;;This man co-sponsored a 1984 act with Bill Nichols which consolidated the military command structure, and sued Jimmy Carter for nullifying the Sino-American Mutual Defense Treaty. He began his senate career by defeating the incumbent majority leader Ernest McFarland, but he replaced Carl Hayland  the next time he ran for senate. He chose William Miller as his vice-presidential candidate, and himself ran as vice-president in 1960, the year in which he wrote Conscience of a Conservative. FTP, name this conservative icon, who lost the landslide 1964 election to Lyndon Johnson, a Republican dude from Arizona.;;(Barry) (Morris) Goldwater
Pop Culture;;He was just 5'4" as a high school senior, but in college he grew seven inches and added ten miles per hour to his fastball.  He was drafted in the sixth round in 1999 despite being from Navan, Onterio, and he had Tommy John surgery while a minor leaguer.  He started at least 24 games each year since 2004, and his ERA has gone down from 4.59 to 3.16 in that span.  Along with teammate and countrymate Adam Loewen, he had a perfect ERA in the World Baseball Classic.  Despite starting only 28 games in 2007, he had a career-best .722 win percentage and was fourth in the majors in strikeouts, and he set the all-time franchise record for strikeouts in a game and season, both of which were previously held by Mike Mussina.  FTP, name this Baltimore Orioles lefthanded Canadian ace.;;(Erik) (Joseph) Bedard
Miscellaneous;;It has its roots in a 1795 Kant work, but empirical research for this idea did not exist until the 1960s, when sociologist Dean Babst published findings supportive of this theory. Rudolph Rummel, Melvin Small and J. David Singer, and Maoz and Abdolali all published articles on this theory that has been strongly criticized by realists like Farber and Gowa.  The Sicilian Expedition, Trail of Tears, and the American Revolution are oft-cited counterexamples to this theory.  FTP, name this theory of international relations, which holds that countries under a certain type of government will never go to war with each other.;;(Democratic|Liberal){1}? peace (theory)
Literature;;One character is told to come "Close, close, close!" when it is revealed that this entity is "the reason why it's no go...Why things are what they are".  An offering to this entity muses "Fancy thinking [this] is something you can hunt and kill," and takes on its form, confessing "I'm part of you" in a climactic scene.  Its existence is first reported by a character with a mulberry-shaped birthmark, and it is alternately called a snake-thing for several chapters.  This entity is discovered to be a fighter pilot's bloated corpse hanging by a parachute, but Simon is killed in a frenzied mob before he can reveal its true identity to Jack and Ralph.  FTP, name this fearful entity that terrorizes the minds of shipwrecked boys in William Golding's Lord of the Flies.;;(The) Beast(ie)
Religion/Mythology;;This person's experiences were set in a modern context in Erik Ehn's play Polio Comes from the Moon, while an Emile Zola work which criticized the reaction to the events surround this person was satirized in a later work by Franz Werfel. She experienced two "miracles of the candle," and while suffering from an asthma attack late in life, she asked for water from the spring she had earlier found, which seemingly cured her. The location of that spring would later become a major pilgrimage site. Most famous for her eighteen visions of a woman standing in the niche of a rock who eventually revealed herself to be "the Immaculate Conception," FTP, identify this patron saint of the sick, a former peasant girl from Lourdes.;;(Saint|St(.)) Bernadette (of Lourdes|Soubirous)
Geography;;Lesser known cities in this state include Patiala, and Ludhiana is called "the Manchester" of this state because of its manufacturing industry. Alexander the Great fought Porus along the Jhelum river in this region, and this fertile region is irrigated by the "five rivers".  Notable cities include one the Le Corbusier designed Union Territory of Chandigarh, a city that serves as the capital for this state and Haryana.   Operation Blue Star resulted in troops storming the Golden Temple in this region's city of Amritsar. FTP, identify this northwestern state of India which was the birthplace of Sikhism.;;Punjab
United States History;;Donald J. Senese wrote a book detailing this main's "Legacy of Constitutional Liberty," and James Brown Scott gave a speech about him in 1926 on the 150th anniversary of his biggest in-state achievement.  He lived for most of his life at Gunston Hall, along the Potomac River, and along with Randolph and Gerry, he insisted that a declaration of rights be included in the federal constitution.  Objections to this Constitution of Government and is the namesake of a university in northern Virginia. FTP name this Founding Father, whose agitation for such guarantees has earned him the nickname "Father of the Bill of Rights".;;(George) Mason
Music;;The first use of this instrument in a symphonic setting was in 1807, when it appeared in Swedish composer Joachim Nikolas Egger's Symphony in E flat.  Handel used this instrument in the Dead March in Saul, while an early prominent usage in symphony came in the last movement of Beethoven's fifth.  Wycliffe Gordon plays this instrument in jazz performances and other notable players of this instrument include Ray Anderson and Carl Fontana.  There are many types of this instrument, but the most prevalent are tenor and base, and its predecessor was known as the sackbut.  FTP, name this instrument, played in either the bass clef or tenor clef, the only instrument to be played solely with a slide and the embouchure.;;trombone
Literature;;In one of this man's poems, the speaker claims that "The boy who walks through this poem... / is the man who writes it: / this page too / is a ramble through the night".  This author wrote poetry collections such as Liberty Under Oath, and his The Traps of Faithis a critical biography of Sor Juana Inez de la Cruz. A better known work is a long poem dedicated to Venus which takes its name from an Aztec artifact, while his best known work is about the machismo attitude and describes certain "masks" which characterize indifference of his native society. FTP, name this writer of Labyrinth of Solitude.;;(Octavio) Paz
World History;;He was briefly a member of the Jesuits, but was released from that order at his own request due to "moral frailties".  He won a fur-trading concession from the governor-general of New France, Louis de Baude Frontenac, and most of his early expeditions in the Great Lakes area were used to establish fur-trading posts, nearly all of which ended up being destroyed, either by Indians or his own men. In 1682 he began his most famous journey, and on April 9th of that year he reached the mouth of the Mississippi River, whose entire basin he claimed for France. FTP, name this early explorer of North America, most remembered for giving that territory the name of Louisiana.;;(Rene-Robert) (Cavlier) (Sieur) (de) la Salle
Earth Science;;The gemstone aventurine's characteristic sheen comes from inclusions of a type of this mineral, and flakes of it covered in titanium dioxide are the source for the "pearlescence" effect in cosmetics. If one of these minerals contains a double-charged ion such as calcium, it is known as "brittle", while if it instead contains a singly-charged ion like potassium or sodium it is classified as "true". Its lepidolite variety is a major source of rubidium and cesium, while the green and ruby types of its muscovite variety are often used in dielectric materials and insulators. FTP, name this group of sheet silicate minerals, well-known for their highly perfect basal cleavage.;;mica
Pop Culture;;In 2004, one of this group's founding members starred in a musical entitled "People Are Wrong!" Many of their live shows and videos feature cutout heads of newspaper editor Willam Allen White, and from 1997 to 2002, its two founders were backed by the "Band of Dans".  The titular aspiring drummer of one of their songs has a friend named Rabbi Vole, while another song's titular character, whose "voice is a backwards record", lives on the opposite side of the world from the narrator. More famous is a song about a nightlight shaped like a blue canary. Creators of the songs "Dr. Worm", "Ana Ng", and "Birdhouse In Your Soul", FTP name this band, founded by John Flansburgh and John Linnell, winners of a 2002 Grammy for "Boss of Me," the theme song for Malcolm in the Middle.;;They Might Be Giants
United States History;;He replaced William Harney as commander of the army’s Department of the West during the American Civil War and attempted to turn Missouri to the Union cause, but was reassigned to West Virginia where he was replaced after consistently losing to Stonewall Jackson. He solved the social shortcoming of his likely illegitimatebirth by marrying the daughter of Thomas Hart Benton, and in 1842 he led a surveying expedition of South Pass with Kit Carson. In the Mexican-American War he led 300 men to Santa Barbara and eventually captured all of California. FTP, name this first presidential candidate of the Republican Party, nicknamed "The Pathfinder".;;(John) (Charles) Frémont|(John) (Charles) Fremont
Biology;;In August 2006, the FDA approved one kind of these entities to be used for disinfecting meats. They fall in the Caudovirales order under the ICTV system and tailed ones contain molecules of linear, double stranded DNA. They were independently discovered by Frederick Twort and Felix d'Hérelle, and it was later discovered that these entities can undergo transduction with their namesake hosts. The lambda kind can reproduce through the lysogenic cycle by integrating with host plasmids and chromosomes, but most use the lytic cycle. FTP, identify these types of viruses which infect another kind of single celled organisms.;;bacteriophage
Religion/Mythology;;Only four paragraphs of its denomination's foundational text are dedicated to it, one of which states that it originated as a popular substitute for the Liturgy of the Hours in Medieval times in the west as a way to praise the Virgin Mary.  John Paul II declared in 2002 that theluminous mysteries could be used with this ritual.  It consists of stating one of five different types of events in the life of Jesus before reciting the Our Father prayer followed by ten Hail Marys. FTP, identify this sequence of prayers common in the Catholic Church that involves a string of beads.;;(The) Rosary
Religion/Mythology;;The Rig-Veda states that he he has supreme control over horses, chariots, and cattle, and that he lifts up the outcast and glorifies the disabled.  After he had an affair with Ahalya, Maharishi Gautama cursed him to bear lots of on his body, but Brahma's repeated pleas reduced the punishment to one thousandeyes. He rides the elephant Airavatha and lives on the summit of Mount Meru, and his most notable battle began when he passed through 99 fortresses of his nemesis. FTP, identify this Vedic god of weather and storms who leads the Devas, loves to drink soma, and constantly fights the asuras, notably Vritra.;;Indra|Indhor
World History;;One of its former dynasties featured such kings as Edward the Philosopher, John the Pious, and Alfonso the African. That dynasty took power from the Afonsine Dynasty, this country's branch of the House of Burgundy, after the 1383-1385 Crisis. Power in this country was usurped by the Hapsburgs, when they seized the throne in 1580, but its independence was regained when II led a rebellion in 1640. The dynasty he founded supplanted the House of Aviz and was named Braganza, and its later rulers named Pedro would hold power in Brazil. FTP, name this country, whose more famous leaders included King John I and Prince Henry the Navigator.;;Portugal|Portuguese Republic|República Portuguesa
Astronomy;;Saturn most recently transited in front of this object in 2003, and a transit by Titan in front of this body was used to calculate the thickness of Titan's atmosphere. The second brightest source of X-rays, Shklovskii predicted that most of its nonthermal emission takes place in the form of synchrotron radiation, which occurs because the object at the center of this body is actually a pulsar. Located about 6300 light years from the earth, it is located in the constellation Taurus and is the first object in the Messier catalog. FTP, identify this astronomical thing that resulted from a 1054 supernova that is named for a crustacean.;;(The) Crab Nebula
Literature;;This man appears to a delirious character wearing clothing that is a few years out of fashion, and Ivan imagines that he is part of the "idle class of landowners" in The Brothers Karamazov.  August Feldner encounters this man in the guise of his imaginary nephew who predicts the occurrence ofunfortunate events in a Twain short story. He also leads the titular characters away from Moscow promising them a life of love and poverty as Woland in The Master and Magarita. In one of his earlier appearances, he destroys the children, livestock, and property of Job because of a bet with God. FTP, identify the personification of evil, often paired with Tom Walker and Daniel Webster.;;(The) Devil|(The) Satan|Lucifer
Economics;;He published the "CMC Paper" with Meiselman, to which Donald Hester replied with an article on "Keynes and the Quantity Theory;" this man replied in turn with "Reply to Donald Hester".  He claimed that theories must be judged by their simplicity and fruitfulness in The Methodology of Positive Economics, while  dealt with the misuse of the Federal Reserve in a book co-authored with his wife, Free to Choose, in another work he posited the relationship between economic liberty and political liberty.  FTP, name this author of A Monetary History of the United States Capitalism and Freedom, the leader of the Chicago School of economics.;;(Milton) Friedman
Noncomputational Math;;Chaitin’s constant is associated with the probability of outcomes in this problem, and the Busy Beaver machine is the limit between the two outcomes of this problem. Alonzo Church's proof involving lambda calculus made it one the first problems to be established as undecidable. A more elegant proof involves the use of reduction which Alan Turing showed in On computable numbers. name this problem that shows that no program can exist that can determine whether a program will terminate in finite time or not.;;(the) halting (problem)
United States History;;On a 1978 album, this man covered the Zeke Manners song "Don't Let Your Sweet Love Die," and he is on pace to break a record currently held by Carl Hayden in 2010.  In 1960, he ran against but failed to beat John F. Kennedy in a presidential primary in his home state. He has authored the anti-George W. Bush book Losing America referred to Bush saying "emperor has no clothes".He has held his highest-ranking position three separate times between the tenures of John Stennis, Strom Thurmond, and Ted Stevens. FTP, name this former and current president pro tempore, the Senate’longest-serving member, from West Virginia.;;(Robert) (Carlyle) Byrd
Literature;;Mary Thayer argued that this work was influenced by Coleridge's poem "Love," noting that the protagonist of the Coleridge poem "pined," while the protagonist of the poem was "haggard" and "woebegone".  The title character of this poem is kissed four times when she weeps after reaching the elfin grot, by a character for whom she finds "of relish sweet, / And honey wild, and manna dew".Taking its name from a work of the medieval poet Alan Cartier, this poem begins when the narrator asks a "knight-at-arms" the cause of his dismay.  FTP, identify this poem about a remorseless magical seductress, a work of John Keats.;;La Belle Dame Sans Merci
Pop Culture;;He left his hometown of Maudlin, South Carolina, after he was arrested following a fight between black and white students.  This former Farragut Academy star became the first player since Moses Malone to go straight from high school to the pros.  He won the MVP in 2004 after leading his team to the conference finals against the Lakers after beating the Kings in the semis.  He recently became the only player to ever have seven players traded for him, as a recent trade saw Gerald Green, Al Jefferson, and five others swapped for him.  FTP, name this long-time Timberwolf and current Boston Celtic power forward nicknamed "The Big Ticket".;;(Kevin) Garnett
Literature;;The work is dedicated to the author of such poems as "Who's for the game".  The figures in this work are knock-kneed and coughing like hags, drunk with fatigue.  One character in this work is described as having "white eyeswrithing in his face" that is like "a devil's sick of sin".  The line "Quick, boys" is followed by "an ecstasy of fumbling," and one figure is left "guttering, choking, drowning".  FTP, identify this poem which takes its title from a line by Horace, written about a gas attack by Wilfred Owen.;;Dulce Et Decorum Est
Physics;;Jackson and Broadway used a similar setup as it to study the properties of active nitrogen.  One result of it was the discovery of Rabi oscillation, which is one of the foundations for most MRI machines, while another application produced the hydrogen maser.  It was performed when of its namesakes was studying under Max Born, and led to questioning of the overly simplistic Bohr model of the atom.  Showing how electrons behave differently than true dipoles when passing through a homogeneous magnetic field, FTP, name this 1922 experiment designed to test whether particles have intrinsic angular momentum.;;Stern(-)Gerlach (experiment)
United States History;;He was allegedly able to communicate in both Greek and Latin by the age of seven, and was apparently the brains behind the building of Christ's Hospital.  His foreign policy accomplishments include bringing an end to the War of the Rough Wooing.  Domestically, he dealt with the revolts against use of the Book of Common Prayer, and his advisors included Northumberland, and the First Duke of Somerset, who ruled as a regent for this man during the first two years of his reign.  FTP, name this ruler who was succeeded by the nine-day reign of Lady Jane Grey and eventually by his half-sister Mary, the son of Henry VIII who ruled England as a boy-king from 1547-1553.;;Edward VI
Literature;;Piet tends to the title plants while Gladys pores over a journal with no words in it, and Steve Daniels prepares to leave the country in this man's A Lesson from Aloes.  The title characters decide "Our life is dumb" before an old man dies on them, but Boesman beats the corpse and they have to flee in his Boesman and Lena.  The young schoolteacher Elsa Barlow admires the elderly Miss Helen's statues in one in his works, while in another, Zachariah and Morris are two brothers with different skin colors, and they role play black menial and white master.  In addition to The Blood Knot, this man wrote a work in which Sam Semela's relationship with Hally changes when Hally spits on him.  FTP, name this author of MASTER HAROLD...and the Boys.;;(Harold) (Athol) (Lannigan) Fugard
World History;;This man’s political career began early in life when he became a city counselor in a posh Paris suburb, most famously negotiating with a man who had taken schoolchildren hostage.  He rose quickly through the political ranks, becoming Minister of the Budget and, as Minister of Finance, he cut government ownership of his country's Telecom.  Eventually serving two terms as Minister of the Interior, where he worked to relieve tensions among his country’s Muslims and ended up taking flak for riots in late 2005.  Eventually beating Ségolène Royal to take his current job, FTP, name this Hungarian-descended President of France.;;(Nicolas) Sarkozy|(Nicolas) (Paul) (Stéphane) Sárközy (de) (Nagy-Bocsa)
Pop Culture;;This runner-up in the 2000 slam dunk contest had to sit out several games in 2001-02 with an inner ear disorder.  He started out at San Jacinto and Allegany Colleges before transferring to a larger school.  After stating he was almost positive he would stay at Maryland for his senior year, he entered the NBA Draft, and was taken number two by Vancouver.  He forced a trade from Vancouver, refused to come off the bench for Orlando, and was immediately released by Portland after he was traded for Zach Randolph.  FTP, name this best bud of Cuttino Mobley and once-again Houston Rocket, a guard nicknamed "Franchise".;;(Steve) (D'Shawn) Francis
Art;;The lower right corner of Picasso's composition of this name features a group of three women, one enigmatically smiling and another whispering into the third's ear.  In the top left background of this painting, a woman in blue sits on a bench and rejects the advances of a man in a black suit.  A beaded man in the front right is picking his teeth with a toothpick or match, and a younger man next to him fiddles a pen in his two hands on the table.  In the center, a bearded gent appears to be leaning in for a kiss, but his girl is leaning away from him.  Near the left center, a bearded man in a bowler is seen dancing with a woman in white.  Set at a fashionable restaurant at Montmartre, FTP, name this Impressionist masterpiece of Pierre-Auguste Renoir.;;La moulin de la Galette|Bal au la moulin de la Galette(,) (Montmartre)
Noncomputational Math;;This construction is used to prove that a square wave's Laplace transform has poles at all values for which the denominator of the transform equation equals zero.  One variation which uses difference operators is called the Stolz-Cesaro Theorem.  It can be proved by performing a Taylor expansion on an equation and applying Cauchy's mean value theorem.  It is not useful for unreduced trigonometric functions because it simply rearranges them, but it can be used to find the limit of lots of expressions in which a function is multiplied, divided, or taken to the power of another function.  FTP, name this rule which uses derivatives in calculating limits of functions when the component functions approach zero or infinity.;;L’Hôpital’s (Rule)|L'Hopital('s) (Rule)
Literature;;One character with this name is a visitor at the namesake seaside resort town in Jane Austen’s unfinished novel, Sanditon, while another is the constant companion of Esther Summerson in Bleak House.  Another person with this name is the wife of Adam Verver in The Golden Bowl.  Yet another is Lucy Honeychurch's cousin with whom she visits Florence in A Room With a View.  A still more famous person possessing this first name marries William Collins in Pride and Prejudice.  Another character with this name writes the words "Terrific" and "Radiant" before dying at the county fair.  FTP, name this name, best known as that of a literate spider in an E.B. White novel about her namesake "web".;;Charlotte
United States History;;After one of his major battles he signed a two-month armistice in return for a city, prompting the president to repudiate his authority, and he commanded troops under Henry Atkinson in the Black Hawk war.  He was the captain in charge of Fort Harrison during a battle there, which earned him his promotion to major, and his victory at Lake Okeechobee was a win against the Seminoles.  After defeating Pedro de Ampudia at Monterrey, he disobeyed Polk's orders and diverted John Wool's troops to march with him Santa Anna's troops at Buena Vista.  FTP, name this general and future Whig president, known as "Old Rough and Ready".;;(Zachary) Taylor
United States History;;Taft's strong dissent in Adkins v. Children's Hospital suggested that this case should be overruled.  The "era" that this case ushered in ended with a case that saw the notorious "switch in time to save nine," West Coast Hotel v. Parrish.  Much of Rufus Peckham's opinion dealt with whether the law in question constituted a proper use of the police power.  John Marshall Harlan's dissent in this case decried the Court's attempt to become a legislature, while Oliver Wendell Holmes's dissent stated that the fourteenth amendment does not enact Spencer's Social Statics.  FTP, name this 1905 case which overturned a law concerning bakers' working hours.;;Lochner (v.) (New) (York)
Geography;;There are four enclaves in this country including Sokh and Shakhrimardan, and tThis country has an exclave at Barak, in the Fergana Valley northwest of its city of Osh.  Like Afghanistan and Azerbaijan, it has a city called Jalal-Abad, which was a stop along the Silk Road, and its principle river is the Naryn, which meets the Kar Darya to create the Syr Darya.  It shares its highest peak with its larger neighbor, and that 24,000+ foot tall summit is known as "Victory Peak" or Jengish Chokusu.  It is home to Lake Issyk Kul, the second-largest mountain lake in the world, in its Alay range of the Tian Shan Mountains.  FTP, name this landlocked, mountainous Central Asian nation with capital at Bishkek.;;Kyrgyzstan
Chemistry;;A modification of a modification of this reaction requires a pyramidine base for decarboxylation.  That reaction is the Doebner modification, and it is based on a modification to this reaction that sees the nucleophilic addition of an active hydrogen group to a carbonyl, resulting in the alpha, beta conjugated version of this reaction's product.  In addition to that reaction named for Knoevenagel, the Robinson annulation requires Methyl-vinyl-ketones because they are both a Michael adapter and able to undergo this reaction.  This reaction sees a carbonyl and an enolate ion form a beta-hydroxy-aldehyde or -ketone, which is then dehydrated to an enone.  FTP, name this condensation reaction named for a portmanteau of "aldehyde" and "alcohol".;;Aldol (condensation)
Literature;;In one section, a bad batch of antipyretics calls a lawyer to Bangkok and later to India, which is of particular interest as he was once a schoolmate of two Siamese princes.  This portion ends after that lawyer sees moles on the side of Ying Chan and a villa burns down.*  The final section features an attempted suicide via methanol in 1974, sixty years after the events involving Satoko and the untimely death of Kiyoaki, who is apparently reincarnated in each subsequent section. Featuring the recurring character of Shigekuni Honda, FTP, name this tetralogy by  Mishima Yukio.;;(The) Sea of Fertility
Religion/Mythology;;At the very end of Paradiso, this man replaces Beatrice as Dante's guide as he approaches his meeting with the Virgin Mary.  His first major role in greater Church affairs came at the Council of Troyes.  He prosecuted Abelard for heresy and sided with Innocent II in his feud with Anacletus II over the papacy after the death of Honorius II.  He was called upon to preach after the fall of Edessa, and he was able to get Conrad, king of the Romans to join in his most notable accomplishment.  His speech at Vezelay caused Louis VII and Eleanor of France to take up the cross.  FTP, name this Cistercian, a Frenchman who advocated the Second Crusade.;;(St.) Bernard of Clairvaux
Music;;Successive lines are keyed in A minor, A-flat minor, G minor, and F-sharp minor in the Confutatis section of this work.  The Tuba mirum section of this work features an unexpected obbligato trombone, and this piece is scored only for basset-horn, bassoon, trumpet, trombone timpani, and string, although the organ part is extant for most of the work.  The Kyrie is a double fugue, while the offertory contains the sections Domine Jesu Christ and Hostias.  Its lacrimosa cuts off abruptly after eight measures, and it was completed by Franz Sussmayr.  Containing a notable dies irae, FTP, identify this unfinished choral work by the composer of The Magic Flute.;;Mozart’s Requiem|K. 626
Literature;;The female protagonist is last seen kneeling before the tomb of Raphael at the Pantheon, where she gives a gesture of repulsion and blessing.  Three characters make an appointment to go to the Church of the Capuchins to see a painting that looks like the central antagonist, but they find the antagonist's funeral instead.  The climactic event of this novel takes place on Tarpeian Rock, where the male protagonist flings a stalker to his death.  That murderer is Donatello, who kills the stalker of Miriam, and after he is apprehended the story shifts to a relationship between Kenyon and Hilda.  FTP, name this work which takes its title from Donatello's resemblance to a Praxiteles statue, the last novel of Nathaniel Hawthorne.;;(The) Marble Faun
United States History;;In the fallout of this event, Alexander Baring claimed that "No slight to the authority of the United States was ever intended".  One of its instigators was killed by an Irish rebel name Benjamin Lett, and in the incident, only one man named Amos Durfee was killed, although initial reports indicated that dozens had died.  After a failed revolt, Rensselaer Van Rensselaer took refuge on Navy Island, leading to this event.  It was perpetrated by Col. Allan MacNab, and in retaliation, Martin Van Buren ordered the burning of the S.S. Robert Peel.  FTP, name this incident, which saw Canadian loyalists cross the US border to burn a ship supplying separatists.;;(SS) Caroline (Affair)|(the) (burning) (of) (the) Caroline
Pop Culture;;Among this character's associates are a computer named TEC-XX, for whom she runs errands and teaches about love and her name graces a beam weapon used to counteract the power of the Star Rod.  She was unofficially married to her nemesis in an attempt to fulfill the prophecies of the Dark Prognosticus and has been known to attack with frying pans and her parasol.  She has an advisor named Toadsworth, although she is primarily known for her less active role in games, usually stuck in a castle somewhere after being kidnapped by a large turtle.  FTP, name this blond, pink dress-wearing sovereign of the Mushroom Kingdom.;;(Princess) Peach (Toadstool)
Literature;;In another one section, "Bad Blood," the author laments his lack of a connection to the history of France, but ends with the narrator's going along with the "French way".  The author analyzes his own prior poetry, saying "I invented the color of the vowels!" and labeling "U" green in the section "Alchemy of the word".  The first section describes a banquet where every heart was open wide, while another section is spoken from the viewpoint of the poem's addressee and is entitled "The Foolish Virgin and the Infernal Bridegroom".  Featuring the sections "Delirium I" and "Delirium II" and written to the author’s former lover, Paul Verlaine, FTP, name this work of Arthur Rimbaud.;;A Season in Hell|Une Saison en Enfer
Religion/Mythology;;Basque mythology has it controlled by Ilazki or Illagi, while in this role the Zoroastrian divinity Mah cares for the seed of the primeval bull Gayomart. The Ainu goddess responsible for it, Chup Kamui, switched places with her brother to avoid observing so much adultery, while in some Aztec stories it was represented by a seashell carried on the back of Tecciztecatl. The Mayan hero Xbalanque is eventually transformed into this, while its Norse personification, Mani, is eaten by Hati at Ragnarok. Thoth is occasionally depicted with this sitting on his head. Also personified by Nanna and Tsukuyomi, name, FTP, this big celestial rock, which the Greeks associated with Selene and Artemis.;;(the) moon
World History;;A conflict involving it was sparked by a demand of Sir Frederick Hodgson which was refused by Kumasi, leading C.H. Armitage to beat a torture of villagers at Bare.  In 1920, a group of road builders stumbled upon it and stripped it down, and the British had to commute their death sentences to banishment.  A great festival surrounding it was established on the advice of one its civilization's two founders, Okomfo Anokye.  It is hung with bells and is said to contain the spirit of its people and the chief.  The monarch is never allowed to touch it, instead only being raised and lowered over it during ceremonies, and only the Asantahene is allowed to have direct contact.  FTP, name this legendary throne of the Ashanti people.;;Golden Stool (of) (Ashanti)
Chemistry;;They can be turned into alkynes through the Corey-Fuchs reaction, and one of these gives cinnamon its spice.  A silver mirror when Tollens' reagent is added to them, and these compounds are alternately known as either formyl or methanoyl groups.  FTP, name this organic functional group consisting of an alkyl group bonded to a carbon atom which is double-bonded to an oxygen atom and bonded hydrogen atom.;;aldehyde
World History;;This man was able to repulse a would-be assassin in Vienna by returning fire, and was reportedly the subject of hundreds of blood vendettas.  He became the governor of Mat at age sixteen, and a later political role would see him clash with Kosovar leaders such as Hasan Prishtina.  As executive, he banned mandatory veiling of women and set up a strong police force.  His attempts to regain control of his country after World War II were foiled by the spy Kim Philby and the government of Enver Hoxha.  Eventually forced into exile in America, FTP, name this flashy monarch of Albania.;;Zog (I)|(Ahmed) Zogu
Art;;His Battle of Cadore was destroyed in a massive palatial fire, and he helped usher in a new style of equestrian art with his portrait of Emperor Charles V at Mühlberg.  One of his last works was a Pieta apparently slated for use in his own tomb and many of his works feature King Charles' spaniels, one example of which is a work also featuring a cheetah-drawn chariot, Bacchus and Ariadne.  A number of men holding sticks crowd around Jesus in his Crowning with Thorns, and he is also the painter of a notable depiction of the Rape of Europa.  Another of his works features servants rummaging in a chest for some clothes to bring to the titular reclining nude.  FTP, name this Venetian artist of Venus of Urbino.;;Titian|(Tiziano) Vecelli(o)
Literature;;The protagonist of this work extols the virtue of dung to placate his mistress.  At the beginning of this work, a doctor falls in love with his patient after medically examining her part by part through a hole in a sheet.  The protagonist's life changes forever when he hides in his mother's laundry basket and spies her masturbating, causing a pajama cord to become lodged in his nose.  Characters in this work include the protagonist's sister, the Brass Monkey, and Padma, to whom the entire story is told.  This work features the rivalry between Shiva and the protagonist, who was born on August 15, 1947.  FTP, name this work about Saleem Sinai by Salman Rushdie.;;Midnight's Children
Psychology;;One of his later works discusses a title character he claims to be the first to criticize God, while one of his earlier works is ascribed to Basilides of Alexandria.  In addition to The Answer to Job and The Seven Sermons to the Dead, he wrote about his time in Africa in the autobiography Memories, Dreams, Reflections.  He broke with Freud and outlined some of his most famous ideas in Psychological Types.  He created the concept of archetypes, the anima and animus, and the terms "introvert" and "extravert".  FTP, name this Swiss psychologist who posited the collective unconscious.;;(Carl) (Gustav) Jung
Physics;;Leon Brillouin wrote an article in which he states that this "cannot operate" without at least a Boltzmann's constant-worth of entropy per observation, while Charles Bennett proved that a construct of this type would have to store and, eventually delete information, which would amount to a non-reversible process.  Leo Szilard made the most famous argument against it, which argued that its entropy would undoubtedly increase to a greater degree than it would be able to decrease entropy for the system.  FTP, name this thought experiment which, in separating molecules by speed, violates the Second Law of Thermodynamics, named for its Scottish formulator.;;Maxwell(')s Demon
Religion/Mythology;;According to tradition, this person once cleaned camel placenta off of a man who'd had it dumped on him.  The man who performed that act, Abu Jahl, also slapped her in the face in the street at one point.  She nursed the wounded after the Battle of Uhud and was involved in an inheritance dispute over the land of Fadak.  Also notably threatening to uncover her hair in defense of her husband, she was buried in secret so that her enemies, who included Umar, could not take part in her janazah.  FTP, name this only female of the Fourteen Infallibles, Ali's wife and Muhammad's favorite child.;;Fatima
United States History;;This man replaced Ezra Decoto as a district attorney after that man resigned to become a railroad commissioner, and Goodwin Knight replaced him in his most powerful executive position.  He defended the freedom of association in writing the decision for United States v. Robel, and wrote that "legislators represent people, not trees or acres" in his decision on Reynolds v. Sims.  He presided over such decisions as Gideon v. Wainwright, Miranda v. Arizona, and Brown v. Board.  FTP, name this former California Governor and Chief Justice of the Supreme Court who also chaired a commission on the JFK assassination.;;(Earl) Warren
Literature;;The children of one of the central couples are generally referred to as unruly "no-necked" hellions by the protagonist.  Dr. Baugh prescribes morphine to the central family's patriarch, who asks if his son's ankle injury was incurred while he was "chasin' some poon-tang".  One character claims to drink because of the world's "mendacity," after which he reveals that his father has cancer.  Maggie recounts the unrequited homosexual love of Skipper for Brick in this work, and Mae and Gooper scheme to get an inheritance.  FTP, name this play centering around "Big Daddy" Pollitt, a work of Tennessee Williams.;;Cat on a Hot Tin Roof
Philosophy;;This man wrote several anonymous articles criticizing Thomas Bugeaud's treatment of the Berbers, some of which are collected in an anthology of his Writings on Empire and Slavery.  He wrote A Memoir on Pauperism about his time in England and only completed one volume of his planned history, The Old Regime and the Revolution.  Another of his works cites Madison's Federalist 51 in what may been the first formulation the tyranny of the majority, and he wrote that work after accompanying Gustave de Beaumont to the United States to study the prison system.  FTP, name this French philosopher and author of Democracy in America.;;(Alexis) (de) Tocqueville
Biology;;Centroaciner cells in this body occupy the lumen of its acinus, and some people have a secondary passage that connects this body to a nearby organ known as the Duct of Santorini.  This body is generally described as having four regions: the head, neck, body, and tail.  Its main duct is alternately called Duct of Wirsung, and that duct empties into the duodenum through the ampulla of Vater.  This organ is divided into dark exocrine tissue and light endocrine tissue that contains the islets of Langerhans.  FTP, name this organ that controls insulin production.;;pancreas
Miscellaneous;;This man clerked for Judge Robert Sweet, before serving under Robert Morgenthau as chief of the labor-racketeering unit, notably taking down the Gambino family.  His lost out to Dennis Vacco in 1994, but finally was elected his state's Attorney General in 1998.  He settled a case with Warner brothers over the radio station "payola" controversy, and prosecuted NYSE chairman Dick Grasso.  He won his current position over Republican John Faso after Chuck Schumer decided not to run.  FTP, name this Democratic successor to George Pataki as Governor of New York.;;(Eliot) (Laurence) Spitzer
World History;;He composed poetry dedicated to his wife under the pseudonym Muhibbi, and he elevated a former slave to Grand Vizier.  His forces defeated the Spanish navy at Preveza, and he died on the eve of victory at Szigetvar.  This man personally strangled his only son not borne of his concubine-wife Roxelana, and his successor defeated Bayezid at Konya to take control of his empire.  His forces dominated Eastern Europe after his victory at Mohacs, but he was turned back from central Europe after losing the 1683 Siege of Vienna.  FTP, name this son of Selim the Grim, an Ottoman sultan nicknamed "the Magnificent".;;Suleiman I|Suleiman the Lawgiver|Suleyman Kanuni|Suleiman the Magnificent
Literature;;This man is refused admittance to an inn in Upton because his companion's clothes are torn.  He rescues one of his lovers from the clutches of Ensign Notherton, and among his enemies are Lady Bellaston and Harriet Fitzpatrick.  His path to his true love would have been much easier had he not angered Black George, the gamekeeper of his adopted father's estate.  He also refuses the proposal of Arabella Hunt and his tutors include Square and the evil Thwackum.  FTP, name this resident of the Allworthy estate who eventually ends up with Sophia Western, the title character of a Henry Fielding picaresque.;;Tom Jones
Religion/Mythology;;Stephen Field designed a stainless steel statue of this figure for an English town, and it is often depicted in art with a snake between its legs, with its rider is usually carrying a sword and a drinking horn.  This figure was born as the ultimate result of a bet in which one side wagered the Sun and Moon, but that bet was foiled by Svadlifari's departure during the last stage of building the walls around Asgard.  This figure can travel through the sky, across water, and even into the land of the dead, and has runes carved on its teeth.  FTP, name this offspring that Loki bore in the guise of a white mare, the eight-legged steed of Odin.;;Sleipnir
Pop Culture;;Murdered Denver Broncos cornerback Darrent Williams attended this school, as did third baseman Robin Ventura.  This school plays its home games in Boone Pickens Stadium, and notable alums include Bob Fenimore and Thurman Thomas.  Its head football coach claimed that an article criticizing Bobby Reid for liking fried chicken made by his mother was "garbage!" and exclaimed "I'm a man!  Come after me!"  FTP, name this school whose football program is coached by Mike Gundy, whose nickname is the Cowboys and whose in-state rivals are the Sooners.;;Oklahoma State (University) (Cowboys)|OSU
World History;;He participated in the Peninsular War, serving in both the Battles of Bailen and Albuera.  After defeating Jose Rondeau at Cepeda he tried to resign his army commission, but was rejected.  He later landed at Ancon in order to meet Viceroy Serna, which eventually led to his occupying Lima.  He saw his first combat at the Battle of San Lorenzo, and teamed up with Bernardo O'Higgins to liberate Chile at the battle of Chacabuco.  Famously retiring to become a farmer after the Guayaquil Conference, FTP, name this Protector and first President of Peru.;;(José) (Francisco) (de) San Martín (Matorras)|(Jose) (Francisco) (de) San Martin (Matorras)
Astronomy;;It was the target of Project Daedalus, which suggested the possibility of using fusion technology to send an unmanned probe.  A flare double this star's normal surface temperature was detected in July 1998,  and Peter van de Kamp claimed that a perturbation of this star's motion implied that it was being orbited by two Jupiter-sized planets, an assertion which was later disproved.  This star is a red dwarf invisible without a telescope, located in Ophiuchus.  FTP, name this fourth closest star, next to those of the Alpha Centauri system, to the Solar System which has the largest proper motion of any known star.;;Barnard('s) (Star)
Music;;One of this piece's themes was incorporated into the disastrous opera-ballet Mlada, and another revision appears in the unfinished opera Sorochintsi Fair.  This piece was initially intended as incidental music for the Georgy Mengden play Ved'ma, and the original was based on a Nikolai Gogol short story and was allegedly completed on St. John's Day.   This composition depicts the fury of the celebration of a Witch's Sabbath before the eventual calm of the break of dawn.  FTP, name this composition orchestrated by Rimsky-Korsakov and originally composed by Modest Mussorgsky.;;(A) Night on Bald Mountain|(St.) (John's) Night on (the) Bare Mountain|(Ivanova) Noch na lisoy gore
Geography;;Its south face has only been ascended once, in 1986, and one of the more difficult routes up this peak is called the "Magic Line".  This mountain is the tallest near the glacial convergence area known as Concordia.  One of its more hazardous ascents, its North Face, involves crossing the Shaksgam River, but the most commonly climbed route contains such obstacles as the "Bottleneck" couloir, the "Black Pyramid," and "House's Chimney," and is known as the Abruzzi Spur.  This mountain's alternate name comes from the head of a survey team, Henry Godwin-Austen.  Located in the Karakoram Range between India and Pakistan, FTP, name this second-highest mountain on Earth.;;K2|Qogir|Chogori|Lamba Pahar|Dapsang|Kechu|Ketu
Pop Culture;;Rolling Stone's review said that several of its tracks were reminiscent of Pat Benatar and ABBA, and its British version features two bonus tracks which were singles on the artist's prior album.  The second single from this album was originally written for Pink, while its title track gained exposure through its use in Princess Diaries 2.  It won its artist a 2006 Grammy for Best Pop Vocal Album and featured singles like "Walk Away," "Because of You," and "Behind These Hazel Eyes". FTP, name this album whose title track claims that the singer will "make a wish / take a chance / make a change" before engaging in the title activity, the second release of Kelly Clarkson.;;Breakaway
Noncomputational Math;;They are generally believed to have first appeared in a work called The Art of Prosody written by a Sanskrit author named Pingala and later appear in Jainist texts.  Zeckendorf's Theorem states all positive integers can be written as the sum of two nonconsecutive ones, and every other term in this is the largest term in a Pythagorean triple.  Its terms also occur in some of the diagonals in Pascal's Triangle, and Kepler found a specific case in which a series of them has a limit of the Golden Ratio.  FTP, name these constituents of the series beginning 0, 1, 1, 2.;;Fibonacci (numbers)
Literature;;Her aunt was the subject of the companion piece to Blue Boy, Thomas Lawrence's Pinkie, and the life of her cocker spaniel was the subject of Virginia Woolf's Flush.  She translated Prometheus Bound and one of her first major ventures was an epic about the Battle of Marathon.  An advocate of the antislavery cause, as evidenced by her work The Runaway Slave at Pilgrim's Point, she also supported Italian independence in Casa Guidi Windows, while a collection of her poems contains a notable Sonnet 43.  FTP, name this author of Sonnets from the Portuguese, a Victorian poet whose husband Robert wrote poems too.;;E(lizabeth) (Barrett) Browning;;Browning
Biology;;This pathway is inhibited by a deficiency that causes a precursor molecule to be lacking, known as Tauri's Disease, which is a deficiency of the Phosphofructokinase enzyme.  A reverse of this reaction is used by bacteria to synthesize carbon compounds from CO2 and water.  Its third step sees cis Aconitate attacked by Aconitase and hydrated to release water.  Its ninth step sees an addition reaction between Fumarate and the Fumarase enzyme.  During its first turn, it produces one GTP, three NADH, one FADH2, and two CO2.  FTP, name this pathway, occurring directly before the electron transport chain in cellular respiration, also known as the Citric Acid Cycle.;;Krebs (cycle)|Szent-Györgyi-Krebs (cycle)|tricarboxylic acid (cycle)|TCA (cycle)
Music;;One of these works by John Adams has a movement titled "Body through which the dream flows".  Max Bruch's first in G-minor has an Allegro moderato Vorspiel, while Edouard Lalo's Symphonie Espagnole is sometimes regarded as a five-movement example of this type of composition.  Mozart's third in G-major was dubbed the Strassburg, and his fifth in A-major is the Turkish.  Niccolo Paganini wrote six, including his second in B-minor, La Campanella. Alban Berg's has an atypical fourth movement and is dedicated "to the memory of an angel," while Antonio Vivaldi's L'Estro Armonica and The Four Seasons are examples of this type of composition.  FTP, name these typically three-movement pieces for a stringed instrument and orchestra.;;violin concerto(s)|violin concerti
Pop Culture;;During a brief maintenance downtime in June 2006, a derivation of this phrase appeared on the front page of YouTube. Jeffrey Ray Roberts' dance track "Invasion of the Gabber Robots" features a memorable voiceover consisting of this phrase, and it is the focus of another dance track by the Laziest Men on Mars. It appears in a secret event in the 1996 Squaresoft game Radical Dreamers, and when entered as a cheat code in Warcraft 3, it enables god mode. First appearing in a game in which the player controls a starfighter known as a "ZIG," FTP, give this phrase originally spoken by CATS, a widely known example of Engrish originating from the video game Zero Wing.;;all your base are belong to us
Literature;;The protagonist of this work notes "ominously beautiful" sunsets.  The third section of this work is named after a drug that prevents against the excessive fear of death, Dylar, which one character has been procuring by boning Willie Mink.  Murray Jay Siskind is an Elvis Presley specialist in this work, and the protagonist is a professor of Adolph Hitler studies.  The protagonist worries about a "nebulous mass" that he develops in his lungs, after the central location of Blacksmith is subject to a train derailment that unleashes a noxious cloud.  FTP, name this work which describes an "Airborne Toxic Event," a novel by Don DeLillo.;;White Noise
World History;;On Monday, Japan canceled a multimillion-yen grant to this nation in protest of the death of Kenji Nagai, a photographer who was killed by this country's troops.  Canada recently granted honorary citizenship to a democracy advocate from this country, Aung Sang Suu Kyi.  Over 3,000 people were arrested in this country in pro-democracy rallies this week.  In September, the government of this country arrested thousands of monks and students.  FTP, name this southeast Asian nation governed by a military junta known as SLORC, with current capital at Naypyidaw and a large former capital at Rangoon.;;(Union) (of) Myanmar|(Union) (of) Burma
World History;;The leadup to this war saw Jose Saraiva demand payment from Atanasio Aguirre for damages in border conflicts.  Francisco Barroso lost only one steamer in the climactic naval battle during this conflict, at Riachuelo.  Initial successes for the aggressors at Mato Grosso and the Corrientes province were followed by defeat.   At the hands of Bartolomé Mitre at Tuyutí, and many estimates indicate nearly half of aggressor president Francisco Solano Lopez's countrymen died during this war. FTP, name this war, which took its name from the combined forces of Brazil, Argentina, and Uruguay, who fought against the invading Paraguayans.;;(War) (of) (the) Triple Alliance
Religion/Mythology;;It is thought that part of an inscription found in the Negau helmets refers to this character. In the Lokasenna, Loki taunts him with cuckoldry, while during a visit the Aesir pay to the sea king Aegir, this character accompanies Thor to retrieve Aegir's brewing kettle. That story, told in the Hymiskvida, unusually labels this god the son of Hymir. He notably cared for a creature whose name means "marsh-dweller;" that creature would later be responsible for this god's receiving the Ulflithr. The rune associated with this god resembles an upward-pointing arrow, and according to Snorri Sturluson, he is fated to battle the guard dog of Hel at Ragnarok.  FTP, name this Norse god of combat and glory who famously sacrificed a hand to allow the chaining-up of Fenrir.;;Tyr|Tiw|Tiwaz|Ziu
Pop Culture;;Professional wrestlers Ron Simmons and Lex Luger were once employed by members of this organization. This entity was founded in 1982 by David Dixon, though neither he nor Chet Simmons or Harry Usher, its commissioners, could keep it in operation. In 1986, it filed a lawsuit against its most prominent competitor; witnesses named in that suit included Howard Cosell and Al Davis. This organization was awarded only $1, tripled to $3 under antitrust laws, despite the jury's agreement that the NFL was an illegal monopoly. FTP, name this organization, which featured stars Herschel Walker, Doug Flutie, and Steve Young playing for colorfully named franchises, including the San Antonio Gunslingers, Houston Gamblers, and Memphis Showboats.;;U(nited) S(tates) F(ootball) L(eague)
World History;;Legendarily, the angel Fe-ku-len gave birth to the founder of the Aisin Gioro, the clan itself that founded this dynasty. It received, and was unimpressed by, the Macartney Embassy, but sixty years later it would be forced to sign the humiliating Treaties of Tianjin. Its anthem, Gong Jin'ou, would unfortunately be penned only six days before the Wuchang Uprising destabilized the country, leading to the Xinhai Revolution. Feng Guozhang and Yuan Shikai led the armies of this dynasty against the revolutionaries, but this dynasty fell when forces under Sun Yat-Sen established a provisional government. FTP, name this Chinese dynasty, originally founded by Nurhachi, that ended in 1911 with the abdication of Emperor Pu-yi.;;Qing (Dynasty)|Manchu (Dynasty)
Literature;;One character tells another a long joke about a tailor that made another laugh when they were at Lake Como years before.  The weather is described as "light black from pole to pole" and one character looks forward to seeing a three-legged dog toy.  Another character in this work tells a long story about being the lord of a large estate, prompting his father to admit to neglecting him.  Hamm is blind and crippled on a makeshift wheelchair in this work, while Nell and Nagg lost their legs in a tandem bicycle accident and are confined to trash cans.  FTP, name this play in which only Clov can move, an absurdist work that takes place in a lighthouse by Samuel Beckett.;;Endgame|Fin de Partie
Art;;A neatly set table on which sit a bottle of wine and a crepe with an open eye in the middle is the focus of one of this man's works, while a white hand rests upon a red bird on another table in the lower left of another one. A third work features three heads on a back windowsill observing a man examining a phonograph. In addition to The Portrait, The Difficult Crossing, and The Menaced Assassin, this man produced a series of paintings of women with veiled faces, thought to be inspired by his mother's suicide. His Mysteries of the Horizon, Golconda, and The Son of Man all feature men wearing bowler hats. FTP, name this Belgian surrealist, also the artist of The Treachery of Images and Time Transfixed.;;(René) (François) (Ghislain) Magritte
Chemistry;;Vedejs and Marth used NMR spectroscopy to follow the intermediates of this reaction and concluded that cycloaddition to directly form oxaphosphatanes was a possible mechanism for it.  Phenyllithium and a hydrochloric acid can be used to avoid the traditional "erythro" intermediate in this reaction, which typically yields a product in the "Z" conformation; instead, a threo betaine intermediate is formed, leading to a product in the "E" conformation, in a process known as the Schlosser Modification to this reaction.  Phosphonium ylide is often called this type of reagent, and in this reaction it is added to a ketone or aldehyde.  FTP, name this reaction that yields an alkene and a triphenylphosphide oxide.;;Wittig (reaction)
Literature;;One character in this work is horrified to learn that the hide of her dead dog Barrabus has been turned into a wedding-present rug.  A character named Transito Soto frees another from jail in this work, and a French count named Jean de Satigny marries into this work's central family, but his wife leaves him when she learns of his affairs.  A character who loses three fingers becomes a socialist activist and singer in this work, and a coup-leading military tortures and executes Jaime.  Other characters in this work include Blanca and Alba as well as the central family's patriarch, Esteban.  FTP, name this work that features the green-haired prophetess Clara and centers on the Trueba family, a work of Isabel Allende.;;La casa de los espiritus|(The) House of the Spirits
Earth Science;;Colhué Huapi is one of these bodies in Argentina that was created by eolic forces.  Ones found along the coast of the Black Sea are known as Limans, while in Britain, broad ones are known as meres.  Meromictic ones do not have intermixing between layers, while endoheic or terminal ones are not depleted through diffusion.  Ones that form in cirques are known as tarns.  Ones that are formed from meanders of a river that are cut off from the main body are called Oxbow ones, while ones that form in calderas such the deepest one in the United States are known as Crater ones.  FTP, name these bodies exemplified by Ladoga and Superior.;;lake(s)
United States History;;Along with his successor as Secretary of State, he authored the Hulsemann Letter to justify Americans observing revolutionary activity in Hungary.  This man's son Fletcher announced William Henry Harrison's death to John Tyler, and died at Second Bull Run as a Union colonel in the Civil War.  This man claimed that the government was "made for the people, made by the people, and answerable to the people," in a debate over tariffs with Robert Hayne.  He defended an institution claiming that though it was small, "yet there are those who love it," referencing the precedent set in Fletcher v. Peck, in Dartmouth College v. Woodward, and he signed a treaty delineating the Canadian boundary with Lord Ashburton.  FTP, name this senator from Massachusetts.;;(Daniel) Webster
Philosophy;;Dodsley's "Collection of Poems" contained a work by this man called "The Lawyer's Farewell to his Muse".  The first section of Mary Beard's Women as a Force in History details how this man's work applies to the position of women in his country.  His most notable work is broken down into four sections: The Rights of Persons, The Rights of Things, Of Private Wrongs, and Of Public Wrongs, and his namesake formulation states that "It is better that ten guilty persons escape than one innocent suffer".  He defended what would later be known as the "Bloody Code" and posited "That the king can do no wrong, is a necessary and fundamental principle of the English constitution".  FTP, name this political theorist of The Commentaries on the Laws of England.;;(Sir) (William) Blackstone
Literature;;One character has a hedonistic affair with a man named Avahanni who made love "sweet and natural" to her.  Abner Small attempts to win a bet by entering a house in this work in which "Shenandoah" is often whistled by Seth Beckwith.  In this work, members of the central family are described as having a mask-like appearance to their face.  Lavinia and Orin are siblings in this work, Christine killed Ezra when he came back from the Civil War, and its three sections are "Homecoming," "The Hunted," and "The Haunted".  FTP, name this play featuring the Mannon family, an interpretation of the Oresteia by Eugene O'Neill.;;Mourning Becomes Electra
Geography;;The highest point in this nation is shared with its western neighbor, and its namesake strict nature reserve is a World Heritage Site.  In addition to Mount Nimba, this country's three principle rivers are all south-flowing, including the Komoe, the Bandama, which contains the gigantic Lac de Kossou, and the Sassandra, which contains Lake Buyo. The Gulf of Guinea is to its south, while this country shares a western border with Liberia and Guinea, a northern border with Mali and Burkina Faso, and a southern border with Ghana.  FTP, name this West African nation whose major cities include the port city of Abidjan and capital Yamoussoukro.;;Cote d'Ivoire|Ivory Coast
Philosophy;;He responded to J.B.S. Haldane's essay Daedalus with the essay Icarus, which warned against the rash application of science.  He contrasted "knowledge by acquaintance" and "knowledge by description," and he gave a series of lectures detailing "The Philosophy of Logical Atomism".  He discussed the "present King of France" being bald in outlining his Theory of Definite Descriptions, which piggybacked on the work of Gottlob Frege, and he invented type theory after he found out that Frege's naïve set theory violated his namesake paradox, which deals with sets that can illogically contain sets that are not members of themselves.  FTP, name this philosopher and mathematician who collaborated with Whitehead on the Principia Mathematica.;;(Bertrand) (Arthur) (William) Russell|3rd Earl Russell
Literature;;This character attended Huis Norenius school as a child, and he is robbed of his money by a soldier on a train.  His efforts to secure travel permits are constantly delayed, so he travels without them, but his mother dies at Stellenbosch and he scatters he ashes at Visagies farm.  His sole possession is a pouch of pumpkin seeds, and Captain Oosthuizen arrests him after this man escapes from Jakkelsdrif.  At the novel's end, he is taken to a "retraining camp" in Cape Town, and this character's dropsical mother's name is Anna K.  FTP, name this hare-lipped gardener whose "Life & Times" are the subject of a J.M. Coetzee work.;;Michael (K)|Life & Times of Michael K
Physics;;This effect was famously tested at NIST by Wayne Itano et al. in an experiment in which laser-cooled Beryllium ions were exposed to radio waves which would have been enough to excite them, but for a series of ultraviolet pulses that delayed the transition. It was formulated by Midra and Sudarshan in order to test the collapse of the wave function. FTP, name this effect, whereupon a transition in a particle is delayed by continuously observing that particle, a phenomenon named for a Greek proposer of many paradoxes.;;Quantum Zeno Effect|Quantum Zeno Paradox|(the) Watched Pot Effect
Literature;;In one of this author's short stories, Elisa Allen teaches the Man in a Wagon how to grow flowers, but he discards her carefully prepared plants to keep the pot.  In addition to Chrysanthemums, another of his short stories details the evasion from a posse of Pepe Torres, Flight.  Jim Nolan is shot at the end of his novel about a man named Mac who leads striking fruit pickers, In Dubious Battle, while George Milton talks of owning a rabbit farm before shooting Lennie Small in another of this man's works.  FTP, name this author of Of Mice and Men who chronicled the Joad family's trek to California in The Grapes of Wrath.;;(John) Steinbeck
Pop Culture;;This player was taken out of El Segundo high school a pick before Mike Schmidt in the 1971 MLB draft.  Before Curtis Granderson accomplished the feat in 2007, this player was the last to rack up 20+ doubles, triples, and homers in a season.  He's the only player to win batting titles in three decades, and he credited much of his success to hitting coach Charley Lau.  In 1980, he won the AL MVP, led his team to a World Series loss to the Phillies, and batted .390.  He had to be restrained from punching umpire Tim McClelland after a homer he hit off of Goose Gossage was called back due to excessive pine tar.  FTP, name this Kansas City Royals third baseman.;;(George) (Howard) Brett
Art;;Two blue-bonneted ladies in billowing yellow dresses sit next to two children at play amidst a crowd of top-hatted gentlemen in a painting by this man that inspired a William Glackens work. In addition to Music in the Tuileries, he depicted a trapeze artist's green shoes in the upper left of a painting that also shows a mustached man in a top hat conversing with a brown-haired woman.  A black servant brings flowers to a reclining nude in one of his works, while a scantily clad woman in a stream is depicted behind two dandies and a nude woman picnicking in another.  FTP, name this Impressionist painter of A Bar at the Foiles-Bergere, Olympia, and Luncheon on the Grass.;;(Edouard) Manet
Earth Science;;Herbert Louis and Julius Budel classified these entities into Kerb, Sohlenkerb, Kehl, and Fachmulden types.  Paternoster lakes are found in these geographic features, and their bottoms can be horizontal or terraced.  When two cirques or two of these features form adjacent to each other, an arête is formed, and Bridalveil Falls in Yosemite National Park is an example of the hanging type.  The * Mississippi embayment is an example of the rift type.  Ice masses generally form U-shaped ones, while flowing water cuts V-shaped ones.  FTP, name these landmarks that can be carved out by rivers or glaciers.;;valley(s)
Religion/Mythology;;This book dedicates 11 lines to explaining why "two are better than one" and suggests that men should "remember the days of darkness, for there are many".  It notes that "the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong," and claims that "The heart of the foolish is in the house of mirth" in its seventh chapter.  The speaker claims that "There is no new thing under the sun" and "vanity of vanities; all is vanity".  FTP, name this book of the Bible that claims "To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under heaven".;;(The) (Book) (of) Ecclesiastes|Qoheleth
Literature;;In one of this author's short stories, James Nolan arranged the traitorous Fergus Kilpatrick's assassination. In addition to "The Theme of the Traitor and the Hero," he wrote a work centering on Baltasar, who heals a lamb before he is crucified by the three Gutres.  That story, "The Gospel According to Mark," appeared in this man's collection Doctor Brodie's Report.  Another collection by this man contains a story in which a group of idealists led by Herbert Ashe attempt to imagine a world into existence, as well as a namesake story in which German spy Yu Tsun kills a sinologist.  FTP, name this author of Tlon, Uqbar, Orbis Tertius, The Garden of Forking Paths, and other Ficciones.;;(Jorge) (Luis) Borges
Chemistry;;In 1838, Claude Pouillet used this to set the lower bound for the surface temperature of the sun at 1800 degrees Celsius.  This law assumed that Maxwell-Boltzmann statistics and the equipartition of energy apply at all temperatures.  The Debye model replaces this law at lower temperatures, and this measure sets the dimensionless heat capacity at three.  Simply stated, this law finds a measure in joules per Kelvin per kilogram by taking three times the gas constant over the molar mass of the material.  FTP, name this law that gives the specific heat capacity of a crystal due to lattice vibrations, named after two Frenchmen.;;Dulong-Petit (law)
United States History;;Historian Mark Neely criticized this government's civil liberties regime, particularly its passports mandated for internal travel.  Its first leader laid out the basis of this entity's government in the so-called "Cornerstone Speech," and its congress passed the pro-pirating Bounty Laws.  McNeill's and Mosby's Rangers were the only paramilitary units formed as a result of its Partisan Ranger Act.  The Supreme Court case Texas v. White ruled that this entity's founding was illegal, and Judah Benjamin served as its first Attorney General.  FTP, name this nation headed up by Jefferson Davis, the pro-slavery counterpart of the United States during the Civil War.;;(The) Confederate States (of) (America)|CSA
World History;;This man was quoted as saying that some rape victims look like they are saying "do it to me," which causes male "black panthers" to attack them.  His father served as Prime Minister in the late 1970s, introducing primary elections and caving to the demands of terrorists who had hijacked Flight 472.  This man was the longest-serving Chief Cabinet Secretary in his country's history, serving under such LDP Prime Ministers as Mori and Koizumi.  FTP, name this man who ascended to office on September 26, replacing Shinzo Abe as the current Prime Minister of Japan.;;(Yasuo) Fukuda
Literature;;A subplot in this work sees one character disguise himself as Tom O' Bedlam in order to avoid the scheming of his half-brother.  Another character claims that "truth's a dog must to kennel" and constantly addresses the title character as "nuncle".  One figure who claims "As flies are to wanton boys, we are to the gods— / They kill us for their sport" disguises himself as Caius in this work, while another is told to "Smell his way to Dover" after the Duke of Cornwall plucks out his eyes.  FTP, name this play which features Edgar, Edmund, the Earl of Kent, and the title figure's three daughters Regan, Goneril, and Cordelia, a work of William Shakespeare.;;(The) (Tragedy) (of) King Lear
Chemistry;;Louis Hammett did work with "super" ones, and developed a namesake function for measuring them, and George Olah won a Nobel prize for his work with a "magic" one.  Liebig believed that these substances always contained hydrogen that could be replaced by a metal, and weak ones have a namesake dissociation constant.  Arrhenius defined them as substances that increase hydronium ion concentration, while Bronsted and Lowry claimed that they were proton donors.  FTP, name these low-pH substances contrasted with bases.;;acid(s)
World History;;This man fought as the head of the Uruguayan navy in the Guerra Grande, opposing Manuel Oribe, and he won victories at Cerro and Sant'Antonio.  He was exiled from his home country after a failed Carbonari insurrection, and upon his return he battled Louis Napoleon and was exiled again.  In his most successful campaign, he won the battle of Volturno against the Neapolitans before Cavour's Piedmontese army prevented him from marching on Rome.  FTP, name this leader of the red shirts whose military victories helped unite Italy.;;(Guiseppi) Garibaldi
Religion/Mythology;;This figure is associated with the muses because he created their fountain Hippocrene on Mount Helicon.  Late in life, he aided Eos in bringing in the dawn and brought Zeus his thunderbolts.  His offspring by Euippe include Celeris and Melanippe, and a single feather fell to the ground at Tarsus when he was made a constellation.  Along with his brother Chrysaor, he was born of Medusa and Poseidon, and he was stung by a gadfly before he could reach the top of Mount Olympus.  FTP, name this creature tamed by a golden bridle and rode by Bellerophon, a winged horse.;;Pegasus
Literature;;He described one of his first works as "falling down an elevator shaft and landing in a pool of mermaids". That work was published in Scanlan's Monthly, and was later republished in his collection The Great Shark Hunt.  He ran for political office on the "Freak Power" ticket with a platform of renaming Aspen "Fat City".  His article The Kentucky Derby is Decadent and Depraved inspired Bill Cardoso to coin the label for his genre.  Another of his works stemmed from an assignment to write a 250-word caption for a photographic article of a motorcycle race.  FTP, name this writer of Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas, a "Gonzo" journalist.;;(Hunter) (Stockton) Thompson
Literature;;In a poem reminiscent of a Longfellow work, he wrote of a "smithy's" "unpredictable fantail of sparks" in "The Forge".  He details his reaction to his young brother dying in "Mid-Term Break," while he describes a pilgrimage to Lough Derg in Station Island.  One of his poems contrasts a "squat pen" resting in his hands with the "spade sink[ing] into gravelly ground," and another of his poems contrasts Miss Walls's classroom explanation of animal mating with collecting frogspawn near a flax dam.  FTP, name this author of "Digging," Death of a Naturalist, and a recent translation of Beowulf, an Irish poet.;;(Seamus) Heaney
Biology;;Edible members of this phylum include the pineapple roller, and the terms "oral" and "aboral" are used in lieu of traditional anterior and posterior nomenclature with these organisms.  First arising in the Cambrian Explosion, Helicoplacus is generally regarded as the first member of this phylum to have evolved.  The genus Xyloplax is encompassed by this phylum's Pelmatazoa subdivision, while the Eleutherozoa subdivision contains class Holothuroidea.  Other classes in this phylum include Ophiuroidea and Asteroidea.  FTP, name this taxonomic phylum that contains sea cucumbers, sea urchins, and starfish.;;echinoderm(ata)|echinoderms
United States History;;He served as the first U.S. Minister to Sweden and he forwarded the Hutchinson Letters to friends with instructions not to publish them, which were disregarded.  Several of his satirical pamphlets, including Rules By Which a Great Empire May Be Reduced to a Small One and An Edict by the King of Prussia, supported the American Revolution.  An alter-ego of this man was fond of poking fun at hoop petticoats and Harvard, Silence Dogood, and he depicted the colonies as a segmented snake with the caption "Join, or die".  FTP, name this American founding father who also invented bifocals and experimented with electricity.;;(Benjamin) Franklin
Economics;;He wrote a three-part work of essays containing histories of astronomy, ancient physics, and ancient logics and metaphysics.  August Oncken noted a contradiction in this man's two major works that he dubbed this man's namesake "problem".  His first major work was an extension of his mentor Francis Hutcheson's philosophy and broke moral systems down into nature and motive categories.  In addition to The Theory of Moral Sentiments, he wrote a work that used an example of a pin factory to underscore the importance of the division of labor and posited a force by which self-interest benefitted the general good, the "invisible hand".  FTP, name this author of The Wealth of Nations.;;(Adam) Smith
World History;;An important naval battle in this conflict was won by Admiral George Rooke over Manuel de Velasco, Vigo Bay.  In the leadup to this war, the First Partition Treaty supported Joseph Ferdinand's position, but he died of smallpox and the Second Partition Treaty was signed.  This war's bloodiest battle was a clash between Marshal Villars and Eugene of Savoy at Malplaquet, and the Duke of Marlborough led the victory at Blenheim.  FTP, name this war ended by the Treaty of Utrecht, that installed Philip V on the throne of an Iberian nation.;;(War) (of) (the) Spanish Succession
Music;;One of this man's symphonies contains a 6:8 Andante con moto second movement in E-flat, and its third movement contains a Trio in G Minor.  In addition to his Fifth Symphony in B-flat major, this man composed 34 sentimental and 12 Noble Waltzes.  His lyric songs include one that ends "in his arms the child was dead," a setting of Der Erlkonig, as well as another that uses sixteenth notes to represent a foot treadle, Gretchen at the Spinning Wheel.  FTP, name this Austrian composer of the "Tragic" symphony, whose eighth symphony in G-minor is known as his "Unfinished".;;(Franz) (Peter) Schubert
World History;;Anne Curry argued that the victorious troops at this battle weren't as outnumbered as traditionally thought in her "New History" of this battle.  Edward of Norwich and the Earl of Suffolk died at this battle, which saw the innovative use of palings.  Humphrey, Duke of Gloucester was wounded in this battle, and his brother fought over him until he could be rescued.  Constable Charles d'Albrecht led one side in this battle before he was killed by an arrow.  This battle was fought in muddy conditions, leading the French knights to sink in, and the British were commanded by King Henry V.  FTP, name this 1415 British victory in the Hundred Years' War.;;(the) (Battle) (of) Agincourt
Astronomy;;A star known as Gliese 710 might pass through this area sometime in the next 10 million years.  An object called 2000 CR-105 is believed to be located in this area, and was discovered in 2000 at the Lowell Observatory.  Another object believed to be in this area is a planetoid called Sedna.  One theory holds that objects escape this area when a star named Nemesis, a brown dwarf that orbits the sun, passes through it.  This area is theorized to extend nearly a quarter of the way to Alpha Centauri, and Ernst Opik's name is often appended to its name.  FTP, name this region believed to be the source of long-period comets.;;(the) (Opik-)Oort Cloud
Literature;;Octavio Paz translated a number of them into Spanish, publishing them as "Sendas de Oku".  Regina Weinreich compiled a book of them by Jack Kerouac, and Richard Wright wrote a collection of them subtitled "This other world".  Franny and Zooey contains one about a snail that climbed "slowly, slowly!" by Issa.  Buson was a noted writer in this form, and works in this form include one about a whore and monk sleeping in the moonlight and another about a frog jumping into the old pond.  FTP, name this 17-syllable poetic form popularized by Matsuo Basho.;;haiku(s)
Literature;;This man’s childhood friend goes into a trance and drums the earth "as if fornicating with her," and the author claims that this character literally became the cross after killing his uncle Pedro.  He clings to reality by listening to a tape that his secretary Padilla plays, and contrasts himself with the idealistic Gonzalo, who refused to betray the revolution.  His daughter Teresa hates him, and his son Lorenzo died in the Spanish Civil War.  He married Catalina in a scheme to acquire the Bernal family lands, and he eventually ruined many competitors and bribed his way into political office to build his business empire.  FTP, name this character who relates a series of flashbacks on his deathbed, the title tycoon of a novel by Carlos Fuentes.;;Artemio (Cruz)|(Artemio) Cruz
Economics;;A 1950 article by H. Leibenstein discussed the effect that leads to these entities, creating a curve for them known as "RT".  C. Wright Mills posited the "Counter" effect to the one that causes these entities, and quotes John Brooks as saying this counter-effect arises from a desire not to embarrass others.  These entities arise from an interaction effect similar to the bandwagon and snob effects, and Higgins and Rubin suggest that the demand for these goods could go down with widespread counterfeiting, such as with Rolex watches.  FTP, name these goods such as luxury cars and champagne whose demand increases as price increase because of status-seeking, named after the economist who posited "conspicuous consumption".;;Veblen (goods)|Veblen effect
Pop Culture;;This team's minor league affiliates include the Boise Hawks and Tennessee Smokies, and its top prospects include Donald Veal and Tyler Colvin.  In its early years, this team was led by "Three-Finger" Brown and the double-play combo of Tinker, Evers, and Chance.  This team's 2007 playoff run was sparked by the callup of a catcher who batted .389 in 54 at bats, Geovany Soto, and after George Sianas got kicked out of their home game in the 1945 World Series, he placed the Curse of the Billy Goat upon this club.  FTP, name this team that currently features stars like Aramis Ramirez and Carlos Zambrano and plays their home games in Wrigley Field.;;(Chicago) Cubs
Biology;;Their properties are catalogued in a database known as BRENDA.  Relaxation and progressive curve experiments are two ways to conduct an assay of these molecules, and Aspirin works by reducing the functionality the COX-1 and COX-2 types of them.  "Apo" ones require cofactors but are not bound to them, while allosteric ones change in shape after undergoing their main function.  Important terms in an equation of their kinetics include the speed V and the substrate concentration S.  In addition to the Michaelis-Menten model, Emil Fischer posited the "lock and key" model for their function.  FTP, name these proteins that catalyze chemical reactions.;;enzyme(s)
World History;;Portuguese clergyman Rodolpho Aquaviva gave this man a Plantin Bible and Christian paintings by Flemish Masters.  This man' "nine jewels" included the poet Faizi, singer Mian Tansen, and the witty Birbal, and his chief advisor Abul-Fazel authored this emperor's namesake "nama," a history of his reign.  This ruler created the Din-i-Ilahi or "divine faith," a thinly veiled personality cult for himself, and he repealed the jizya tax against non-Muslims.  His greatest military conquests came against the Hindu leader Hemu and descendents of his father's adversary Sher Shah Suri.  FTP, name this son of Humayun, the victor at the Second Battle of Panipot known as the "Great".;;Akbar (Great)|(Jalaluddin) (Muhammad) Akbar|Akbar(-e-Azam)
Literature;;In a five-act play by this author, Ben Telfair abandons his psychology studies at a university to become an apprentice in the family business. His second novel tells of a baby abandoned in the forest by Culla without the knowledge of his sister Rinthy. In addition to The Stonemason and Outer Dark, this author told the story of Lester Ballard in Child of God and John Wesley Rattner in his first novel The Orchard Keeper. But he’s better known for the story of John Grady Cole and a series of works including Cities of the Plain and The Crossing. FTP, name this American author of Blood Meridian and All the Pretty Horses.;;(Cormac) McCarthy
Art;;Picasso depicted this figure with a grey body and overlarge legs sitting on a distorted man's lap in his work Musketeer and this figure.  Caravaggio used typical chiaroscuro technique to depict this character with an oversized belly button, sleeping.  In one work featuring this character, he is lounging on a yellowish orangeblanket surrounded by three women, one of whom holds his possession above his head.  In another work featuring him, he holds a bunch of flowers by his left ear while strolling towards a two women kissing while one fondles the others' breast in a painting alternately titled the "Allegory of Lust".  This figure was "a captive" in a Rococo work by Francois Boucher, and he rounded out a gang of four with Venus, Folly, and Time in a Bronzino painting.  FTP, name this figure that Canova sculpted with his lover, Psyche.;;Cupid
Literature;;In this work, one character’s son is described as an "unfeather'd two Leg'd thing…Got, while his soul did huddled notions try; And born a shapeless lump, like anarchy". A final portion notes that "peals of thunder shook the firmament" and "henceforth a series of new time began". We hear of one character’s exile to Gath and another who is "so various, that he seem’d to be not one, but all Mankinds Epitome," the inconstant servant Zimri. Part two features Og and Doeg, who represent Elkanah Settle and Thomas Shadwell, and was likely largely written by Nahum Tate. FTP, name this work which features a virtuous David representing Charles II, an allegorical poem by John Dryden named for two Biblical characters.;;Absalom and Achitophel(:) (A) (Poem)
Religion/Mythology;;Both this character's father Everes and his daughter Manto are the namesakes of butterfly genuses; Roman myth credits Manto as being the mother of the founder of Mantua. His mother, the nymph Chariclo, was also the mother of four children by the centaur Cheiron. One story about this character has Chariclo urging Athena to undo a curse she laid on this character; as she is unable to, she instead gives him the gift of augury. Another story claims that he interrupted a pair of mating snakes and was turned into a woman. Due to that experience he later revealed the secret that women derive ten times as much pleasure from sex as men, winning a bet for Zeus. FTP, name this blind seer who lived seven lives in service of Thebes.;;Tiresias|Teiresias
Philosophy;;Janet Coleman argued that this man was trapped between the via antiqua and the via moderna.  Some of his philosophy spilled over into a play that features Callimaco trying to bed Lucrezia, while his adviser Ligurio spouts this man's own views, The Mandrake.  He wrote a three-part tract on the ideal government, and he laid out the internal structure, military matters, and individual leadership in a republican monarchy in his Discourses on Livy.  His most important work contrasts parsimony and generosity, cruelty and mercy, and says that rulers should avoid flatters.  FTP, name this political theorist of The Prince.;;(Niccolo) Machiavelli
Physics;;The Wu-Yang variety of one of these particles is consistent with the Yang-Mills field tensor. The 't Hooft one of these was conceived because it would not be singular, and newer devices to detect these are described as spin exchange relaxation-free. More famous devices built to  detect these are superconducting quantum interference devices, or SQuIDs, and Dirac showed that charge quantization follows from that of angular momentum and the existence of one of these. FTP, name this hypothetical particle, the magnetic analogue of electric point charges.;;(magnetic) monopole(s)
Literature;;One work by this author tells the story of the title sculptor's relationship with the castrato Zambinella. His novel about the Flemish Claes family was alternately titled Balthazar: Or, Science and Love, while masters Frenhofer and Porbus meet with a young Nicholas Poussin in "The Unknown Masterpiece". Raphael de Valentin discovers the Sanskrit-engraved title object in a crap shop in his The Wild Ass's Skin, which also features the young gambler Rastignac. The dandy Charles marries the title heiress in his Eugenie Grandet, and his better known protagonists include a boarder at the Maison Vauquer and a relative of the Baroness Hulot. FTP name this author of Pere Goirot and Cousin Bette.;;(Honore) (de) Balzac
Music;;Jude Jordan wrote the libretto for a work by this composer based on an earthquake, I Was Looking at the Ceiling and Then I Saw the Sky.  The movement "Negative Love" was set to the words of John Donne, while "Wild Nights" and "Because I could not stop for death" were poems by Dickinson set to music in his Harmonium. He wrote a two-part, 24-aria opera-oratorio that quotes Gabriela Mistral and Martin Luther.  He composed an homage to the September 11 victims with "On the Transmigration of Souls," while another of his works sees the line "We'll teach those motherfuckers how to dance," before the iconic foxtrot in the Chairman Dance.  FTP, name this composer of Nixon in China.;;(John) (Coolidge) Adams
Noncomputational Math;;Andrey Tychonoff lends his name to classes of separation axioms of this type of structure, a classification system that has separate schemes for Kolmogorov, Frechet, and Hausdorff examples of this type of construct. If every open cover contained in one of these has a finite subcover, it is known as compact. If one of these is contained in another one of these, it is often called coarser than the second. For ten points, name this mathematical set of subsets of a set, such that it is closed under union and closed under a finite number of intersections, and contains the original set and the empty set, an object which lends itself to a branch of mathematics, including Algebraic, Differential, and Point-Set varieties.;;Topology|Topological Space
United States History;;Operation Killer during this conflict was an effort to destroy the enemy below the Arizona Line, and was followed up by Operation Ripper, which had a similar objective using the Idaho Line.  The enemy capital was the subject of a flyby of a nuclear capable plane in Operation Hudson Harbor during this conflict.   Five battles took place during this war at "Old Baldy," and nearby fighting took place at Alligator Jaws, Hill Eerie, and T-Bone Hill.  Arthur Trudeau commanded U.S. forces at the Battle of Pork Chop Hill in this conflict, while an early objective was defending the Pusan Perimeter.  FTP, name this war that saw the landing at Inchon, during which Douglas MacArthur's hubris caused about a million Chinese dudes to swarm across the Yalu River.;;Korean (War)
Religion/Mythology;;The cosmogony of this religion describes 36 levels of heaven and 72 planets, of which Earth is number 68. It also describes three ages of man; namely, the Eras of Innocence, Progress, and the current Era of Annihilation. Its name, which comes from an epithet for the supreme god, means  "high tower;" said God is represented by the Eye of Providence. Adherents are required to practice vegetarianism for ten days per month and believe God speaks to its priesthood using a corbeille a bec. Its priesthood is organized into three branches that resemble those of the United States' government and is led by its Pope, or Giao Hoang, from its Holy See at Tay Ninh. FTP, name this syncretic Vietnamese religion that has canonized, among others, Victor Hugo, Julius Caesar and Sun Yat-Sen.;;(Dao) Cao Dai|Caodai(sm)|Dao Dai Tam Ky Pho Do
Biology;;The Ceratium genus of these organisms has large horns and a gonyaulacoid tabulation, while the Protoperidinium genus has an apical horn and a cingulum.  At one point, the Silurian Arpylorus of North Africa was considered to be a cyst of them.  They were particularly prominent in the organic-walled microflora starting in the Jurassic and continued to play an important role through the Cenezoic.  They possess a complex cell covering called an amphisema but are best known, however, for their periodic blooms, which can kill fish and even cause sickness in humans who consume infected shellfish.  FTP, name this type of algae responsible for red tides.;;dinoflagellate(s)
World History;;This man's brother, Henry of Winchester, provided Church support for his rise to power, securing approval from Innocent II for his succession; he ran into administrative problems after he sacked his predecessor's chief advisor, Roger of Salisbury, due to the latter's family monopoly on English bishoprics. His succession was secured through the Treaty of Walingford, which brought an end to the civil war prompted by his maneuvers to secure his succession over that of his cousin, the widowed Empress Matilda, bringing about "The Anarchy". Succeeded by Matilda's son, Henry II, he was the last Norman king of England.  FTP, name this English monarch, the successor to William II and the only ruler from the house of Blois.;;Stephen (I|the First|of (England|Blois){1}?){1}?;;Stephen
Literature;;Act two begins with a motor car broken down in front of a clump of trees and the main character is focused on some legs in blue trousers which protrude from the car and actually have a speaking part. This play was published with an epistle dedicatory to Arthur Bingham Walkley. It’s revealed in the fourth and final act that there are two men named Hector Malone, the elder of whom invested in Mendoza Limited and the younger marries Violet Robinson. It begins with Roebuck Ramsden in his study opening the morning letters and the main plot follows Ann Whitefield’s pursuit of Jack Tanner, while act three features the famous Don Juan interlude. FTP, name this play subtitled "A Comedy and a Philosophy," by George Bernard Shaw, which takes its title from the work of Nietzsche.;;Man and Superman(:) (A) (Comedy) (and) (a) (Philosophy)
World History;;The city of Hat Yai has been the center of several recent attacks by Islamic separatists centered in the Pattani region of this nation, despite overtures from General Sothni. After 10 months, CNS, the group currently in power in this country, disbanded the former ruling party, TRT, and lifted the ban on political activity here, which had been in effect since it placed General Surayud Chulanont into power. In August, a constitution drafted by CNS won a referendum here, replacing the 1997 constitution, and paving the way for the promised return to elections in, FTP, what Southeast Asian nation which was formerly headed by Thaksin Shinawatra, with a capital at Bangkok?;;Thailand
World History;;In the leadup to this battle, the victorious side captured the city of Methone.  Many vessels were unoccupied for one side during this battle because of a malaria outbreak among his troops, and the losing commander escaped this battle when a hole opened up a hole in the line, because Gaius Sosius was ordered south.  The victorious side commanded 400 swift liburnian vessels, while the loser had fewer ships, mostly quinqueremes. Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa was the winning commander in this battle, and the loser committed suicide shortly after, thinking that Cleopatra had died.  FTP, name this naval victory for Octavian over Marc Antony.;;(Battle) (of) Actium
United States History;;A group of Copperheads with Clement L. Vallandigham as their leader were known as the Knights of the Golden Circle before they renamed themselves after this group during the Civil War.  This group took its name from a speech given by Isaac Barre in Parliament, and one of their members, Silas Downer, made a famed speech in which he claimed was prepared to live in Greenland.  Two flags the original group used consisted of both nine vertical red and white stripes and the more familiar horizontal thirteen red and white stripes.  Alexander McDougal, James Otis, John Adams, Samuel Adams, and Paul Revere are perhaps the most famous of, FTP, what Revolutionary War group who dressed up like Indians and threw tea into Boston harbor.;;(The) Sons of Liberty
Literature;;Three parts of this work were earlier published as Doris's Dream Songs, while part one was originally published in the French journal Commerce.  The titular entities of part II are described as "Sunlight on a broken column," and they reappear in part four as "the perpetual star/Multifoliate rose/Of death's twilight kingdom".  Making several references to the "Eyes I dare not meet in dreams," the speaker declares that "this is the dead land…cactus land," and sings "Here we go round the prickly pear/At five o’clock in the morning".  Ending "not with a bang, but a whimper," this is, FTP, what poem by T.S. Eliot?;;(The) Hollow Men
Chemistry;;The extended Debye-Hückel equation relates the coefficients of this name to the charge of the ion in question, the hydrated radius of that ion and the total ionic strength of the solution.  Because this quantity is greater for protons than hydroxide ions, the pH of salty water is actually slightly below 7.  For singly charged ions in weak solutions, these quantities can be approximated by the actual concentrations of the ions and they can be almost ignored for gases and non-ionic solids.  FTP, name these quantities that represent the actual strength of a compound in solution and replace concentrations when calculating properties of equilibrium.;;activities|activity|activity coefficient(s)
Religion/Mythology;;Pelias killed his step-grandmother Sidero in this figure's temple, causing this deity to manipulate Jason and Medea to kill Pelias.  One story of the Milky Way's creation holds that this goddess was suckling Hercules when she found out who he was, causing her to jerk him away from her breast and spill her milk into the heavens.  This "cow-eyed" figure punished Tiresias for claiming that women have more pleasure during sex by striking him blind, and she bathes in the spring of Kanathos to renew her virginity annually.  The line of centaurs were born when Ixion screwed a cloud in the shape of this goddess, and her offspring with her husband include Eileithyia, Hebe, and Ares.  FTP, name this Greek goddess, the wife of Zeus.;;Hera
World History;;Legend has it that he ended a seven year famine by rebuilding a temple in the first cataract, the statue of him in painted limestone is the oldest known example of Egyptian life-size statuary.  The Palmero Stone provides an estimate of this ruler's reign at 28 years, and the Papyrus Westcar suggests that he, not Nebka, was the first ruler of the third dynasty.  Expeditions in his name subdued residents of the Sinai Peninsula brought back turquoise and copper to Egypt.  FTP name this king who whose monument is a stack of six mastabas, the Step Pyramid at Saqqara designed by Imhotep.;;Netjerikhet|Djoser
Pop Culture;;In 2007 this man published an autobiography entitled "I Told You I Wasn't Perfect".  In his breakout year, he won 16 games and finished third in the American League in strikeouts, behind Sam McDowell and teammate Mickey Lolich.  The next two seasons he was mediocre, putting up ERAs in the high threes despite winning 20 and 17 games.  In his only full year with another team, he lost 22 games for the Washington Senators in 1971.  In his best year, he won a crucial game 6 in the 1968 World Series. FTP name this man who won the 1968 MVP as well as the 1968 and 1969 Cy Young Award with Detroit, the last man to win 30 games in the regular season.;;(Dennis) (Dale) (Denny) McLain
Literature;;This man's only drama displays his love of the author of Floating Foams and Voices from Africa.  Characters from this man's novels include a dead man who got his nickname after mistaking a bottle of water for alcohol, the murderer of Doctor Virgilio Cabral, and a Syrian nightclub owner.  He wrote a short story in which Ubaldo Capadocio is miraculously transported to a convent by the titular avians.  Other works include Jubiaba, Tieta, the Goat girl, and a novel centered around the Vesuvius bar in the town of Ilheus, and recipes from the title character’s cookbook precede each chapter of Dona Flor and her Two Husbands.  FTP name this Brazilian author of Gabriela, Clove and Cinnamon.;;(Jorge) Amado
Biology;;A narrow-footed marsupial known as the Dunnart has the smallest mammalian one of these.  It can only undergo a mutation process known as RecLOH.  A gene on this body codes for the tooth enamel protein Amelogenin, while another codes for the "zinc finger" protein.  Having too many of these bodies can lead to a karyotype prefixed with "47," but generally doesn't produce adverse physical effects.  Having one of these bodies in addition to two of their opposite type are is known as Klinefelter's Syndrome, and in humans, it only contains 86 genes.  FTP, name this chromosome that contains SRY, the hormone responsible for testis development.;;(the) Y (chromosome)
Art;;A man with a pencil-thin moustache is one of five figures crowding around a book in one of them.  One of them features a rugged landscape with a canyon and high thunderheads above and features two men fighting with sticks, Duel with Cudgels.  Another depicts four floating haggard figures spinning, measuring, and cutting the thread of life, The Fates.  A group of hags gather around a figure in a white cloak and a dark figure with spiraling horns in this collection's The Great He-Goat, also known as the Witches Sabbath.  FTP, "Saturn Devouring his Children" is a part of what group of paintings done on the wall of the Quinto del Sordo by Francisco Goya?;;(Goya's) Black Painting(s)|(las) pintura(s) negra(s)
Pop Culture;;The video version of this song features the artist's brother Sebastian in an extra verse, and the radio version generally doesn't feature the rap that contains such lyrics as "I ain't got a motorboat, / But I can float your boat" and "Your body ain't Pamela Anderson / It’s a struggle just to get you in the caravan".  The speaker claims that he will "Thug it out until we get it right".  The second verse claims that "We can't go nowhere exotic" due to the speaker having no Visa or Red American Express, which echoes the claim in the first line that "I ain't got no money".  This song featuring Keri Hilson and rapper D.O.E. from the Mosley Music Group, and it claims "Baby if you strip, you can get a tip".  FTP, name this grammatically incorrect song by Timbaland.;;(The) Way I Are
Literature;;This character's birthright of a locket and a ring were stolen by Old Sally.  Dr. Losberne saves this character from being investigated, and Toby Crackit appears with this character at one point.  He is apprenticed to a casketmaker named Sowerberry, but is sent away when he attacks fellow worker Claypole.  A minor character in his namesake novel is the gruff Grimwig, while the kindly Mrs. Bedwin takes care of him while he's ill.  and his and He meets up with Jack Dawkins, is trained by Fagin, and becomes a member of Bill Sikes's gang.  FTP, name this Dickens novel in which the title character asks for another bowl of porridge.;;Oliver (Twist)|(Oliver) Twist
Philosophy;;He rejected universals, believing instead in the "fictum-theory" that universals merely existed as thoughts.  He wrote an extensive commentary on Aristotle's Physics in which he expounded on what it means "to know".  This man's Quodlibeta septem outlines his thoughts on the unicity of God and the intuitive knowledge of nonexistent objects.  His Questions from the Commentary on the Sentences got him into trouble for supposedly heretical statements, and his nominalist philosophy was outlined in his tract on logic, Summa Logicae, which was based on his principle of parsimony.  FTP, name this Medieval British philosopher, the namesake of a logical "razor".;;(William) (of) Ockham
Miscellaneous;;In Japanese, this is achieved by inserting the word "ni," while in In Uzbek and other Turkic languages, this is expressed with the suffix ga, while in the Russian it is expressed via the ending -u for masculine nouns and follows such prepositions as k- and po-.  In German it generally expresses an indirect object, and is governed by prepositions including aus, mit, zu, von and seit, while in Latin, there are commodi, possesivus, and finalis types of this case. FTP, name this case, with a name derived from the Latin for the case appropriate to giving.;;dative (case)
United States History;;He wrote seven thrillers about the xenophobic DEA agent Jack Novak, including Sonora, Cozumel, and Izmir.  Seven years after working to overthrow Guatemalan president Jacobo Arbenz, he was in charge of creating a Cuban provisional government after the Bay of Pigs invasion. He hired four of his contacts from the Bay of Pigs, Bernard Barker, Virgilio Gonzalez, Rolando Martinez and Frank Sturgis, to break into the Democratic National Committee headquarters in Washington's Watergate Hotel.  FTP, name this man, who orchestrated the Watergate break in with G. Gordon Liddy.;;(Everette) (Howard) Hunt(,) (Jr.)
Religion/Mythology;;Both stories about his death reference a "Field of Blood".  One such story claims that he bought the field but "fell headlong," causing his body to burst open and all his intestines to spill out, while a conflicting report tells that he hanged himself, and his money was used to buy a Potter's field in which to bury strangers.  A Coptic Gnostic gospel from the perspective of this man was found near Beni Masah, Egypt.  This man was supposedly in charge of accounting for the "money bag," and he sold out for thirty silver pieces.  FTP, name this Apostle whose kiss betrayed Jesus Christ to Pontius Pilate.;;Judas (Iscariot)
Literature;;After comparing a play by John Gay negatively with Ovid's Acis and Galatea, a character in this work recites a ballad about a "gentle hermit of the dale".  That character had earlier rescued a girl from a stream after she was thrown from a horse.  A dispute over the morality of remarriage interferes with that girl's brother's marriage to Arabella Wilmot, who abandons him after his family's money is stolen by a town merchant.  Sophia eventually marries Mr. Burchell, actually uncle to the amoral man who had seduced and abandoned Olivia, Squire Thornhill.  Putatively written by the title character himself, this is, FTP, what novel chronicling the misfortunes of Dr. Primrose by Oliver Goldsmith?;;(The) Vicar of Wakefield
Music;;The vocal part in the sixth movement is given with the instruction "without regard for the tempo," and that movement is labeled "Farewell".  Its first section contains the repeated line "Dark is life, is death," and features a tenor singing in his upper ranges.  Movements of this piece include "Of Youth," "Of Beauty," and "The Lonely Soul in Autumn," while its first takes its name from the drunken poems of a certain poet.  FTP, name this work that contains the movement "The Drinking Song of Earth's Miser," a song cycle by Gustav Mahler partly based on the poetry of Li Po.;;(Das) Lied von der Erde|(The) Song of the Earth
Chemistry;;A pair of these reactions can couple with a Friedel-Crafts acylation in the Haworth synthesis of phenathrenes, and its mechanism likely sees an imine-like intermediate and the elimination of an alkyl anion as the last step. The constituents can be mixed together in ethylene glycol in a one-pot modification to this reaction known as the Huang-Minlon modification.  In this reaction, one-phenyl-one-propanone is converted to propylbenzene.  FTP, name this reaction in which a hydrazone and strong base are heated to reduce a ketone or aldehyde to an alkane.;;Wolff-Kishner (reaction)|Wolff-Kishner (reduction)
Geography;;This river is the namesake of a province that shares a border with the Masvingo and Matabeleland South provinces of a neighboring country, and its capital is Polokwane.  It rises in the Gauteng Province and flows north, cutting the Hartbeespoort Gap before curving east then south past Pafuri and Mapai.  This river's main tributary is the Oliphants River, and near its mouth is the city of Xai-Xai.  It makes up part of the border between Botswana and South Africa, and that country's only border with Zimbabwe.  FTP, name this "great grey-green greasy" river of southeastern Africa.;;Limpopo (River)
World History;;His birthplace is a landmark in the Pyrenean city of Pau, and his statue on the Pont Neuf was the first royal statue to be rebuilt after their destruction in the French revolution.  As King, he financed the North American expeditions of Pierre Dugua and Sieur de Monts, oversaw the construction of the Pont Neuf and the Place Royale in Paris, and worked with Sully to regularize state finance and encourage education.  FTP, name this first Bourbon king of France, the issuer of the Edict of Nantes, who claimed that "Paris is well worth a mass" after converting to Catholicism.;;Henry IV (of) (France)|Henry (III) of  Navarre
Literature;;This author wrote of Jensine trying to teach her husband fear in "The Pearls," which along with "The Invincible Slave-Owners appears in Winter's Tales.  One of her collections features such entries as "The Supper at Elsinore," "The Old Chevalier," and "The Roads Round Pisa," while another story in that collection sees Kasparson assume the identity of the Cardinal Hamilcar von Sehesedt.  In addition to "The Deluge at Norderney," this author wrote of herself as the protagonist of another work, in which Kamante Gatura becomes a talented chef.  That novel sees her divorce Bror and travel with Ingrid Lindstrom on the title continent.  FTP, name this author of Seven Gothic Tales and Out of Africa.;;(Karen) Blixen(-Finecke)|(Isak) Dinesen
United States History;;This treaty has, since its ratification, been broadened by article 2, paragraph 4 of the United Nations Charter, which guards the "territorial integrity" and "political independence" of member nations. The US Senate approved it overwhelmingly with a vote of 85-1, but made one reservation to it. It served as the basis for the charges leveled at the defendents of the Nuremberg Trials. It took only three years for its primary goal to fail, when Japan invaded Manchuria in 1931. FTP, name this 1928 treaty that purported to outlaw war.;;Kellogg-Briand (Pact)|Pact of Paris