Biology;;This structure can be repaired by grafting in the Bentall procedure. An overriding one is present in the Tetralogy of Fallot, and a valve named for it contains the nodules of Arantius. Dilation of the root of this structure is a common symptom of Marfan's syndrome, while coarctation, or narrowing, of it is fairly common in patients with Turner's syndrome. Structures such as the subclavian, innominate, and common carotid branch off from its namesake arch, located between its ascending and descending segments. FTP, name this vessel which arises from the left ventricle, the largest artery in the human body.;;Aorta;;
Philosophy;;In this work's second section, the author notes that nobody who jumped out of a burning building was ever accused of suicide. In a response to Grotius, the author defines the word alienate to mean giving or selling, notes that the words slave and right contradict each other, and that we must always go back to a first convention. He also labels the collective grouping of all citizens as the "Sovereign", claims monarchies are best suited to hot climates, and claims that friction between the sovereign and government will eventually destroy any state. The oft-quoted phrase "man is born free, yet everywhere he is in chains" originates from, FTP, what philosophical work which states that a legitimate government can only originate from the titular concept, a work by Jean-Jacques Rousseau?;;(The) Social Contract(,) (or) (Principles) (of) (Political) (Right);;
World History;;This man was said to have rejected the offer of a red hat, and opted for a hat of blood instead. Some of his disciples agreed to submit to an ordeal by fire but rain prevented that, angering the populace. He increased his authority by predicting the invasion of Charles VIII, and the Arrabbiati formed in opposition to him. He made homosexuality a capital offense, but after Pope Alexander VI ordered his arrest he met his end in the Piazza della Signoria. FTP, name this Dominican priest and enemy of the Medici who conducted the 1497 Bonfire of the Vanities and transformed Florence into a Christian republic.;;(Girolamo) Savonarola;;
Literature;;The narrator of this work claims that his neighborhood is "as deserted as Petra". After returning from church, he finds that his key does not work, and another character tries to keep two colleagues who are never angry at the same time under control. The narrator counts John Jacob Astor among his clients, and was recently promoted to Master in Chancery, but is dismayed to find a blanket lying underneath a desk behind a screen, and its owner is removed to the Tombs for vagrancy. A former employee of the Dead Letter Office, the title character is hired to assist Turkey and Nippers but soon refuses to perform any work. FTP, name this Melville "Story of Wall Street" about a lawyer and the titular clerk who responds to orders with the mantra "I would prefer not to".;;Bartleby(,) (the) (Scrivener);;
Art;;Among his first projects in the public realm was the New York State Theater, but after that construction he rejected his earlier style, leading to works like the neo-gothic PPG Place in Pittsburgh, and stainless steel prisms surround the Bell Tower of his Crystal Cathedral. His collaborations with John Burgee include the Puerta de Europa in Madrid and a building in New York City which features the so-called "Chippendale" pediment. That building was originally named for AT&T, and this man is perhaps most famous for his own residence in New Canaan, Connecticut, built in collaboration with Richard Foster. FTP, name this American architect who built the Glass House and who with Mies van der Rohe designed the Seagram Building.;;(Philip) Johnson;;
Physics;;In the Ramsauer-Townsend effect, this phenomenon occurs with unity probability when certain boundary conditions are satisfied. The variety of this by which long-range order is preserved in SQUIDs is called the Josephson effect, whereby a current flows across two weakly coupled superconductors. A diode which makes use of this property was developed by Esaki, while Gurney and Condon discovered that it could explain alpha decay, though that result was also obtained concurrently by Gamow. Perhaps its most famous application, invented by Binnig and Rohrer, is the STM. FTP, identify this phenomenon by which a particle may pass through a classically impenetrable barrier.;;(quantum) tunneling;;
World History;;This man's innovations included the "buffalo horns formation," and he gradually phased out the use of the assegai. Henry Flynn and Nathaniel Isaacs became acquainted with him and recorded many of his exploits. He instituted a conscription policy known as Impi and first obtained prominence at the Battle of Gqokli Hill. Moshoeshoe was his chief rival, and in addition to proclaiming a three-month fast, he ordered seven thousand people executed upon the death of his mother Nandi, and he was later murdered and succeeded by his half-brother Dingaan. Responsible for the turbulent Mfecane, FTP, name this man whose name translates as "intestinal parasite," an iconic Zulu chieftain.;;Shaka (Zulu)|Chaka (Zulu);;
Literature;;One section of this work ponders a man who "has no country, he's a chilling/ thunderbolt, a cold heart clad in armor". Another section is consists of letters to the author's friends and is titled "The Rivers of Song," and describes the genesis of rivers and minerals in "A Lamp on Earth". The speaker ends the work by claiming that it was written on the run in "I end here," and praises the noble deeds of rebels in sections with headings "The Liberators" and "The Sand Betrayed". He asks someone to "Rise up to be born with me, my brother" while ascending to an Incan ruin in "The Heights of Macchu Picchu". FTP, this is what poetic history of South America by Pablo Neruda?;;Canto General;;
Religion/Mythology;;Plutarch claims that this figure was identified with  Bebo, and during the month of Pachons an antelope and a black boar were sacrificed to him in a ritual involving the full moon. In the Book of the Dead, he is called the "Lord of the Northern Sky," while in other tales he fled to the heavens to live with Ra and became the voice of thunder. His cult was centered at Avaris, and he sat at the help of Ra's boat from which he battled Apep each night. His wife Nephthys cheated on him, leading to the birth of Anubis and an eighty-year battle in which this god lost his foreleg. Horus's left eye was torn out by, FTP, what Egyptian god of the desert and chaos who also killed Osiris?;;Set|Seth|Sutekh;;
Religion/Mythology;;The Zohar describes this figure as dominant over the morning hours, and other kabbalistic literature associates him with earth and the color green. In the book of Enoch, he is commanded to imprison Azazel under the desert of Dudael. He is known in the Hadiths as Israfel, where it is said that he will first destroy the world and then cause a mass resurrection with two blows on his trumpet. In another apocryphal book, he masquerades as Azarias, but reveals his true identity after of Tobit's sight is restored. With a name meaning "God heals," FTP, identify this archangel, companion of Michael and Gabriel.;;Raphael;;
Literature;;This character takes running lessons from Mike Flynn, and he scorns a classmate who pronounces "science" as one syllable. While offstage during a play, this character is interrogated about an old crush and stricken with a cane. He imagines himself saying that he never eats muscatel grapes in the role of the Count of Monte Cristo, and later explains beauty to Lynch in terms of integrity, harmony, and clarity. A horrifying vision of hell drives him towards the priesthood, but he later rejects that path, and in an earlier episode a pair of broken glasses leads to his unfair punishment by Father Dolan. FTP, identify this protagonist of A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man, the fictional alter-ego of James Joyce.;;Stephen Dedalus;;Stephen|Dedalus
United States History;;In United States v. Continental Can Co., the Supreme Court ruled that section 7 of it applied to all industries with the same user end market. This act contained provisions which reversed the decision in Loewe v. Lawlor, and it was later extended by the Hart-Scott-Rodino Act and Cellar-Kefauver Act. Another section of it prohibited any person from serving as director of two large competing corporations, and its Alabama drafter also included provisions which prohibited local price cutting to freeze out competitors, thus strengthening its weaker predecessor. FTP, identify this 1914 piece of legislation which strengthened the Sherman Antitrust Act.;;Clayton (Antitrust) (Act);;
Miscellaneous;;This type of algebra is a non-empty collection F of subsets of X such that if A is in F, then so is the complement of A, and if A-sub-N is a sequence of elements of F, then the union of those An is in F. This letter also designates a baryon containing a strange quark with the other two quarks being up and/or downs. In electrodynamics, it is the symbol for the ratio of current density to electric field, also called electrical conductivity, and in the physics of blackbody radiation it designates the Stefan-Boltzmann constant. Chemical bonds which lie directly on the bond axis are named by, FTP, which Greek letter whose upper-case variety means "sum"?;;Sigma;;
Chemistry;;They can be synthesized by the McFadyen-Stevens reaction and the Nef reaction, and aromatic examples of them are created by the Gattermann-Koch reaction. Reacting an ester or a nitrile with DIBAL-H and hexane will produce them, and they can be detected by the formation of a "silver mirror" when exposed to Tollen's reagent. They can also be prepared by oxidizing a primary alcohol with potassium dichromate and sulfuric acid, though using a secondary alcohol will give a ketone instead. Such properties are characteristic of, FTP, what class of organic compounds with a terminal carbonyl group, whose simplest member has formula CH2O?;;Aldehydes;;
World History;;One army in this conflict under Folkmar was destroyed at Nistra, and forces under William of Aquitaine suffered a similar fate. Early leaders included Walter Sansavoir, and internal strife arose when Tancred deserted Raymond of St. Giles. In one battle, knights under Bohemond of Taranto swarmed over the enemy walls to open the Gates of St. George. However, its unwilling direct instigators were envoys sent to the Council of Piacenza, and in the Princes' phase of this campaign, Kerbogha was defeated at Antioch. FTP, identify this campaign to recapture the Holy Land called at the Council of Clermont in 1095 by Pope Urban II.;;First Crusade;;
Literature;;One character in this work claims that manual laborers like cooks and glass-men are often prone to atheism due to intoxicating fumes. Another character, Kastril, desires to learn how to quarrel, and a clerk named Dapper is bound and gagged with a ginger roll. A prostitute pretends to be prone to madness and later assumes the guise of a fairy queen. Though he had fled from London to escape the plague, Lovewit returns unexpectedly, forcing Face to resume his role as the butler Jeremy, while his co-conspirators escape through the back door. FTP, identify this play in which the swindler Subtle pretends to create the philosopher's stone, a work by Ben Jonson.;;(The) Alchemist;;
Art;;Dirk Bax argues that some objects in this work are a pun on the word schel, meaning ‘quarrel.' At bottom-center, a fish lies dead on the ground, while an owl peeks out at us from a fountain above crumbled rocks in another section. On the left side of this painting, a unicorn drinks from a lake as a giraffe looks on, while a swarm of animals exits from a hole in the ground on the bottom. On the right side, a monstrous bird on a throne swallows a human while defecating another one as buildings explode in the smoky landscape above. FTP, identify this triptych depicting the genesis of the world, scenes of debauchery, and punishment in hell, a work by Hieronymous Bosch.;;(The) Garden of Earthly Delights;;
Geography;;This country's northern lakes include Chiuta and Shirwa, and port towns include Xai-Xai and Lichinga. Ethnic groups in this country include the Shangaan in the southern regions, such as the Gaza province, while the north is dominated by the Makua. The Ruvuma River forms part of this country's northern border, and this country disputes the name of a lake which borders its Niassa Province. Its capital city lies in the southern tip and was once known Lourenco Marques, and the Zambezi River empties into the this country's namesake channel in the Indian Ocean. FTP, name this former Portuguese colony with capital at Maputo.;;Mozambique;;
Music;;Joseph Joachim feared that this man's Violin Concerto was a product of his madness, and a melody from that piece was adapted in a piano duet by Brahms. A Thomas Moore novel inspired his oratorio Das Paradies und die Peri, and characters like the Count of Brabante appear in his lone opera, Genoveva. His Cello and Piano concertos are both in A minor, and his solo pieces for the piano include Kreisleriana and the Night Suite. An injury to his right hand forced him to give up his performing career, but did not prevent him from composing piano pieces like Scenes from Childhood and Carnaval. FTP, name this German Romantic composer of the Spring Symphony and the Rhenish Symphony.;;(Robert) Schumann;;
Miscellaneous;;This language's script can be translated into Cyrillic using the Kontseivich system, and the McCune-Reischauer romanization is preferred in modern publications. Samuel Martin developed the Yale Romanization of this language, which is the basis for its ISO standard. Ramstedt hypothesized that this language belongs in the Macro-Altaic family, and it contains 7 speech levels coupled with a complex honorifics system. Its phonetic alphabet, which contains 14 consonants and 10 vowels and is called Hangul, is used alongside borrowed characters known as Hancha in this language's namesake "mixed script". FTP, name this language spoken by the current UN secretary general and most inhabitants of Seoul.;;Korean|Hangugeo|Chosonmal;;
Literature;;This author wrote about former freak show object Little Lee Roy, and narrated the adventures of Jamie Lockhart in another work. Shoe company representative R.J. Bowman meets his end in this author's Death of A Traveling Salesman, and in another novel, the widow Lauren Hand returns home to her dying stepmother despite her dislike for her stepmother Fay. A story where Phoenix Jackson travels to buy medicine for her grandson appears in her collection A Curtain of Green, and in addition to The Optimist's Daughter she wrote a story where the narrator feuds with her sister Stella-Rondo, causing her to move out of the house. FTP, name this Southern author of "A Worn Path," and "Why I Live at the P.O".;;(Eudora) Welty;;
Literature;;In Edgar Lee Masters's Spoon River Anthology, a character with this first name overdoses on morphine, having married a sixty-five year old man to provide a father for her unborn child. Another character of this name is the beloved of Proteus in Two Gentlemen of Verona, and Childe Harold arrives in Germany and finds true love in a character of this name. The eighteen-year-old news director of Radio Panamerica falls in love with a woman of this name, while yet another character with this name is a member of the Anti-Sex League and elopes with her lover in Mr. Charrington's antique shop. FTP, give this name which is paired with the Scriptwriter in a Mario Vargas Llosa novel and names Winston Smith's lover in 1984.;;Julia;;
Psychology;;The views of E. O. Wilson and this man are argued against in a 2004 paper by J. E. R. Staddon, who had earlier criticized his views in a work subtitled, "Mind, Mechanism, and Society". His views of education were expressed in The Technology of Teaching, and Noam Chomsky criticized one of this man's works, which discusses the notion of the "mand". With regards to delivering food, he experimented with superstition in pigeons, while this author of Verbal Behavior wrote about a planned economy in a fictional utopian society in the 1940s, Walden Two. FTP, name this proponent of operant conditioning American behavioral psychologist, the author of Beyond Freedom and Dignity and inventor of a namesake box.;;(B.) (F.) Skinner;;
Pop Culture;;In one scene, he asks another character for a Baby Ruth, since "that's how Chunk got over with Sloth in The Goonies," and this character, uses a Nokia 770 Internet Tablet to speak to a character who had convinced him to put an AIDS-ridden monkey in Andy Rosenberg's room. The fact that he likes handjobs makes this character a "hypocriticizer," which takes place before his recitation of "The Square Root of Three" at the wedding of Colton and Vanessa. This medical school applicant makes it to Amsterdam to find Maria, the love of his friend. Escaping from Guantanamo Bay after going to White Castle, this is, FTP, which Kal Penn-played character portrayed with his friend Harold?;;Kumar;;Patel
World History;;Reforms led by this leader include abolishing tax exemptions for large landowners, planned by Count Haugwitz, and the mandating of autopsies thanks to Gerard van Swieten. Maximilien Joseph signed the Treaty of Fussen with this ruler, while this ruler's son demanded that the Dutch open the Scheldt, resulting in a mediation by the french at a Treaty of Versailles. Wenzel Kaunitz accepted Zator and Auschwitz in the first partition of Poland as the advisor of this ruler. This ruler's power had been defended during the Seven Years' War, while the War of the Austrian Succession had been fought over her ascension to the throne. FTP, name this archduchess who had came into power during the Pragmatic Sanction.;;Maria Theresa;;
Physics;;One method of measuring this quantity was modified by both Ramay and Shields and Guggenheim and Katayama, and contains a V to the 2/3 term and is used to relate this quantity to temperature. In addition to the Eotvos's rule, the Tolman length measures the deviation from its planar value. The Marangoni effect is where a difference in this quantity causes the transfer of mass, and Laplace's Law states the inverse relationship between this value and alveolar radius. Often measured in dynes per centimeter, its effect is lowered by surfactants, and it is responsible for "tears of wine" and the ability of water striders to walk on water. FTP, name this tendency of a liquid to minimize its exposed area, causing capillary action.;;surface tension;;
Physics;;A type of instability when a light fluid supports a heavy fluid against gravity is named after Taylor and this man, who is also the namesake of a value governing stability of flow between concentric spinning cylinders. He is also the namesake of the product of the Grashof and Prandtl numbers. Waves associated with the surface of the earth are named for Lamb and this man, and he lends his name to a value that governs diffraction, his namesake criterion. He had his work concerning electromagnetic blackbody radiation corrected by Planck. That law bears the name of James Jeans and, FTP, which English physicist whose namesake scattering is responsible for the color of the sky?;;(John) (William) (Strutt,) (3rd) (Baron) Rayleigh;;
World History;;One commander in this battle kept back his third infantry line to prevent his center from being pinned, having seen the results of his enemy's victory at Ilipa. One side placed his troops in three lines, with his hastati in front of his principes and triarii, instead of the normal checkerboard fashion. The cavalry under Syphax were on the left flank of one commander, who had been ordered home after a loss at Utica. Preceded by a battle at the Great Plains, this battle resulted in a decisive Roman victory over the numerous forces and elephants of the Carthaginians. FTP, name this 202 B.C. battle which ended the Second Punic War as Scipio Africanus defeated Hannibal.;;(Battle) (of) Zama;;
Literature;;One character in this play advises another to walk up to women and say, "If you got the harbor, I got the ship" after selling him a "magic" suit made of silk. That character, Wining Boy, tells about the passing of Cleotha Holman to the father of a character who had arrived at the beginning of the play with ten dollars worth of old Pitterford's watermelons. After seeing his niece Maretha, that character tries to convince his sister to marry the preacher Avery, but it is his plan with Lymon which sets off the ghost of Old Sutter in Doaker's home. However, Berneice prevents the death of Boy Willie by playing the title instrument, which isn't sold for land, at the end of, FTP, which August Wilson play?;;(The) Piano Lesson;;
Philosophy;;Karl Popper wrote that reason is the only alternative to violence in a work titled this concept "and Violence," while various forms of the title mentality were described in a work by Karl Mannheim about "Ideology" and this idea. James Harington argued for land distribution in describing one of these entities, and Etienne Cabet's work about the travels of Lord William Carisdall was about one. Charles Fourier developed the phalanstere, which was one of these, while Peter Giles hears about the city of Amaurote from the traveler Raphael Hythloday in a work describing one. FTP, name these idealized societies, the namesake of a 1516 novel by Thomas More.;;utopia(s);;
United States History;;Priscilla Brewer has published a historical analysis of this group, which may have been based off of the camisards from the Cevennes Mountains. Richard McNemar wrote The Kentucky Revival as a defense of this group, whose leaders included James Wardley and Lucy Wright. Having been established at Mount Lebanon, New York, most of its remaining members currently make their home at Sabbathday Lake. A famous song written by them is called "Simple Gifts," and among their innovations are the washing machine and flat broom. Also called United Society of Believers in Christ's Second Appearing, this is, FTP, which religious movement, led by Mother Ann Lee, so named because of their trembling, shouting, and dancing?;;Shaker(s);;United Society of Believers in Christ's Second Appearing
Art;;One of these items, which resides in the Galleria dell'Academia, is dubbed the "Palestrina" one and is the most dubious in terms of authenticity. The Castella Sforzesco is the home of the "Rondanini" one, which features an arm dangling at its side as it was unfinished, while Nicodemus or Joseph of Arimathea may be one of the four figures in the one found in Florence. The most famous one of these had its sculptor's signature etched onto a sash after a remark that it was the work of Cristoforo Solari; it is housed in St. Peter's Basilica. FTP, name these sculptures depicting Mary holding Jesus after the Crucifixion, created by the sculptor of a 16th century marble David.;;Pieta(s) (by) Michelangelo|Michelangelo's Pieta(s);;Pieta(s)
Literature;;In the preface of this work, its protagonist states that his fascination with an araucaria plant is due to its expression of middle-class cleanliness. Its protagonist is told to go to the Black Eagle during a funeral procession, after which he is prevented from committing suicide on his fiftieth birthday by a character that reminds him of Rosa Kreisler. That character encourages him to meet Maria and a jazz musician, who invites the protagonist into his "magic theatre". While each door leads to a different world, the protagonist finds Pablo with Hermine, whom he stabs with a knife. The half-animal instincts of Harry Haller are detailed in, FTP, which novel by Herman Hesse?;;Steppenwolf;;
World History;;The composer of the song "The Crabs" once saved the life of this ruler, whose name is borne on a law abolishing of immunities of the clergy; this ruler had helped it pass before becoming the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court. He defeated a coup by leading the Rebels in the War of the Reform, causing this man to succeed Comonfort, and he went on to annul his country's foreign debts, leading to the Battle of Puebla. A key figure in drafting the Plan of Ayutla, he put down several insurrections by Porfirio Diaz prior to his death in 1872. FTP, name this Mexican leader who opposed French rule under Maximilian.;;(Benito) Juarez;;
Religion/Mythology;;This mythological figure gave away Ahalya after a competition to go around the three worlds, while some stories say that this figure gave birth to Rudra from the forehead and Daksha from the thumb. Other stories involving this deity include one involving the beautiful woman Shatarupa and being cursed for performing a sacrifice with the milkmaid Gayatri. Often accompanied by a swan, he has the bow Parivita is often seen with a rosary of beads. The husband of Savitri, he was born from a golden egg or a lotus flower. The consort of Saraswati, FTP, name this Hindu creator god who bears four heads and four arms and forms the Trimurti with Vishnu and Shiva.;;Brahma;;
Art;;Antonio Canova created a marble pyramid as a mausoleum in the Santa Maria Gloriosa dei Frari for this artist.  Palma the Younger completed his last painting, which features a self portrait with his son Orazio and is called his Pieta, while the title character is holding onto a bull's horns in his Rape of Europa. He depicted Laura Bagarotto sitting on a coffin next to Venus in a work painted for the wedding of Niccolo Aurelio, his Sacred and Profane Love, but this painter of Bacchus and Ariadne may be better remembered for a painting in which the two servants are searching in a chest in the background while title figure reclines nude in front of a green curtain. FTP, name this Italian painter of Venus of Urbino.;;Titian|Tizian(o) Vecelli(o);;
Noncomputational Math;;One person managed to prove the Snark theorem while working on this problem, and one generalization is stated in terms of edge contractions and is named for Hadwiger. Robertson, Sanders, and Seymour improved on the original proof of this problem, while Ringel and Youngs proved a generalized version which relies on the floor function of an expression involving the genus of the surface. Its proof used the method of discharging and defined unavoidable sets and reducible configurations, and it is sometimes called Guthrie's problem. It is a specific case of the Heawood conjecture and was proved by Appel and Hankin using a computer. FTP, name this theorem that gives the number of shades needed to draw a map.;;Four color (theorem);;
Biology;;The nonuniformity of their response is known as the Stiles-Crawford effect, while Young and Helmholtz developed a theory accounting for their existence. George Wald provided proof of Ragnar Granit's theory of the different types of these entities, which generally make connections to horizontal cells. They may have principal and accessory members when occurring as two contiguous cells in birds, and there are S, M, and L types of them. The subject of the opponent-process theory, each type contains different photopsins, but all of them are attached to the outer membrane and are concentrated in the fovea. FTP, name these photoreceptor cells in the retina which allow for color perception and are often paired with rods.;;cone(s);;
United States History;;A letter signed "Belisarius" detailed problems encountered by one side of this incident. Preceded by meetings at Hatfield, it resulted in the removal of judge William Whiting and state representative Moses Harvey. It ended with a defeat at Petersham, after which its leader fled to Vermont, as Governor James Bowdoin fielded an army led by Benjamin Lincoln and William Shepard. The Regulators had hoped to force the adjourning of the Springfield Supreme Court as they opposed the taxes they had to pay in the aftermath of the American Revolution. FTP, name this 1786-1877 rebellion of debtors against the imposition of taxes in Massachusetts.;;Shay(')s(') (Rebellion);;
Music;;Drum rolls occur during the entrance of the strings following a brief violin solo near the end of this work, while the main instrument enters for the first time near the beginning, following a theme played by a muted trumpet. This is followed by the first entrance of the whole orchestra, then a cymbal crash, after which the solo instrument has its first extended solo in this work, which opens and ends in B-flat. Orchestrated by Ferde Grofe and written on behalf of Paul Whiteman, it was conceived by its composer on a train ride to Boston. A clarinet glissando over a seventeen-note diatonic scale opens, FTP, which work for solo piano and jazz band written by George Gershwin?;;Rhapsody in Blue;;
Literature;;At the end of Nathanael West's The Day of the Locust, Tod Hackett sees a sign quoting the first sentence of this poem near the Persian Palace Theatre. "Huge fragments vaulted like rebounding hail" from a "mighty fountain" in this poem, which opens by describing "twenty five miles of fertile ground". The narrator advises that "all should cry, ‘Beware, Beware!'" as they see the title character's "His flashing eyes, his floating hair," while its narrator recalls hearing "a damsel with a dulcimer…singing of Mount Abora" as well. Allegedly interrupted by a visitor from Porlock, this is, FTP, which poem, whose title character did "a stately pleasure-dome decree" in Xanadu, written by Samuel Taylor Coleridge?;;Kubla Khan;;
World History;;In this war, defeat at Koivisto forced one side to retreat back to Vipurii. The effectiveness of motti, or encirclement, tactics was proven in this conflict at the Raatteentie Incident, and Hjalmar Siilasuvo emerged victorious in the larger battle of Suomussalmi. The invading side was expelled from the League of Nations as a result, and a major goal of the war was to cut off Germany's supply of iron ore. The invaders managed to take part of the Karelia Isthmus and the later Continuation War would mark an end to the interim peace guaranteed by the Moscow Peace Treaty. The Mannerheim Line was destroyed following the end of, FTP, what conflict during World War II between Finland and the Soviet Union?;;(The) Winter War;;
Pop Culture;;Albel Nox lost an arm while attempting to make a pact with one of these creatures in Star Ocean 3. Dyne was a master of these creatures in Lunar: The Silver Star, in which Nall transforms into a white one near the end.  Defeating eight legendary ones unlocks the seal on the esper Crusader in Final Fantasy VI, while in Super Mario RPG the "Czar" one can be fought in Barrel Volcano.  A game starring one of these creatures sees him facing off against Gnasty Gnorc, and has sequels like "Ripto's Rage" and "A New Beginning".  FTP, name these creatures, a black one of which is the namesake of Kano's organization in Mortal Kombat, and whose more famous examples include the fire-breathing purple lizard Spyro.;;Dragon;;
Physics;;When these substances have an anisotropic momentum distribution, they are subject to Weibel instabilities, and columns of these substances with strong axial currents develop Kink oscillations. One type of wave in them is characterized by the Lundquist number, and long-range interactions in them are taken into account in the Vlasov equation. Langmuir probes are used to determine their properties, and they move across magnetic fields in Bohm diffusion. These substances screen electric fields up to the Debye length, and the quark-gluon type is of interest in QCD. Studied in tokamaks, this substance is usually created on earth by electric arcs. FTP, name this fourth stage of matter commonly found in stars.;;Plasma(s);;
Literature;;One of this man's works is framed as a letter from Mrs. Curren to her daughter. Another one of his works centers on the relationship between Paul Rayment, who loses his leg in a biking accident, and his nurse Marijana. In addition to Age of Iron and Slow Man, this author wrote about a woman who rewrote Ulysses from the perspective of Molly Bloom, entitled Elizabeth Costello.  This author wrote about Susan Barton's encounter with Cruso and Friday in Foe. Another work focuses on the gruesome exploits of Colonel Joll, while another one of his protagonists moves to his daughter Lucy's farm after seducing a student. FTP, name this South African Nobel Prize winning author of Waiting for the Barbarians and Disgrace.;;(John) (Maxwell) Coetzee;;
Music;;Its third movement sees the winds repeat the violin theme, and was originally titled Our Country's Wide Spaces. The final movement of this piece is marked allegro non troppo and ends with the woodwinds and violins building to an ambiguous climax. The first movement of this work, which features a notable snare drum accompaniment, has a 22 measure ostinato, which is repeated by the trumpet and percussion; this is called the "invasion theme", and borrows from the composer's earlier Lady Macbeth of the Mtensk District. FTP, name this symphony composed in opposition to totalitarianism by Dimitri Shostakovitch, a 1941 work dedicated to a certain Russian city under siege by the Nazis.;;Symphony no(.) 7 (in) (C) (Major)|Leningrad (Symphony);;
Religion/Mythology;;He chased Pleione until Zeus turned her into a star. He carried Hephaestus' servant Cedalion upon his back during his journey to Lemnos, and one story of his birth tells how Hyrieus roasts a bull for the gods, the hide of which is later urinated upon and buried. This son of Poseidon and Euryale had the ability to walk on water. One figure escaped him by hiding in an iron fortress; that figure, Oenopion, had earlier blinded him after his rape of Merope. After boasting that he could kill any creature, Gaia created a giant scorpion to kill him. FTP, name this figure who was turned into a constellation next to his dog Sirius, a noted hunter from Greek Mythology.;;Orion;;
Chemistry;;Its formulator extended it by citing work that he had performed under Kolbe, while Henry's independent discovery of this statement led to another generalization by its formulator. Hornback explained it in terms of positively-charged intermediates, and this statement is notably abrogated in a procedure sometimes named for Herbert Brown. Often paired with a similar rule that governs eliminations, Zaitsev's rule, this rule is violated in reactions using peroxides and in hydroboration reactions due to steric hindrance. FTP, name this rule from organic chemistry that states that when a halide adds to an alkene, the more substituted carbon attaches the halide, named for a Russian chemist.;;Markovnikov('s) (Rule);;
Noncomputational Math;;The Anscombe transformation is used in systems which follow this distribution, and variables that follow this distribution are subject to Robbins Lemma. When it has an expected value of 1, the nth moment of this distribution is equal to the number of partitions of a set of n elements. If two variables follow it, their difference follows the Skellam distribution. Used to model the number of mutations in irradiated DNA or the number of calls to a call center, this limiting case of the binomial distribution is entirely reliant on the parameter lambda, which is equal to its mean and variance. Usually used to model events with low probability, FTP, name this statistical distribution named for a Frenchman.;;Poisson (distribution);;
World History;;This ruler deposed Osroes I and replaced him with Parthamaspates after capturing the city of Susa in one campaign. During his reign, the death of Rabbel II Soter lead to the annexation of the Nabataean kingdom. His marriage to Pompeia Plotina was unable to produce any children. Apollodorus of Damascus was responsible for much of this rulers' extensive architectural program, which resulted in the creation of his namesake market, arches, and forum. His greatest military victory occured at Sarmisegusta over Decebalus, and reversed the outcome of a previous defeat under Domitian. FTP, name this man whose victory in the Dacian Wars is commemorated in his namesake column, the adopted father of Hadrian and the second of the Five Good Emperors.;;Trajan|(Marcus) (Ulpius) (Nerva) Traianus;;
Sociology;;KS Larsen repeated this experiment 18 times and noted the results were dependent on duration. Stang showed that its results were dependent upon the self-esteem of the participants, and Perrin and Spencer's 1980 repetition of this experiment on engineering students suggested that the results don't apply to modern culture. A meta-analysis by Bond shows that the results hold more strongly in collectivist countries. Participants would often claim poor eyesight or misunderstanding, and the study used a majority group of "confederates" that deliberately gave the wrong answer. FTP, name this experiment in which one was asked to determine which of three lines on a card matched another, a classic demonstration of conformity.;;Asch('s) (Conformity) Experiment|Line-matching task;;
United States History;;One justice's dissent in this case cited the "totality of the circumstances test", while another dissent compared Constitutional law to a continually-growing temple. One notable opponent of this cause is Paul Cassell, and this decision was later extended in Rhode Island v. Innes. The outcome of this case was upheld in Missouri v. Seibert and Dickerson v. United States, the latter featuring a proclamation that its result had "entered our national culture". This case extended the earlier decision in Escobedo v. Illinois, and centered on the rape and murder of an 18-year-old woman. FTP, name this 1966 Supreme Court case which stated that the Fifth Amendment requires the police to inform a suspect of their rights.;;Miranda (v.) (Arizona);;
Religion/Mythology;;In this faith, the most advanced form of divination is known as Ifa, and involves throwing a small chain with eight pieces of shell or bone attached. A key ritual in this faith involves the possession of a devotee in a ceremony called a bembe, and priests in this religion are called babalawos. In this faith Oggun is linked with violence, force, and energy, while Olorum is considered the sky Father and wields power over all things white, and its spirits include Inle, and Obatala, collectively known as Orishas. Also known as "Lukumi's Rule," FTP, name this Afro-Caribbean religion derived from the beliefs of the Yoruba people.;;Santeria|Way of the Saints;;
Biology;;These compounds are commonly synthesized via the tryptamine pathway or the IPA pathway, and one mode of their action involves the formation of ARF homodimers.  These compounds also lead to the activation of by H+-ATPase pumps in the acid growth model.  First fully characterized by Fritz Went using agar blocks and coleoptiles, this hormone is commonly synthesized in apical meristems and distributed throughout the plant via polar transport.  Also responsible for phototropism, the formation of lateral roots, and apical dominance, FTP, name this class of plant hormones which includes indoleacetic acid and the herbicide Agent Orange.;;Auxin;;
Religion/Mythology;;This man's Account of Faith was countered in a publication by Jan Eck, whom he had earlier disputed at Baden. His account of surviving a plague can be found in his poem Pestlied, and his opposition to another religious movement can be found in his Whoever Causes Unrest. He defended the inclusion of non-Christians in heaven in one part of his Exposition of the Faith, and he outlined the idea that secular power is based on the word of Christ in his seminal 67 Articles. FTP, name this man who met with Martin Luther in the Marburg Colloquy, a leader of the Swiss Reformation.;;(Ulrich) Zwingli;;
Literature;;One character in this story asks his wife for a roll and an onion for breakfast, and lives in a building with "Blood Let Here" written on a signboard; that character is later confronted by a constable on a bridge. Another character adds "Major" to his title in order to increase his prestige, enjoys playing "Boston" every morning, and is very proud of the fact that he knows the wife of a council member. The clerk in the police station notes that the patch left behind is smooth like a pancake, and the title character becomes a state councilor after leaving College Assessor Kovalev. Beginning with the story of the barber Ivan Yakovlevitch's discovery of the title body part in his home, FTP, name this short story by Nikolai Gogol.;;(The) Nose|Nos;;
Art;;He depicted a woman in a red blouse sitting at a desk next to two vases in his Annelies, White Tulips, and Anemones, while his other floral-themed works include Still-Life with Geraniums and The Plum Blossoms. His The Sorrows of the King and The Snail are among the many of his paintings dubbed "cutouts", which also include his series of Blue Nudes. His La Negresse and L'Asie are among his other depictions of women.  His more famous works include one of an interior with several blue vines on the wall, and another featuring five nude people holding hands in a circle. FTP, name this leading Fauvist, a French Impressionist famous for The Red Room and The Dance.;;(Henri) Matisse;;
Philosophy;;Bernard Baars extended this scenario to create the "Theater of Consciousness", and Ngugi Wa Thiong'o uses it to analyze the relationship between language and the New World Order in one paper. Martin Heidegger analyzed this scenario in his Essence of Truth. Immediately preceded by and relying on the "Analogy of the Divided Line", this argument states that its subject would be seen as ruined after being freed and returning. First presented as a dialogue between Glaucon and Socrates in book 7, FTP, name this philosophical argument concerning a prisoner who can only see the shadows on the wall of the title location, outlined in Plato's Republic.;;Allegory of the Cave|Myth of the Cave|Parable of the Cave;;
Literature;;Margaret Atwood wrote a short story in which one character from this play "talks back", and Richard Curtis wrote a "skinhead" version of this play. Heiner Muller wrote an eight-page postmodernist "machine" version of it, and it was also the basis of the Akira Kurosawa film The Bad Sleep Well. One sequel to this work was written by Lee Blessing form the perspective of a Norwegian ruler, and another play that takes place in the same fictional universe begins with one character winning ninety-two coin flips, Tom Stoppard's Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead. FTP, name this tragedy that features the characters Osric, Polonius, and Laertes, centering on the prince of Denmark who notably asks "to be or not to be"?;;Hamlet;;Gertrude
United States History;;Clement Vallandingham lead a reorganized Knights of the Golden Circle that titled themselves "The Order of" this earlier group. This group was responsible for the capture of a repository at Turtle Bay, and their habit of erecting large poles lead to the Battle of Golden Hill.  Members of this group were responsible for the death of William Dudingston and aided Abraham Whipple in the capture of a ship in Narragansett Bay. This group is probably most famous for an incident in which they snuck on board the Dartmouth dressed as Mohawks. FTP, name this organization whose members, including James Otis and Samuel Adams, carried out the burning of the HMS Gaspee and the Boston Tea Party.;;Sons of Liberty;;
Computer Science;;One method of performing this operation on a distributed system is Cannon's algorithm. Kleinberg showed that it can be embedded on the wreath product of an order-17 abelian group and an order-2 symmetric group. The fastest method for doing this has big-O of n to the 2.3 runtime, the Coppersmith-Winograd algorithm.  Another method splits the arguments into blocks and is named for Strassman, and this operation naively ran in big-O of n to the third time. In a vector space, this operation is used to compose two linear transformations, and is always associative but only commutative if there are no off-diagonal elements. FTP, name this operation carried out on paper by multiplying the elements of the nth row and nth column of the namesake constructs together.;;Matrix multiplication;;
Literature;;The narrator sees a location where one object "bent into the undergrowth", and states that "I doubted if I should ever come back" at the end of the second stanza, immediately after stating that "I kept the first for another day". The speaker notes that one object in this poem may "have the better claim" because it "wanted wear". Found in the collection Mountain Interval, its final stanza states that the story will be told "with a sigh" after "ages and "ages hence", and notes that the narrator's actions have "made all of the difference". FTP, name this poem in which "two roads diverged in a yellow wood", and the narrator took the less-traveled one, by Robert Frost.;;(The) Road Not Taken;;
Miscellaneous;;In the title of a 1975 work by Robin Lakoff, this concept is combined with "Woman's Place," and in a more recent book, she has written about this kind of "war". In a 1975 work, Jerry Fodor hypothesized the existence of the one "of thought". A work which begins with a chapter dedicated to "The Elimination of Metaphysics" was written by A.J. Ayer and titled after this concept, "Truth, and Logic," and in the Philosophical Investigations, Wittgenstein devised his "beetle-in-a-box" thought experiment to demonstrate the impossibility of a private one. For ten points, identify this human faculty whose namesake "instinct" was elucidated in a book by Stephen Pinker and which you use when you talk.;;language;;
Literature;;In the fifth act of this play, one character chides another for making a bad decision regarding a casket of state secrets, and in the next scene, that same character notes that "we live in such an age, with such a king, that violence can not advance our cause". After disowning his son Damis for claiming that the title character had made an advance on his wife, the main character signs his house over to the title character. In this work's final scene, the title character is arrested by an officer of the prince for his past crimes while Valere, Marianne, and Cleante, among others, look on. For ten points, identify this play about the titular hypocrite who attempts to swindle Orgon, a comedy by Moliere.;;Tartuffe(,) (or) (the) (Impostor);;
Art;;During his time in Rome, this artist worked with the miniaturist Giulio Clovio. It was in Rome that he produced his earliest signed painting, "Landscape with Christ and the Apostles at the Sea of Tiberias," while a later commission resulted in his series entitled Labours of the Months. His Large Landscapes series was published by Hieronymus Cock, but he remains better known for allegorical works, such as one that depicts a structure reaching to the sky, The Tower of Babel, as well as illustrations of various Netherlandish Proverbs, including Big Fish Eat Little Fish. FTP, identify this Flemish artist famous for such works as Peasant Wedding, The Triumph of Death, and Landscape with the Fall of Icarus.;;(Peter) Breughel (the) Elder;;
Pop Culture;;In one appearance, he traps his friend in a drier, resulting in that friend obtaining super powers, and in another episode, he splits the cost of a Russian mail-order bride with his neighbor. After developing glaucoma, this character is tricked into inhaling "moonajuana" in the shape of tires and wood. In a work partially titled "Colon Movie Film for Theatres," this character kills a giant poodle and explains that his excellent physique is the result of training on the Insanoflex, eventually jumping out a window when it is revealed that his mother is a bean burrito. Voiced by Dana Snyder, FTP, identify this neighbor of Carl and companion of Meatwad and Frylock, the cup-shaped third member of Aqua Teen Hunger Force.;;Master Shake;;
World History;;Shortly before dying, this ruler appointed his son by Meryetre as co-regent, and his mortuary temple was discovered in 1961 at Dayr al-Bahri beside that of his aunt. In the 33rd year of his reign, this ruler vanquished the king of the Mittanni in a battle on the Euphrates, after which he also supposedly engaged in an elephant hunt. Upon assuming the throne, this ruler ordered the destruction of all mentions of his predecessor, Hatshepsut, and less than a year later defeated the king of Kadesh at a site near modern-day Haifa. For ten points, identify this Egyptian pharaoh of the 18th dynasty, the predecessor of Amenhotep II, who ruled from 349 to 1426 B.C.E. and was victorious at the Battle of Megiddo.;;Thutmose III;;
Physics;;J.E. Hirsch of UCSD has proposed that, much like the Quantum Hall effect, a "spin" variety of this effect exists. One proposed explanation for the incomplete type of this effect is the Mendelssohn sponge. In certain geometries, such as hollow cylinders, this effect can result in flux pinning, and the successful prediction of this effect is one of the triumphs of BCS theory, though it does not explain its type II variety. On a macroscopic level, this effect can be described using the London equation, which give the penetration depth when combined with Ampere's Law. Resulting from the behavior of a perfect diamagnet, for ten points, identify this physical effect in which a superconductor expels magnetic fields from its interior.;;Meissner(-Ochsenfeld) (effect);;
Literature;;While writing under the pseudonym of "Robert Slender," he produced a series of "Probationary Odes by Jonathan Pindar, Esq". This man's political poems include one written with Hugh Henry Brackenridge for a Princeton commencement, as well as one about a "flame" which "lays all tyrants low," entitled "The Republican Genius of Europe". Renowned for such patriotic works as "Eutaw Springs," and "Rising Glory of America," he is best remembered for a poem about a flower "by Nature's self in white arrayed," and another which ends with the image of "the painted chief, and pointed spear". For ten points, identify this poet best known for "The Wild Honeysuckle" and "The Indian Burying Ground".;;(Philip) Freneau;;
Religion/Mythology;;The first mention of this prayer being employed in its best-known context comes from the 13th century text entitled Or Zarua, and its earliest version is sometimes called the "half" version. Under certain circumstances, a chazzan may recite the "half" variety following a Torah reading, and its "rabbinical" version is recited by those studying the midrash or aggada. Its "Great" version contains a prayer for the rebuilding of Jerusalem and the Temple, and the full version adds two sentences which begin, respectively, "Yohei shlomo rabba" and "Oseh shalom". This prayer, whose purpose is sometimes confused with the prayer "El Molai Rachamim". opens with the line "yit'gadal v'yit'kadash sh'mei raba," and a variant of it is recited by mourners after the death of a loved one. For ten points, identify this Jewish prayer extolling the coming kingdom of God.;;Kaddish;;
World History;;One ruler of this name and number was known as "the Bad," and alternately supported both Pedro the Cruel and Henry of Trastamara in an attempt to expand the power of the kingdom of Navarre. A ruler of Anjou with this name and number signed the Peace of Caltabellotta, ending the War of the Sicilian Vespers, while the death in 1700 of a Spanish ruler of this name and number set off the War of the Spanish Succession. Also the designation of a Holy Roman Emperor nicknamed "the Bald" who was a signatory to the 843 Treaty of Verdun, for ten points, identify this royal name and number most famously held by "the Merry Monarch," whose English reign from 1660 to 1685 was known as the "Restoration".;;Charles II|Carlos II|Karl II;;
Chemistry;;Werner's complex contains 3 atoms of chlorine and 3 molecules of this compound as ligands, and this compound is produced by a molybdenum-iron-copper complex-containing enzyme in some organisms. Pure solutions of this molecule contain large quantities of solvated electrons, which is why it is used as a solvent in the trans-hydrogenation of alkynes and the reduction of benzene to cyclohexadienes in the Birch reduction. This molecule is industrially produced by using an iron oxide catalyst that was modified by Bosch. FTP, name this molecule produced by the Haber process, with formula NH3.;;NH3|Ammonia;;NH4|ammonium
Music;;In the second scene of this opera, one character confesses not to know what the "Marker" does, after which another character explains the rules to him while drawing a parallel to the cobbling trade. To prevent one character from serenading another in this opera, a third sings "Jerum! Jerum!" A side plot concerns the romance between David and Magdalene, and at a meeting of the title group, one of them named Veit Pogner sings "Das schone Fest, Johannistag," outlining the contest that will take place on that festival day. Walther triumphs over Sixtus Beckmesser for the hand of Eva in, for ten points, what this Richard Wagner whose title characters include Fritz Kothner, Augustin Moser, and Hans Sachs, all singers in the titular city.;;(Die) Meistersinger von Nurnberg|(The) Mastersingers of Nuremberg;;
Literature;;This work is the subject of a 1991 critical interpretation by Edward Callan, who also published a 1968 biography of its author. This work's third chapter opens with the image of a "small toy train" climbing up to Carisbrooke. The main character's brother refers to the chief of his old village as a "white man's dog," and in the end, the main character's sister Getrude returns to her life of prostitution and drink. The main character is assisted in his search for his son by the Reverend Theophilus Msimangu, but in the end, that son, Absalom, is hanged for the murder of Arthur Jarvis, while two white men are released. For ten points, identify this novel about the Reverend Stephen Kumalo, the most famous work of Alan Paton.;;Cry, the Beloved Country;;
United States History;;The man elected to the Senate to replace John Eaton, Felix Grundy, also succeeded Eaton in this post and was the 13th man to hold this position. The man who defended the freedom of movement as guaranteed by the Constitution in the 1941 case Edwards v. California, Robert Jackson occupied this post before being appointed to the Supreme Court. The man who succeeded William French Smith in this post ordered a study of the effects of pornography on society, while another man who occupied this post launched a series of namesake raids on communists. FTP, identify this office occupied at various times by such individuals as Edwin Meese, A. Mitchell Palmer, Robert F. Kennedy and Janet Reno.;;Attorney General;;
Astronomy;;Recent observations of this body have revealed a bright West Virginia-sized spot on its surface just southeast of the Xanadu region. The only noble gas found on it is argon-40, leading to speculation that its primary distinguishing feature is generated by outgassing from the interior. Its surface temperature and atmospheric pressure were first measured by Voyager I, though the most detailed information about this satellite comes from the Huygens probe, which landed on its surface in 2005 and discovered lakes of liquid hydrocarbons near its polar regions. The only satellite in the solar system with clouds and a dense atmosphere, FTP, identify this second largest moon in the solar system and the largest moon of Saturn.;;Titan;;
Psychology;;A modified version of this concept was proposed by Eliot Aronson, who has also collaborated with Carol Tavris on a book with such chapters as "Law and Disorder," and "Good Intentions, Bad Science". In a 1971 paper, Tedeschi, Schlenker, and Bonoma proposed that its manifestations are a result of an attempt at impression management. In one study of it, those people who had been paid $20 rather than $1 to perform a boring task improved their attitude towards the task, and this theory had its genesis in a study of a UFO cult, entitled When Prophecy Fails. For ten points, identify this psychological hypothesis which states that people prefer their beliefs to be consistent with each other, first elucidated by Leon Festinger.;;cognitive dissonance;;
Biology;;In 2003, Iwata and Kabak used crystallography to obtain the structure of its lactose transporter. It developed an ability to consume citrate in an experiment by Richard Lenski and its DnaK and DnaJ proteins are homologs of the eukaryotic chaperones Hsp70 and Hsp40. Its verocytotoxic and enterohemorrhagic varieties are grouped together under the category of Shiga toxin producers, and in 2001, a Nature article reported a complete genetic sequence of its pathogenic O157:H7 strain. Often used to grow libraries of recombinant DNA, they were observed to undergo conjugation by Edward Tatum. FTP, identify this Gram-negative bacterium, a favorite model organism of biologists.;;E(scherichia) coli;;
Literature;;This author wrote of a woman who loses two children to drowning while on vacation in his short story, "Death in Midsummer," while a man who anticipates leading an attack against his own men appears in "Patriotism". The proprietress of the Setsugoan restaurant is the heroine of this author's After the Banquet, and a man who is killed after being given poisoned tea by Noboru is the title character of his The Sailor Who Fell From Grace With the Sea. This author wrote of Mizoguchi, a monk who burns down the titular edifice in The Temple of the Golden Pavilion, and a tetralogy containing Spring Snow and Decay of the Angel. For ten points, identify this Japanese author best known for his 4-volume Sea of Fertility.;;(Yukio) Mishima|(Kimitake) Hiraoka;;
World History;;Among this man's influences were the writings of Lorimer Denis, and at the beginning of his rule, he was opposed by Archbishop Francois Poirier, whom this man later exiled. An attack on a neighboring country's embassy brought this man in conflict with Juan Bosch, though the incident was later defused by the OAS, and this man helped organize the resistance to Paul Magloire after the overthrew of Dumarsailles Estime. When this man suffered a heart attack in 1959, he was temporarily replaced by Clement Barbot, who had helped this man organize a paramilitary force known as the "Bogeymen," or Tontons Macoute. For ten points, identify this man, who was succeeded by his son after ruling Haiti from 1957 until 1971.;;F(rancois) Duvalier|Papa Doc Duvalier;;Duvalier
Religion/Mythology;;In the 13th canto of the Kalevala, Lemminkainen is tasked with slaying the Hiisi elk, which is said to have one of these made from a stump. In Japanese myth, Yamato no Orochi is said to have eight of them, while the Slavic deity Triglav possesses three. In the Skaldskaparmal, after surpassing the craftsmanship of the sons of Ivaldi, Brokk demands the one belonging to Loki. Britain could not be invaded so long as the one belonging to Bran was planted facing across the Channel, and the one belonging to Mimir was preserved by Odin as an oracle after it was sent back by the Vanir. Perseus stored Medusa's in a magic wallet. FTP, identify this body part which, when detached from the body of Orpheus, floated down a river singing.;;head;;
Art;;An unknown artist depicted this man being attended by Doctors Craik and Brown during his last illness, while a notable chronicler of this man's life in art was Junius Brutus Stearns, who depicted this man's marriage and his life "as Citizen". This man appears in a red uniform holding a musket across his body in a portrait by Charles Winston Peale, while other notable depictions of this man's life include the engravings of John McRae. Jean-Antoine Houdon produced a bust of this figure, but the most iconic depiction shows him standing in the prow of a small boat while an American flag is carried by a man to his right. FTP, identify this man, famously depicted in a presidential portrait by Gilbert Stuart and by Emmanuel Leutze as "crossing the Delaware".;;(George) Washington;;
Geography;;Originally established by the khanate of Kokand, this city is situated along the Alaarcha and Alamedin rivers, and Erkindik Boulevard is one its main avenues. North of this city is the Chu River, which forms part of its country's border with a northern neighbor, and the Kant air base, owned by Russia, is located 20 miles east of it. From 1926 until 1991, this city was named after Mikhail Frunze pron: froon-zeh, an equestrian statue of whom can still be found in this city's Ala-Too Square. Today it is served by the Manas International Airport and is the seat of a government headed by Kurmanbek Bakiyev. The capital of a country that is home to Lake Isyk-Kul and the Tienshan range, FTP, identify this capital of Kyrgyzstan.;;Bishkek;;
Noncomputational Math;;A type of differentiable manifold in which each tangent space has an inner product that varies smoothly is named for this man. His namesake sphere is an extension of the complex plane, while his namesake surface is a one-dimensional complex manifold. With Cauchy, he lends his names to a set of equations which determine whether a function is holomorphic, though his namesake hypothesis about the distribution of the zeros of a namesake function has yet to be solved. FTP, name this German mathematician whose aforementioned zeta function gives the distribution of prime numbers and whose eponymous sums are a method of numerical integration.;;(Bernhard) Riemann;;
Literature;;Karen Swann describes this poem as a case of "harassing the muse," since we only hear one side of the story, and the title is taken from a poem by Alan Cartier. The narrator is shocked at first, given that the squirrels have all finished their harvest, but we then learn how the speaker was given "honey wild, and manna dew". The titular character sings "a faery's song" and takes the speaker to an "elfin grot". The speaker then falls asleep and dreams of "death-pale" figures who warn him that he has been tricked, and the poem opens with the aforementioned narrator asking what bothers the "knight-at-arms".  FTP, name this ballad centering on a seductive woman who deserts a knight after their brief encounter, a work by John Keats.;;(La) Belle Dame Sans Merci;;
Art;;Theodore Duret claims that the women in this work have a "roguish charm" which only this work's artist could create. In the upper right, a woman with a feathered hat touches her gloved hands to her face, and a man in ablack top hat has his back turned to us. On the right, a man sits backwards in his chair to the left of a woman in a blue dress. The artist's future wife Aline Charigot cradles a Bob, a black dog, while a man in a brimmed straw hat leans against the balcony next to her. Set at the Maison Fournaise, FTP, name this painting which a table with plenty of food and wine for a meal eaten on the Seine waterfront, an Impressionistic work by Pierre-Auguste Renoir.;;Luncheon of the Boating Party;;
World History;;This man was known to have masqueraded under the names Orontes, Moeris, and Diodotus of Erythrae, and Arrian calls him the governor of Assakenois. as well as by the Achaemenid dynasty. He successfully repelled an invasion by Seleucus I Nicator, but retired after the onset of a 12-year famine and fasted to death. Heavily influenced by his mentor Canakya's text Arthasastra, in his earlier years he defeated the Nanda kingdom after taking the throne of the Magadha kingdom, and established his center of power at Paliputra. FTP, name this grandfather of Ashoka and founder of the Mauryan empire.;;Chandragupta (Maurya);;
Chemistry;;The Bartoli synthesis uses three equivalents of them to produce indoles, and another reaction that uses them results in the production of enol lactones, the Fujimoto-Belleau reaction. Their utility is limited by the Boord reaction, and they are instrumental in the production of the drugs Taximofen and Naproxen. Because they dimerize by the Schenk equilibrium, they must be coordinated to solvents like THF or diethyl ether. Also used in the ring opening of epoxides, they act as strong nucleophiles to produce alcohols from aldehydes or ketones, and as bases, they produce the corresponding alkane when dissolved in water. FTP, identify these magnesium halide organometallic reagents, named for a Frenchman.;;Grignard (reagent(s));;
Literature;;Through bribery, one character in this novel is made a chevalier in order to give his wife a fancier funeral, and another character hides in the nunnery at Grandview Garden due to her illness. Another character hires a sorceress to bewitch her son's half-brother and Phoenix, but her efforts are thwarted by a lame priest. Opening with the story about an object abandoned by Nuwa, this story also sees one character attempt to marry Precious Virtue to her cousin, which results in the death of Black Jade. After passing the Imperial exams with flying colors, Pao-yu is nowhere to be found. FTP, name this classical Chinese novel about the downfall of the Jia family, written by Cao Xuequin.;;Dream of the Red Chamber|Honglu Meng|Dream of Red Mansions|Story of the Stone;;
Religion/Mythology;;A fish couple and a pot full of pure water are numbered among its eight auspicious symbols, and the endless knot is another prominent motif. Its cosmogony divides the universe into seven parts, including the Nigoda, where the lowest life-forms reside, and its members practice Satya, or truthfulness, as well as aparigraha or 'detachment.' Visions of a famine by one of their leaders led to the schism between the "white-clad" and "sky-clad" sects, and its followers perform a fivefold bow when reciting the fundamental prayer, the Navakar Mantra. Based on the teachings of men like Mahavira, the 24th Tirthankara, FTP, identify this Indian religion which teaches that the way to bliss is through nonviolence and renunciation.;;Jain(ism);;
Philosophy;;In one section of this work, the author calls Euclid's methods 'perverted' since he tends to ignore the importance of perception. In another part, the author draws upon the concept of Tat tvam asi, but dispels the idea that renunciation leads to suicide. In the preface, the author compares the effects of the works of Kant to operating on a blind man's cataracts, and in book 3 argues that art allows us to transcend conflict, and that music grants immediate access to its subject. In the opening he states that one who attains wisdom becomes certain that what he knows is only an eye that sees a sun and a hand that feels the earth. FTP, name this work which considers the unobservable truth as a "thing-in itself", penned by Arthur Schopenhauer.;;(The) World as Will and Idea|The World as Will and Representation|(Die) Welt als Wille und Vorstellung;;
Biology;;Recent research has shown that Pif1 directs the movement of these objects, and the cancer drug Cytarabine causes destabilization of them. Enzymes which act on them are governed by RPA, and these objects were first confirmed using a pulse-chase experiment with tritium-marked substrates. Enzymes like RNAse H and FEN1 remove the RNA primers which begin these objects, and phosphodiester bonds are then formed as they are linked together by ligase. Occurring because DNA polymerase only works in the 5-prime to 3-prime direction, FTP, name these pieces of DNA formed on the lagging strand during replication, named for a Japanese husband-and-wife team.;;Okazaki fragments;;
Literature;;In one story by this author, a hunter comes across a group of five boys, one of whom relates the story of a paper mill haunted by a goblin as they sit around the campfire. In one of his novels, an aspiring artist and his illegitimate half-sister vacation to the Rhine where they meet a man known only as N.N, and the teenager Vladimir Voldemar vies with his father for the affections of Zinaida in his novella First Love. In addition to Asya, On the Eve, and A Sportsman's Sketches , he wrote a novel in which a medical student runs afoul of the Kirsanov family and even distances his closest friend Arkady. FTP, name this Russian author who created the nihilist Bazarov in Fathers and Sons.;;(Ivan) Turgenev;;
United States History;;In an earlier conflict at the same location, James Negley encountered the forces of Edmund Kirby Smith atop Cameron Hill. One general here waited at Orchard Knob near the enemy line of rifle pits, and the pursuit following this battle was thwarted at Ringgold Gap. Patrick Cleburn successfully delayed Sherman's advance on the final morning, but Carter Stevenson failed to hold Lookout Mountain in the 'Battle above the Clouds.' Joseph Hooker broke through to Missionary Ridge on the final afternoon, further damaging an army which had been defeated under William Rosencrans at Chickamauga two months earlier. FTP, identify this battle of 1863 where Ulysses Grant defeated Braxton Bragg at a namesake city in southeast Tennessee.;;(Third) (Battle) (of) Chattanooga;;Second (Battle) (of) Chattanooga
Pop Culture;;Chances are you didn't see this man playing Chauvelin in the 1982 adaptation of The Scarlet Pimpernel, or as Dr. Peter Cleave in Asylum. It's more likely you saw him portraying James Whale in Gods and Monsters, or playing himself on The Simpsons and getting struck by lightning because people keep saying "MacBeth". He provided the voice of Iorek Byrnison in The Golden Compass, and you may have seen another of his characters trapped on a bridge and shouting "You shall not pass!" FTP, name this British actor and gay rights activist, best-known for playing Magneto in X-Men and Gandalf in The Lord of the Rings.;;(Sir) (Ian) McKellen;;
Psychology;;This man claimed that, like Hitler, Maxim Gorky fell mentally ill with the futility of existence in an essay on the "Legends" of Gorky's youth. Together with his wife and Helen Kivnick, he analyzed the results of the "Guidance Study" in Vital Involvement in Old Age, and applied his psychoanalytic theory historically in a work chronicling the life of a reformer. His studies of Sioux Indian children in collaboration with Alfred Kroeber contributed to his theories on personality development. He won a Pulitzer for Young Man Luther, and his essays were later collected in Childhood and Society. FTP, name this German-born psychologist who posited eight stages of psychosocial development and coined the phrase "identity crisis".;;(Erik) Erikson;;
Music;;In one scene of this opera, a quarrel between two lovers results in the quartet "Addio dolce svegliare alla matina" at an inn near a toll gate. In a previous act, one of those lovers sings  "Quando me'n vo," to the chagrin of Alcinodoro, while in another scene a philosopher goes to pawn his overcoat. In another episode, two characters celebrate their love in the duet "O Soave Faniculla" before accompanying their friends to the Latin Quarter. Pretending that he cannot find a lost key, the lead tenor, Rodolfo, sings "Che Gelida Manina" to a character who later dies of tuberculosis, Mimi. FTP, identify this opera about the titular group of four Parisian intellectuals, a work by Giacomo Puccini.;;La Boheme;;
World History;;This event's spearheader wrote a forward to a work about it by Jiri Valer subtitled "Anatomy of a Decision". Its goals were outlined in the Action Programme, while in its aftermath, student Jan Pach set himself on fire. A call for openness during this event was written into the manifesto "The Two Thousand Words" by Ludvík Vakulík. Only František Kriegel refused to sign the Moscow Protocol which followed this event, which began with Ludvik Svodoba's elevation to the presidency. Cut short due to an invasion by the Warsaw Pact, FTP, identify this period of political liberalization under First Secretary Alexander Dubcek in Czechoslovakia in 1968.;;Prague Spring;;
Music;;One section of this work contains a passage depicting a goat-herd resting with his faithful dog, while another movement depicts a calm fireplace and uses pizzicato to represent the rain. Originally, they were published under the title "The Contest between Harmony and Intervention". The last of these is in F minor, and the accompanying sonnet compares the brisk, rushing tempo to the north wind. The last movement of the second, written in G minor, is likened to a thunderstorm, and the third ends in a triumphant allegro representing a hunter's song. FTP, name this set of violin concertos originally published as part of the Opus 8 of Antonio Vivaldi.;;(The) Four Seasons|(Le) Quattro Stagioni;;
Physics;;Mayer and Atzrodt have developed models to investigate the use of this property in actuators, and wafers possessing this property are used to control scanning microscopes in the nanometer range. Lead zirconate titanate is the standard medical imaging material which uses it, and PVDF is one of the few polymers to display it. It is exhibited by ceramics like barium tantalite and lithium niobate, and its converse is eletrostriction. First discovered in Rochelle salts and quarts by Pierre and Jacques Curie, FTP, identify this ability of certain materials to produce an electric potential in response to applied stress.;;piezoelectricity|piezoelectric (effect);;
World History;;A bronze-age people established the settlements of Erice and Egesta here and were called the Elymians.  Euphemius declared himself Emperor here, and with the help of the Aghlabids established the "Emirate" of this place. Roger de Hautevelle defeated a Saracen garrison here, and Peter III of Aragon instigated a rebellion against Charles of Anjou here, which he supported by sending his army to Trapani. The Peace of Caltabellotta ended the aforementioned War of the "Vespers" of this place, while the Edict of Bayonne established the ‘Kingdom of the Two' of them. FTP, name this island to which Alcibaides led a disastrous Athenian naval expedition during the Peloponnesian War.;;Sicily;;
Religion/Mythology;;He rescued Achilles from the river god Scamander. A son of this god named Cacus plundered Heracles' cattle and paid with his life, and he was once carried to Olympus on the back of a donkey. In another story, the future Athenian king Erichthonius was produced when this god's semen fell from Athena's thigh. According to the Iliad his wife was a Grace called Aglaea, and this god's actions allowed for the emergence of a daughter of Metis. He constructed his palace on Lemnos after falling for nine days and nights, though he was later thrown off Olympus again for siding with his mother Hera in an argument. FTP, name this Greek equivalent of Vulcan, the god of smiths and fire.;;Hephaestus;;
World History;;His first election to parliament saw him replace John Martin, and a lack of response from a later prime minister led him to issue the "vote-Tory" manifesto. He successfully won a lawsuit against The Times concerning Richard Piggott, and was the main influence behind the "No Rent" manifesto which was abandoned in the 'Kilmainham treaty.' Though popular as the first president of the Land League, forged letters surfaced claiming that this man had supported the Pheonix Park murders, and the IPP rejected his leadership after he was named in a divorce proceeding between William and Kitty O'Shea. FTP, name this chief advocate of Irish home rule during the 1880s.;;(Charles) (Stewart) Parnell;;
Literature;;One of this author's works sees several employees of the title locale, including Fernande and Rosa, journey to witness Constance's confirmation, while another works features the prostitute Rachel stabbing the title character, an officer named Wilhelm von Eyrick. In addition to "Madame Tellier's Establishment" and "Mademoiselle Fifi," this author wrote a short story in which Elizabeth Rousset, the title prostitute, finally gives in to the Prussian officer, as well as a work in which Mathilde Loisel works to pay back Madame Forestier for the title object, which turns out to be fake. FTP, name this French author of "Boule de suif," or "Ball of Fat," and "The Necklace".;;(Guy) (de) Maupassant;;
World History;;At Magdala on Good Friday in 1868, Robert Napier crushed the forces of this entity, whose ruler then committed suicide. Kassai replaced Abuna Salama, the head of the Orthodox Church in this country before becoming emperor, while the Battle of Wofla was fought near the end of its war with the Adal Sultanate. Mengistu became head of state after the Derg deposed the then-ruler; that ruler had led this nation in its second war with Italy, the first of which ended with a victory at Adowa. FTP, name this African nation whose leaders have included Menelik II and Haile Selassie and has its capital at Addis Ababa.;;Ethiopia;;
Physics;;A 2005 study at the SLAC showed the lessening strength of this entity at longer distances. Val Fitch and James Cronin received the Nobel Prize using kaon decay to demonstrate its property of CP violation, and an early theory of it was attempted by Fermi, whose name is sometimes given to its coupling constant. Yang and Lee built upon the experiments of C.S. Wu to show that it violates parity, and the Glashow-Weinberg-Salaam theory unifies it with the electromagnetic force. Mediated by the heavy W and Z gauge bosons, it is capable of changing flavour, and affects all quarks and left-handed leptons. Causing the production of a proton, electron, and anti-neutrino in beta-minus decay, this is, FTP, which fundamental interaction, ten to the fourteenth power less in strength than the strong force?;;weak (force);;
Music;;The maid Berta sings, "Il vecchiotto cerca moglie" in this work, while the aria "Una voce poco fa" is often sung higher than its composer had intended for coloratura sopranos to perform it. The "Slander Song" is sung by the singing teacher, who is bribed to feign scarlet fever in the quintet "Buona sera, mio signore" as one character pretends to be his substitute. That character, who poses as the student Lindoro, is aided by a character, who enters singing "Largo al factotum" and helps the count enter the home of Dr. Bartolo, whom he provides with a daily shave. Rosina and Count Almaviva are wedded thanks to the plans of Figaro, the title character of, FTP, which Rossini opera?;;(The) Barber of Seville;;
Sociology;;Nathan Schlanger collected several of this man's works in the 2006 work Techniques, Technology and Civilization, while a counterexample to one of his best known ideas involving Jain "gastropolitics" is provided in Riches and Renunciation by James Laidlaw. Sociology and Anthropology, a collection of his essays, was published in the year of his death, 1950. This inventor of the phrase "total social fact" is best known for a work, which is subtitled "The Form and Reason for Exchange in Archaic Societies" and discusses reciprocity and voluntary exchange. FTP, name this French sociologist and author of The Gift.;;(Marcel) Mauss;;
World History;;Uldin's failed invasion of Moesia eventually led to the splitting of this group before the rise of Octar, who may have been its second ruler and also known as Uptar. Ardaric, the king of the Gepids, defeated King Ellac and this group at the Battle of Nedao, effectively ending their rule. The sons of Mundzuk were left in charge of this group after the death of his brother Rugila, and they negotiated a treaty at Margus with the Eastern Roman empire before Bleda was killed, leaving his brother to lead these people to victory at the Battle of the Utus and defeat by Aetius at Chalons, or the Catalonian Plains. FTP, name this group of semi-nomadic equestrian Central Asians whose famous ruler was Attila.;;Huns;;
Literature;;The ladies in this work do not believe that the protagonist of this work could forget "noblesse oblige," even after the death of that character's father. The title character, who is the subject of complaints by the Board of Aldermen, gives china-painting lessons, refuses to pay taxes, and has her servant Tobe run her errands. The purchase of a silver toilet set, a complete outfit of men's clothing, and arsenic occur before the title character's cousins leave town, after which the foreman Homer Barron returns to Jefferson before never being seen again. However, it is revealed that the title character has been sleeping with the corpse of her lover at the end of, FTP, which short story by William Faulkner?;;(A) Rose for Emily;;
Religion/Mythology;;The Midrash Raba relates how Nimrod forced this figure to worship the fire, an event which ended in the death of Haran. He rescued a relative by defeating Chedorlaomer at Dan, which led to his blessing by Melchizedek. He fathered Zimran by Keturah, and he was twice forced to pretend that his wife was his sister.  He provided the mother of his surrogate first-born with food before his wife exiled her to the desert of Paran, and managed to save his nephew Lot when escaping from the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah. FTP, name this Biblical figure, husband of Sarah and father of Ishmael, who was spared from sacrificing his son Isaac.;;Abraham|Abram;;
Biology;;Mutations in the sixth type of this molecule causes Bethlem myopathy and Ullrich myopathy. Mutations in another version of this molecule causes Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, while another mutation in this molecule causes Alports's syndrome.  This molecule is stained by Masson's Trichrome, and it is modified by prolyl hydroxylase in the ER during synthesis, which requires vitamin C as a cofactor.  Every third residue in this protein is glycine, which allows it to stabilize into a characteristic triple helix.  FTP, name this fibrous connective tissue protein found in tendons, bones, teeth, and skin, the most abundant protein in mammals.;;Collagen;;
Art;;One of his unrealized words was to house the totemic King of Kings, many pieces of which came from reclaimed house-timbers. A similar work used chestnut and oak to represent the title characters of his Adam and Eve, while Margin Pogany inspired a sculpture by this artist. He commemorated his hometown with a tower of 17 rhomboidal shapes, and the influence of Rodin can be seen in his rectangular marble version of The Kiss.  His native folklore was the basis for his Maiastra. In 1920, a Parisian exhibit banned his allegedly phallic Princess X, but this sculptor remains best remembered for a marble and bronze series that was mistaken for a propeller blade. FTP, name this Romanian sculptor of Bird in Space.;;(Constantin) Brancusi;;
United States History;;A 1980 amendment that prevented the growth of the Missouri state budget from exceeding that of the family budget was named after a man with this surname. Another man with this surname issued his General Order Number 40 while governing the Fifth Military District, supporting Andrew Johnson's policies. That man would be defeated in the 1880 presidential election by James Garfield, having successfully fought in the Peninsular and Wilderness campaigns. The most famous man with this surname served as the Second Continental Congress's President and as Massachusetts's first governor. Mel and Winfield Scott both shared, FTP, which surname, also that of the first signer of the Declaration of Independence?;;Hancock;;
Literature;;The midget Mr. Brown is brought in to rid of an ant plague in this novel, which also features the calling in of Rostipov to examine a character's curious muteness. Uncle Marcos's body is recovered along with the dog Barrabas early on in this work, which sees a loan to a prostitute of the Red Lantern and eventually of the Hotel Christopher Columbus repaid by this work's end. By the end of the novel, Estaban dies in the arms of Alba, avoiding a prophecy similarly made by the clairvoyant Clara in portending the death of her green-haired sister, Rosa the Beautiful. The life of the Trueba family in the titular home is chronicled in, FTP, which novel by Isabel Allende?;;(The) House of the Spirits;;
Biology;;Some plants create an alternative version of this process via the use of the AOX protein, and GLDH interfaces with this pathway during ascorbate synthesis. This process is disrupted by the protein thermogenin and the chemical FCCP, and the antibiotics Rotenone and Antimycin A were used to elucidate this process. Molecules can enter this pathway via either succinate dehydrogenase or a ubiquinone oxoreductase, and the next steps involve Coenzyme Q and cytochrome c. Used to generate a proton gradient across the inner mitochondrial membrane, FTP, name this set of chemical reactions which follows the Krebs Cycle and produces ATP by the use of a donor and acceptor of negatively charged atoms.;;E(lectron) T(ransport) C(hain)|oxidative phosphorylation;;
Art;;One character responds to another's vision by recalling the incident where he claimed that the Devil used his tail as a brush to paint wheels red. That character is later made to dance like a bear by Raval, who was prevented by Jons from raping a mute girl, whose only line, "It is the end," comes near the end of the film. The protagonist allows the acrobat, Jof, and his family to escape, although his declaration that he will win by "a combination of the knight and the bishop" does not come true. Max von Sydow portrays Antonius Bloch, a knight, who returns home from the Crusades while playing chess with Death in, FTP, which 1957 Ingmar Bergman film?;;(The) Seventh Seal;;
Religion/Mythology;;One story alleging his death involves a herdsman bringing back a dog's tongue, while he would later offer a golden crown to the bull that could beat the Agelaus's champion. Aesacus gave an ominous interpretation of his birth, which his mother dreamt as giving birth to a flaming torch, after which he was left abandoned on Gargarus, the tallest peak of Mount Ida. Later on, Oenone would refuse to treat his fatal wound, inflicted by Philoctetes, which occurred after his duel with Menelaus and his wounding of Achilles. FTP, name this brother of Hector, a shepherd whose advice was sought during the wedding of Peleus and Thetis and whose choice of Aphrodite sparked the Trojan War.;;Paris;;
United States History;;The "staples" idea of Harold Innis and the Laurentian school of thought popularized by J.M.S. Careless are known as the basis of the Canadian equivalent to this statement, which is often opposed by the "metropolitan-hinterland" paradigm. Merle Curti, a student of this idea's creator, tried to extend it by examining Trempeleau County and published a 1943 work about his historiometric studies. Its formulator, the author of The Character and Influence of the Indian Trade in Wisconsin, attributed "restless, nervous energy" and "dominant individualism" to the title concept. The argument that "the existence of free land… and the advance of American settlement westward explain American development" is known as, FTP, which thesis, proposed by Frederick Jackson Turner?;;Frontier (thesis);;
World History;;This figure captured Narbonne while evicting the Saracens from Gaul, and this former mayor of Neustria put Desiderius in power with the approval of Pope Paul I. Due to the requests of Pope Stephen II, he defeated Aistulf, king of the Lombards, having earlier put down a rebellion led by half-brother Grifo, who had hoped to establish rule in Bavaria. Having deposed Childeric III and confining him to a monastery after the retirement of this ruler's brother Carloman, he integrated Aquitaine into his kingdom and founded the Papal States with his namesake "Donation". The father of Charlemagne and the son of Charles Martel, this is, FTP, which first Carolingian ruler of the Franks?;;Pepin (the) Short|Pepin III|Pippin the Short;;
Music;;This composer reworked the music for the ballet Ala i Lolli into his Scythian Suite, while he composed a Symphony-Concerto for Mstislav Rostropovich, inspiring a similar work by Shostakovich. A poem by Balmont inspired his Visions Fugitive set for piano, while Valery Bryusov's novel The Fiery Angel was the basis of his opera of the same name. The March is the most famous section of his opera The Love for Three Oranges, while the "Troika" is the fourth movement of his Lieutenant Kije Suite. Better known for the opera War and Peace and his ballets Cinderella and Romeo and Juliet, this is, FTP, which this Russian composer of Peter and the Wolf?;;(Sergei) Prokofiev;;
Noncomputational Math;;Van Der Wardern's theorem gives the number of ways to color one subset of these numbers, and this result is generalized by the Szemeredi theorem. The Eisenstein ones are imaginary numbers that lie in the quadratic field "Q extension square root of negative 3", and the Gaussian ones lie in "Q extension square root of negative 1". This set of numbers is a cyclic group under addition with cardinality Aleph-null, and a mapping from the real numbers to them is given by the floor function. Usually denoted by a blackboard "Z", FTP, name this set of numbers which consists of zero, the positive whole numbers, and the negative whole numbers.;;Integers;;Positive Integers
Literature;;This character notes to another that "the eye sees not itself / But by reflection," and, later that night, he speaks to himself about "a serpent's egg / Which hatched, would, as his kind grow mischievous". He reveals that he has been "at war with himself" when conversing with another character, who tells him that "the fault… is not in their stars". In Act Four, he later tells the same character that "there is a tide in the affairs of men / Which, taken at the flood, leads on to fortune," while arguing to begin a battle, where he "overcame himself" at the hands of Strato at Philippi. FTP, name this "honorable" character, the "noblest Roman of them all," who announced that although he loved the title character, he "loved Rome more" in stabbing Julius Caesar.;;Brutus;;
Art;;Chaumpfery, one of the few critics to initially praise this painting, claims that the traces of wine in the red faces of some figures provide an uplifting tone. A man whose eyes are obscured by a black hat exchanges gazes with a child in a red skullcap in this work, whose alternate title calls it a "Painting of Human Figures". One figure has a Black 'X' marked on his robe, while a nearby child carries a brass vessel. A white hat lies strewn on the ground, while a black and white dog turns its head to our right. A priest stands next to two men in red robes, as another man at kneels before the big hole in the center. FTP, identify this painting of a funeral at the artist's hometown, the first great masterpiece of Gustave Courbet.;;Burial at Ornans;;
United States History;;One political cartoon related to this bill depicts a man being pushed into the mouth of a giant, and a group called the "F Street Mess" was influential in revising it. Immediately after its reintroduction, Joshua Giddings referred to it as a "gross violation of a sacred pledge" in his "Appeal of the Independent Democrats". Also denounced in the Peoria Speech, this bill's underpinnings were central to its formulator's "Freeport Doctrine".  The passage of this act lead to the actions of the Border Ruffians and a localized "Bleeding" conflict in one state. FTP, name this 1854 act formulated by Stephen Douglass that upheld popular sovereignty and repealed the Missouri Compromise, named for two Midwestern states.;;Kansas-Nebraska (Act);;
Religion/Mythology;;In Norse myth, Eggther owns one of these items, which he uses mournfully during Ragnarok instead of participating. In Shinto, one of these objects is used in a form of divination called Koto-ura.  In Irish myth, the Dagda recovered one of these items from a Formorian camp, which he always took into battle and used to manipulate emotions. Amphion used one of these items in the construction of Thebes, and another one of them was exchanged for some cattle by one god. Also used to combat the Sirens during the quest for the Golden Fleece, the first one was created from a tortoise shell by Hermes, and one of them was used in a failed recovery of Eurydice. FTP, name these stringed instruments used by Orpheus and Apollo.;;Harp|Lyre;;
Physics;;Modern methods to compute them include Coupled cluster methods and Moller-Plasset perturbation theory, which includes correlation functions.  John Pople's work on them used primitive Gaussians as basis sets, and they are the eigenfunctions of the Fock operator in Hartree-Fock theory. Easily derived via the LCAO method, these entities are the solutions of the Schrodinger equation for a multi-body electronic Hamiltonian. They can be used to explain why dihydrogen can exist but dihelium cannot, and they come in bonding and antibonding varieties. FTP, name these regions of space around a molecule where electrons hang out.;;Molecular orbital(s);;orbital(s)
Art;;A small engraving of an owl can be seen on a seat in this work, which shows one black iron ring hanging from the upper right wall. A tall pedestal with a lamp can also be seen, and a partially opened scroll is lying on the floor next to a figure in a gray robe. Three people ascending a staircase can be seen through the archway in this work, and a small harp is lying next to the central figure.  A man with a red robe holds up a golden cup in this work, whose central figure sits on a bed pointing upwards with his left hand. A group of distraught followers stand next to the title figure in, FTP, this Jacques-Louis David painting depicting an ancient Greek philosopher about to drink some hemlock.;;(The) Death of Socrates;;
Literature;;One of his works centers around the peasant girl Zohra, who works as a servant at the titular pension, while this author of Mockery of the Fates and The Struggle of Tyba wrote about Said Mahran, the title criminal in another work. He wrote about the death of the barber Abbas in one work, while an earlier work tells of the families of Adam, Moses, Jesus, and Mohammed, all of which settle in the same imaginary alley. Better known than Miramar, The Thief and the Dogs, Midaq Alley, and Children of Gebelawi is a work about the al-Jawad family, a series of novels that includes Palace Walk and Sugar Street. FTP, name this Nobel Laureate of 1988, best known for his Cairo Trilogy.;;(Naguib) Mahfouz;;
World History;;One figure in this battle died after attempting to grip onto a ship with his bare hands, only to have a member of the opposing army cut it off. The initial charge of one side managed to catch the rear cavalry off-guard, and caused the other groups' missiles to land harmlessly behind them. The retreating side in this battle traveled towards Mesogia and attempted to escape on their triremes, where some of them drowned in a swamp after getting pincered. A group of Platean hoplites helped one side, and this battle is most famous for the exploits of Phidippides, a messenger. FTP, name this 490BC battle in which Datis and Artaphernes lost to a group of Athenians under Miltiades, which lends its name to a 26-mile race.;;(Battle) (of) Marathon;;
Psychology;;Clifford Mays extended this man's work to teaching and learning, and one of his works posited that UFOs are examples of a "modern myth"; that work is entitled Flying Saucers. His autobiography is entitled Memories, Dreams, and Reflections, and this man controversially analyzed a section of the Bible in Answer to Job. This man's work was extended by Myers and Briggs to create their namesake personality test, and he also posited feminine and masculine components of the psyche called the anima and animus. He theorized about a "reservoir of experience" shared between all humans called the "collective unconscious". FTP, name this author of Psychological Types who split with Freud in 1912, a Swiss psychoanalyst who posited the idea of archetypes.;;(Carl) (Gustav) Jung;;
Pop Culture;;Their creator gave his son a "control medallion" which prevented them from attacking him, and after a group of them flew into the sun, they gained teleportation abilities. The Office of National Emergency keeps a squad of human-piloted ones, and they were instrumental in Henry Gyrich's Project Wideawake. During Operation: Zero Tolerance, several humans including Karima Shapandar were transformed into "Prime" ones lead by Bastion. Nimrod is an advanced version of them built by Forge, and a group of them killed 16 million people on the island of Genosha under the command of Cassandra Nova, the evil twin sister of Charles Xavier. Originally created by Bolivar Trask, FTP, name these gigantic mutant-hunting robots from the Marvel universe.;;Sentinel(s);;
Literature;;In 1999, this author published a work made up of 100 short chapters, one for each year of the twentieth century, while three women send the title creature to stand before a tribunal after catching it in Lubeck Bay. Simon Dach is the organizer of the title event in one of this author's works, while a later work centers on the sinking of a cruise ship carrying refugees from the Red Army during WWII. In addition to My Century, The Flounder, The Meeting at Telgte, and Crabwalk, he wrote a novel that takes place largely on a shipwrecked minesweeper explored by protagonist Joachim Mahlke. That novel, along with Dog Years and an earlier work about Osker Matzerath, form the Danzig Trilogy of, FTP, what German author of The Tin Drum?;;(Gunter) Grass;;
Biology;;The expression of BMAL is integral to the development of these processes. In humans, they are partly controlled by the dimerization of ARNTL2 and NPAS2, and in Drosophila, Seymour Benzer discovered the Per and Cry genes, which are integral to these processes. Established through zeitgebers via a process called entrainment, in humans they are largely controlled by signals from the retinohypothalamic tract to the suprachiasmatic nucleus in the hypothalamus. Also controlled by the release of melatonin from the pineal gland, they are disrupted in individuals with seasonal affective disorder and jet lag. FTP, name these 24-hour cycles of behavioral and biochemical processes in living beings, the prime example being sleep.;;Circadian rhythms;;day-night cycles
Sociology;;This man published critical reviews of Tönnies's Gemeinschaft und Gesellschaft. He argued that society is the source of the categories of human thought in Primitive Classification, and chapters of another work address 'The Negative Cult and its Functions' and 'The Peculiar Rite. He examined the origins of Australian Totemistm in that work, Elementary forms of the Religious Life, and another work divides solidarity into mechanical and organic types. Also known for differentiating between the egoistic, altruistic, anomic, and fatalistic forms of a certain action, FTP, identify this French sociologist, author of The Division of Labor in Society and Suicide.;;(Emile) Durkheim;;
Literature;;One scene in this work relates the robbing of a convoy carrying birthday gifts after a group of seven people swear an oath of loyalty and disguise themselves as date traders. One character, nicknamed the "Big Knife", leads an attack against the protagonists but is converted to their side after being captured, and at the end of this work the protagonists are hired by the government to put down the rebellion of Fang Xi. Focusing on the exploits of the 108 stars of destiny, FTP, name this novel that takes place near the end of the Song dynasty, in which a group of bandits centered at Mount Liang fight against the tyrannical Kao Chui and oppose a corrupt government.;;Outlaws of the Marsh|Water Margin|Shuihu Zhuan|All Men are Brothers;;
World History;;His betrothal to the daughter of Humbert III was supposed to grant him the Piemonte and Savoy, and this ruler signed the Treaty of Le Goulet in order to settle one border dispute. He appointed Hubert de Burgh as Chief Justiciar, and both Hubert and William Marshall would go on to fend of an invasion by Louis of France in the First Baron's War. His allies' defeat at the battle of Bouvines by Phillip II greatly weakened his position, and his dispute with Stephen Langton and Pope Innocent III led to his meeting a group of Nobles at Runnymede. FTP, name this son of Eleanor of Aquitaine, an Angevin king most famous for signing the Magna Carta in 1215.;;(King) John (I) (of) (England)|John (Lackland);;
Pop Culture;;In one film, this actor plays a character who falls in love with Vantine, a woman from Saigon, and in another early role he portrays Peter Warne. In addition to his roles in Red Dust and It Happened One Night, he portrayed submarine commander PJ Richardson in Run Silent, Run Deep, and won an Academy award for his portrayal of Fletcher Christian in Mutiny on the Bounty. He's probably most famous for his role as a man who visits Twelve Oaks plantation and falls in love with a character played by Vivian Leigh. FTP, name this American actor who uttered "Frankly my dear, I don't give a damn" as Rhett Butler in Gone With the Wind.;;(Clark) Gable;;
Music;;One character in this opera, after being mistaken for the devil, reasons that if there are black birds, then of course there should be black people too. Three boys advise the lead tenor to ‘be a man,' and Monostatos is punished for his insolence at the end of Act I. Upon seeing a lovely portrait, the tenor sings "Dies Bildnis ist bezaubend schön," and that character is forced to remain silent by Sarastro as part of his trials. The same fate befalls Papageno earlier, and another character is given a dagger as we hear the coloratura aria "Der Hölle Rache" from the Queen of the Night. FTP, identify this opera where Tamino is sent to rescue Pamina using the titular instrument, the final opera by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart.;;(The) Magic Flute|(Die) Zauberflote;;
Philosophy;;One of his works argues that rationality is the core of all reality, and states that there is no reality besides that which is shaped by the mind; a condensed version of this work can be found in his Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences. One of his works divides the title concept into abstract, moral and ethical spheres, and posits the idea that free will can only be realized in systems of property rights and contracts. In addition to the aforementioned Science of Logic, another work relies on the thesis-antithesis-synthesis method, and includes discussions of Absolute Knowing and the master-slave dialectic. FTP, name this German philosopher and author of The Philosophy of Right and Phenomenology of Mind.;;(Georg) (Wilhelm) (Friedrich) Hegel;;
Religion/Mythology;;This god gained one of his servants when her brother crushed the bone of one of his animals. One of his stepsons lives in the hall Ydalir and is the god of snowshoes, while another child was courted by the dwarf Alvis, who was turned to stone after this god tricked him. While traveling with Roskva and Thialfi, this god wrestles with Elli and has an eating contest with fire at the behest of Skrymir. He lives in Bilskirnir, and he carries the belt Meginjarpr and gloves Jarngrieper. His goats Tanngrisnir and Tanngnjost regenerate after they die. The husband of the golden-haired Sif and father of Magni and Modi, FTP, name this wielder of the hammer Mjollnir, the Norse god of thunder.;;Thor;;
Literature;;Phillip Glass composed the music to this authors' Hydrogen Jukebox¸ while his early work is collected in Empty Mirror. One work says the title land is where clouds rise "as on a wave" on a "green crag", and another poem describes people "shopping for images", and includes a discussion of Whitman's beard. William Blake's influence can be seen in his "Sunflower Sutra", and in addition to "Wales Visitation" and "A Supermarket in California", he wrote an elegy describing his mother's immigration and insanity. In another poem, he addresses "angelheaded hipsters" and notes how madness destroyed the best minds of his generation in a more famous work. FTP, name this Jewish beat poet of "Kaddish" and "Howl".;;(Allan) Ginsberg;;
United States History;;Esther Peterson was assigned the position of "assistant for consumer affairs" because of this initiative. This program included the National Historic Preservation Act and Solid Waste Disposal act, which were partially engineered by Stewart Udall. Largely overseen by Bill Moyers and Richard Goodwin, it also saw the creation of the National Endowment for the Arts, and was originally outlined during a commencement speech at the University of Michigan. The creation of the Head Start program was another part of it, and this initiative is probably most famous for the creation of Medicare, a pair of Civil Rights Acts, and the War on Poverty. FTP, name this set of liberal social reforms instituted by Lyndon Johnson.;;Great Society;;
Computer Science;;The similarity between two of these objects can be given by the Levenstein distance.  The set of all of these over a given set V is given by the Kleene Star of V, and The Boyer-Moore and Rabin-Karp algorithms can be used to search them. The Lempel-Ziv-Welch compression algorithm creates a translation table of these objects upon initialization, and fixed-length ones can be plotted as nodes on a hypercube.  The trim function removes trailing whitespace from these variables, and analyzing them with respect to a given formal grammar is known as parsing. Also the subject of regular expressions, concatenation is the combining of, FTP, what type of variable which stores an ordered sequence of symbols, most commonly used to store text?;;String;;sequence
Astronomy;;One deviation from this law is a result of "pancaking" via the Kaiser Effect, while application of the virial theorem explains another deviation known as the Fingers of God. In some cases, the quadratic Lundmark's Law fits better than this relation, and it can be derived from the Friedman-Robertson-Walker equations. The change in one quantity in this law is dependent on the sign of the deceleration parameter q, and measuring anisotropies in the CMB all give a value around 70 for this law's namesake parameter. FTP, name this law which states that the redshift of an astronomical object is proportional to its distance from the observer, named for an American cosmologist and namesake of a giant space telescope.;;Hubble('s) (Law);;
United States History;;In 1701, John Lawson visited the Catawba people while exploring the area that is now this state. Its colonial delegates were the first to officially call for independence in a document called the Halifax Resolve, and battles on the territory of this state include a clash between Nathaniel Green and Cornwallis at Guilford Courthouse. From 1711 to 1715, while it was still a colony, this state was racked by a war against the Tuscarora Indians, and the excesses of its governor William Tryon led to an uprising led by Herman Husband known as the Regulator Movement. For ten points, identify this state which has recently been represented by such senators as Jesse Helms and Elizabeth Dole, and has its capital at Raleigh.;;North Carolina;;
Biology;;One method of doing this relies on coated aqueous beads suspended in oil and is known as the polony method. One method of doing this uses dimethyl sulfate, hydrazine, and a series of other chemical additions and is named for Maxim and Gilbert, while Fologea developed a method of doing this via a nanopore. Another method that relies on ligation is called SOLiD, while Leroy Hood automated one method of doing this originally developed by Sanger, the dye termination method. Another approach uses a combination of primer walking and alignment, the Shotgun method. FTP, name this action done on a large scale by the Human Genome project, the elucidation of the order of bases in DNA.;;DNA sequencing|Genome sequencing|Gene sequencing;;
Literature;;One author from this country wrote of a man who kills himself and his mistress in The Triumph of Death. This nation was home to both the Hermeticist movement and "the twilight poets". One author who lived in this country wrote a novel about the Salina family, while A Cuban-born author who lived mostly in this country wrote a novella about a nobleman who is cut in two, "The Cloven Viscount", as well as a novel about "the Reader" and "the Other Reader". Other notable authors from this nation include the authors of The Leopard, If On a Winter's Night a Traveler, and Six Characters in Search of an Author. For ten points, identify this nation, home of such writers as Giuseppe Lampedusa, Italo Calvino, and Luigi Pirandello.;;Italy;;
Pop Culture;;This character's distinctive suit is the product of a design by Doctor Gina Cross, and he later obtains a Mark V version of it from Isaac Kleiner. This character's body is an Easter egg in STALKER: Shadows of Chernobyl, and his friends include Barney Calhoun, the protagonist of a spinoff of the first game in which this character appears. In his second appearance, this character is sometimes assisted by the Vortigaunts, as well as by Alyx Vance and a robotic dog, and he is frequently followed by the G-man, who plucks him from an exploding reactor in Episode One of the second game in which he appears. A never-speaking fighter against the Xen aliens and the Combine, for ten points, identify this crowbar-wielding scientist from the Black Mesa Research Facility, the protagonist of Valve's Half Life games.;;(Gordon) Freeman|Gordon (Freeman);;
Economics;;Along with Wicksell, the name of this economist is linked with a model which arose in response to the instable Solow-Tobin models. The intersection of the aggregate demand curve and national income is known as the namesake cross of this economist, who, along with "the Classics," was the subject of a work by Hicks. He argued against deflationist policies in his A Tract on Monetary Reform, while this author of The Economic Consequences of the Peace also wrote about the multiplier and a consumption function in a work about macroeconomics. FTP, name this British economist and author of The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money.;;(John) (Maynard) Keynes;;
United States History;;The "repercussions" of this legislation are the subject of a 1934 book by Joseph Jones. The reaction to this legislation directly contributed to the electoral victory of Robert Bennett over William Lyon MacKenzie King, and it prompted Spain's passage of the Wais Bill. The aim of this legislation was to increase the rates set by the Fordney-McCumber act, and the policies it enacted were partially reversed by the Reciprocal Trade Agreement Act. Signed into law despite a petition signed by over 1,000 economists, FTP, identify this legislation passed in 1930 which raised import taxes and exacerbated the Great Depression.;;Smoot-Hawley (tariff)|Hawley-Smoot (tariff);;
Miscellaneous;;A work which ushered in a certain type of positivism was written by H.L.A. Hart and was titled after the "concept of" this idea. A collection of essays that advocates an empirical approach to a certain sphere of human activity is titled Overcoming this concept, and was written by Richard Posner. A book in which Hercules is imagined in the role of an arbiter was written by Ronald Dworkin about this concept's "empire". The best known work by Hugo Grotius is titled after the application of this titular concept to war and peace, and William Blackstone wrote commentaries on the ones of England. FTP, identify this sphere of human activity which is personified by a blindfolded female holding a sword and scales.;;law(s);;
Literature;;This man wrote of a "heathen Chinee" named Ah Sin who cheats the narrator at euchre in a poem entitled "Plain Language from Truthful James". He related the conversation between two locomotives in a poem dedicated to the opening of the Pacific Railroad, "What the Engines Said," while the title character rants while dying about putting Jinny in the cart in his short story, "Tennessee's Partner". More famously, this author wrote of a child cared for by Stumpy and Kentuck after the death of Cherokee Sal, and a group of people including Mother Shipton and Piney Woods who perish before reaching the titular location. FTP, identify this author of such stories "The Luck of Roaring Camp," and "The Outcasts of Poker Flat".;;(Francis) (Bret) Harte;;
Art;;This artist painted an encounter between himself and his patron Alfred Bruyas entitled The Meeting, and two women are entwined on a bed in his depiction of an erotic embrace entitled The Sleepers. A woman sits on a branch in the center while holding her hand underneath a small waterfall in his painting The Source, and he aroused controversy when he depicted female genitalia in Origin of the World. This artist exhibited his The Peasants at Flagey along with two more famous works, and in 1855 completed a painting that depicted himself at an easel while a nude woman stood behind him, The Artist's Studio. FTP, identify this foremost French realist of the 19th century who painted The Stonebreakers and Burial at Ornans.;;(Gustave) Courbet;;
Astronomy;;Paul Steinhardt is one of those who proposed a "slow-roll" variety of this process, which utilized a scalar field in a potential energy well. A measurement of the B-modes would provide evidence of the gravitational radiation produced as a result of this process. Andrei Linde's modified theory of this process proposes that it is ongoing, and this process was proposed to resolve the flatness, horizon, and monopole problems. This process also helps explain structure growth in the universe, and evidence for the occurrence of this process is provided by the anisotropy of the cosmic microwave background. First formally proposed by Alan Guth, for ten points, identify this theory which states that the early universe expanded very rapidly.;;(cosmic) inflation;;
Miscellaneous;;Gail Bederman analysis of race and gender from 1880 to 1917 is titled after "Manliness and" this concept. In a work which contains a chapter on "The State as a Work of Art," Jakob Burkhardt wrote about the one of "the Renaissance in Italy". A work which advocates moving "beyond the reality principle" has this as it second title concept, and this concept was combined with "Madness" in a "history of insanity in the Age of Reason," in the title of a work by Michel Foucault. In addition to Marcuse's work contrasting "Eros" and this, Freud's work about the conflict between individualism and conformity is titled after this and "its discontents". FTP, identify this concept, many of which such as Western, Islamic, and Sinic "clash" in a thesis by Samuel Huntington.;;civilization;;
World History;;This action indirectly led to the deaths of hundreds of Kenyans in supposed reprisal of Kenya's participation in it, and its aftermath led to a speech in which an ambassador argued that "the dignity of man, human life, and human freedom constitute the highest values". Two of the people whose actions caused this event were members of the RZ organization, and it was perhaps the best-known action of a unit called Sayeret Merkal. Resulting in the death of three hostages, Lieutenant Colonel Yonatan Netanyahu, and all of the hijackers, for ten points, identify this rescue operation by the Israeli Defense Force that took place in the namesake Ugandan airport.;;Entebbe (raid)|(Operation) Entebbe|(Operation) Thunderbolt|(Operation) Yonathan;;
Noncomputational Math;;In physics, this term refers to an even-dimensional system of differential equations in which the generalized momenta are proportional to the derivative of a certain function with respect to the generalized velocities, and vice versa. This adjective describes a non-abelian group whose subgroups are self-conjugate. The Bondy-Chvatal theorem and the Dirac theorem both give conditions necessary for a graph to be described by this word, while an operator named by this word is the Legendre transform of the Lagrangian. For ten points, identify this word which in physics describes an operator that is the sum of the potential and kinetic energies and in computer science a path on a graph which visits every vertex exactly once.;;Hamiltonian;;
Music;;This composer's Fourth Symphony in E Minor contained 30 variations on a theme from J.S. Bach's Cantata No. 150, while his acquaintance with Richard Muhlfeld inspired his Trio for Clarinet and Quintet for Clarinet and Strings. He composed a cantata based on Tasso's Jerusalem Delivered entitled Rinaldo, and collaborated with Dietrich and another composer on the F-A-E Sonata. In 1869, this man composed a series of Love Songs, and in the same year released his two volumes of piano duets based on Gypsy folk tunes, Hungarian Dances. The partner to his Tragic Overture was also composed for the University of Breslau. FTP, identify this composer whose works include A German Requiem and the Academic Festival Overture.;;(Johannes) Brahms;;
Religion/Mythology;;In the Homeric hymn to this goddess she is referred to as the "lady of the golden sword," and at one point, after being raped by Poseidon in the shape of a stallion, this goddess was known as Erinys. By a hunter named Iasion, this goddess bore the child Ploutos. In gratitude to Celeus, this goddess attempted to make Demophon immortal and instructed Triptolemus, and she was the only one to eat the meal served by Tantalos, resulting in Pelops requiring an ivory shoulder. Helios informed this goddess of the worst offense perpetrated against her, which resulted in her withholding the harvest. For ten points, identify this goddess of agriculture, a sister of Zeus and the mother of Persephone.;;Demeter;;
Chemistry;;The Petasis reagent contains an atom of this element at the center, and it coordinates to the two cyclopentadiene molecules in Tebbe's reagent. Another compound that contains this element and aluminum operates via the Cosee-Arleman mechanism, and this metal can be extracted via the Kroll process from rutile or ilmentite. In addition to its use in the Ziegler-Natta catalyst, this metal's tetrachloride is commonly used in organic reactions as a Lewis acid. Its dioxide is commonly found in paint. FTP, name this metal which is used in aerospace applications due to its durability, with atomic number 22 and symbol Ti.;;Titanium|Ti;;
Geography;;A building in this city contains a glass dome symbolizing the transparency of democracy designed by Norman Foster, and a museum dedicated to the works of Kathe Kollwitz. This city also contains a Yevgeniy Vuchetich-designed Soviet War Memorial in its Treptower Park, while other landmarks include a museum which contains the Ishtar Gate and an altar excavated from the ruins of a Greek city, the Pergamon Museum. Also containing a field of concrete slabs that serve as a memorial to the Jews of Europe, FTP, identify this city that is home to the Brandenburg Gate, the Reichstag House, and remains of a certain wall.;;Berlin;;
World History;;The Kammhuber line provided notification and support to this organization's NJG division, and one of its greatest successes came against a similar organization called the VVS. Among the opponents frequently encountered by members of the organization was a group known as the "Night Witches," and this organization, founded in part on the theories of Giulio Duhet, sported a volunteer division known as the Condor Legion. This organization launched one of its main offensive efforts on "Eagle Day," August 13, 1940, and notable vehicles employed by it included the Stuka and the Messerschmitt. Controlled by Hermann Goering, FTP, identify this division of the Wehrmacht that was defeated at the Battle of Britain.;;Luftwaffe|(the) German Air Force;;
Literature;;In a poem by Lawrence Ferlinghetti, this titular being finds himself afraid of Coit Tower, but not of Congressman Doyle. A play whose title refers to Sir Francis Crewe and which was written by W.H. Auden and Christopher Isherwood is titled after the one "Beneath the Skin". In The Unbearable Lightness of Being, Tomas obtains one of these named Karenin for Tereza. One of these is the subject of an experiment by Professor Preobrazhensky in a Mikhail Bulgakov novella about the heart of one, and nothing is said about one of them named Montmorency in the title of a Jerome Jerome book about "Three Men in a Boat". FTP, identify this animal, other examples of which include Dorothy's companion in The Wizard of Oz, Toto.;;dog;;
Religion/Mythology;;Michael Sattler authored this group's first declaration of faith, a collection of seven articles known as the "Brotherly Union". According to letters of Conrad Grebel, the Lord's Supper was a sign of love among believers, the church was meant to be a suffering church, and Matthew 18:15 through 18 indicated the importance of witnessing to this denomination, whose early history was told by Thieleman J. van Braght in the Martyrs Mirror. An offshoot of this denomination developed in Moravia under Jakob Hutter, but their more famous leaders included John of Leiden and Menno Simons, who gave his name to another branch of this denomination, the Mennonites. FTP, identify this religious denomination which held that infants are not punishable for sin and thus emphasized adult baptism.;;Anabaptist(s);;
Art;;A clock tower can be seen above the background clouds in this work, while a group of men on a small boat can be seen on the right in front of a flotilla of ships. A cap with a red tuft lies on the ground in front of a pair of men clasping their hands, one of whom is holding a green blanket. A man holding a blue-and-while flag stands over the central scene. On the left an Indian squats in front of the title figure, who is being tended to by three men, two of them in red coats and one in blue. Presumably depicting a scene at the Battle of the Plains of Abraham, FTP, name this painting of a military figure's demise in Canada, by Benjamin West.;;(The) Death of General Wolfe;;
Chemistry;;One type of this process is named for a value that gives the stability of a colloidal system, and another type is used in the Winkler test. The results of this process can be analyzed with a Gran plot. The ability of the reaction between iodine and sulfur dioxide is utilized in the Karl Fischer variety of this process. Another variety uses EDTA and is known as the complexometric type of this process. An indicator, such as phenolphthalein, is often used, in addition to a buret. For 10 points, name this process in which one solution of known concentration is added in increments to determine the unknown concentration of another solution.;;Titration;;
Literature;;This author began his career with a translation of Anatole France's Balthasar, and in a semi-autobiographical work named "Cogwheels", the narrator turns to Strindberg for respite. A Buddha witnesses a robber's attempts to escape hell in his story "The Spider Thread", and in another work, an unemployed man turns to thievery when an old woman arrives at the titular gate. In yet another work, seven characters give seven contradictory accounts concerning the murder of a samurai by the bandit Takehiro, which inspired a film by Akira Kurosawa.  FTP, name this author of "In a Grove" and "Rashomon" who lends his name to Japan's highest literary prize.;;(Ryunosuke) Akutagawa|Akutagawa (Ryunosuke);;
Philosophy;;One of his works consists solely of 392 questions such as whether an industrious nation can ever be poor and is titled The Querist, and he published an instrumentalist view of Newtonian dynamics titled De Motu. He criticized Shaftesbury and de Mandeville in a work about a 'minute philosopher,' Alciphron. He attacked the notions of infinitesimal change in calculus in a work addressed to "an Infidel Mathematician," and criticized Cartesian dualism in works like A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Understanding. Also the author of A New Theory of Vision, FTP, name this advocate of immaterialism and author of Three Dialogues Between Hylas and Philonus, an Irish philosopher who said "to be is to be perceived".;;(George) Berkeley;;
Literature;;This man served as editor of The Pennsylvania Freeman and his prose works include Leaves from Margaret Smith's Journal and Literary Recreations and Miscellanies. He urged the titular religious leader to "Strike-home, strong-hearted man" in "To Ronge". He also described a fisherman named Andrew in "The Which of Wenham," and Goodwife Cole is released from Ipswich jail in his poem "The Changeling," He described a chore girl informing some insects of Mistress Mary's demise in "Telling the Bees", as well the sun rising over grey hills on a ‘brief December day' in a poem subtitled "Winter Idyll". FTP, name this American poet, author of "Snowbound" and "Barbara Fritchie".;;(John) (Greenleaf) Whittier;;
Economics;;Its "New Classical" form can be derived from the Lucas supply function, and Robert Gordon has developed a 'Triangle Model' which takes cost push, supply shocks, and other factors into account to modify it. Blanchard and Gali have written on the 'New Keynesian' variety of it, and it can be theoretically derived from Okun's Law. It was first explicitly shown to hold in the United States by Paul Samuelson and Robert Solow, but it could not explain stagflation until Edmund Phelps and Milton Friedman showed that it is vertical in the long-run. FTP, identify this graph which shows the trade-off between unemployment and inflation, named for a New Zealand economist.;;Phillips (curve);;
United States History;;A 2004 work by Sterling Delano examines the 'Dark Side' of this place, and much of our knowledge of it comes from the letters of Mary Ann Dwight. The land used for this place was purchased from Charles and Maria Ellis. Along with equal compensation, it adopted several of Charles Fourier's theories, labeling its central building as the ‘Phalanstery', while James Russell Lowell and Horace Greeley contributed to its weekly magazine The Harbinger. Founded by a former editor of The Dial, George Ripley, FTP, name this utopian community in West Roxbury, Massachusetts which inspired the novel Blithedale Romance by Nathaniel Hawthorne.;;Brook Farm;;
Religion/Mythology;;One section of this work describes Lazarus meeting Abraham in heaven, while a rich man calls out from hell. Its preface is a letter to Theophilus, and in the first chapter Zechariah is struck dumb as punishment for incredulity. In another section, the tax superintendant Zacchaeus gives half his possessions to charity. The Good Samaritan and Prodigal Son parables appear only in this book, while its author is traditionally believed to have also written Acts of the Apostles, and is frequently represented by an ox. FTP, identify this third canonical gospel which follows Mark and precedes John.;;(The) (Gospel) (According) (to) Luke;;
Physics;;In 2008, Laurent Schoeffel examined the prospects of using the ‘deeply virtual' form of this effect in nucleon tomography, and sodium iodide scintillators are used to counteract its namesake ‘edge' in spectrophotometry. It is mathematically governed by the Klein-Nishima formula, and the inverse form of it is believed to explain the spectrum of accretion disks surrounding black holes. In addition, distortions in the cosmic microwave background radiation are described by an inverse variety of it called the Sunayev-Zeldovich effect. Inducing a wavelength shift proportional to one minus the cosine of theta, FTP, identify this effect which occurs when an x-ray or gamma ray photon scatters as it interacts with matter.;;Compton (scattering);;
Music;;One character in this opera promises to play a pipe tune as a signal; that movement was originally written for the tarogato but is usually performed on the English horn. This opera's dissonant opening chord is parodied in Debussy's Golliwog's Cakewalk, and the duet "O sink hernieder" is broken by Brangäne's warnings that the night is about to end. Merlot's treachery is soon revealed in a sword fight. Kurwenal is soon killed while trying to avenge his master, and in an earlier scene King Marke's plans are ruined when a poison turns out to be a love potion. Concluding with the "Liebestod," FTP, name this Wagner opera inspired by a Celtic legend of two lovers.;;Tristan (and|und){1}? Isolde;;
Anthropology;;This author's dissertation about the "concept of the guardian spirit" discusses the cultural implications of individual religious experience. This author also attacked fascism and claimed that all races have the same intelligence and blood composition in a collaboration with Gene Weltfish, The Races of Mankind, and critiqued racism in Race: Science and Politics. She applied Nietzsche's concept of Apollonian and Dionysian to the rituals of Native Americans, and in another work sought to understand behavioral differences between POWs from two countries in WWII. FTP, name this American anthropologist who never visited Japan but authored The Chrysanthemum and the Sword and Patterns of Culture.;;(Ruth) Benedict;;
Literature;;One character in this work received a career boost from literary critic Leonard Upjohn, and that character creates a metaphor about how we must each make our mark in life's carpet. The protagonist allows an old flame to go on holiday with Harry Griffiths, and in his earlier days renounces religion after discussions with Weeks and Hayward. In an earlier episode, Fanny hangs herself as a result of hopeless love.  The novel ends with the protagonist's proposal to Sally Athelney, but earlier he is nearly consumed by anger after his rejection by the waitress Mildred Rogers. FTP, identify this novel by W. Somerset Maugham about the club-footed Philip Carey.;;Of Human Bondage;;
Art;;A woman in a white dress is shown falling before a Madonna in this painter's Il Penseroso, and horseback riders approach a Gothic cathedral in his The Return.  Another of his works portrays a palace made of clouds as an angel bids farewell, and this man depicted a thunderstorm transitioning to a calm river as seen from Mount Holyoke. In another series, hunters pursue deer across a rugged landscape in the 'Savage' section, while a colossal statue is shown beheaded in the 'Destruction' section. Depicted by Asher Durand alongside William Cullen Bryant in Kindred Spirits, FTP, name this American romantic painter of The Voyage of Life and The Course of Empire, the founder of the Hudson River School.;;(Thomas) Cole;;
World History;;At this battle, the 1st Armoured Division was stalled in its initial attack on Kidney Ridge, though the victors did manage to reach Miteriya Ridge the next day . It was preceded by feint attacks under Operation Bertram.The victorious commander here originally planned a diversive attack against the Ariete division to allow his infantry to cut through the minefields in Operation Lightfoot. The Qattara Depression protected that general from being outflanked, and when he became bogged down was forced to launch Operation Supercharge against the tanks on the Rahman track. Dubbed the "End of the Beginning" by Churchill, FTP, identify this WWII battle in North Africa where Bernard Montgomery sent Erwin Rommel on a retreat from which he would never recover.;;(Battle) (of) El Alamein;;
Music;;Movements such as "With Drums and Pipes" appear in his piano sonata Out of Doors, and he also composed a Sonata for Two Pianos and Percussion. Tibor Serly completed his unfinished viola concerto, and this man wrote about "Nine Splendid Stags" in Cantata Profana. His first ballet, The Wooden Prince, was less applauded than his second, in which a girl is forced to perform three 'seduction games.' In addition to the piano etude set Mikrokosmos, he composed an opera where Judith demands that her lover open all seven doors in his dwelling. FTP, name this composer of Duke Bluebeard's Castle, The Miraculous Mandarin and Music for Strings, Percussion, and Celesta, a Hungarian collector of folk music.;;(Bela) Bartok;;
Biology;;Mutations like rs25532 and I425V have been discovered on the polymorphic gene region which encodes for the transporter of this substance, SLC6A4. Infection by Entamoeba histolytica has been linked with toxic levels of it, and ondensetron is used as an antagonist to it following chemotherapy. Cardiac fibrosis has been linked to excessive amounts of this substance, which is released from the raphe nuclei in the brain. Within the blood, it is mainly stored in platelets, and DDC is used to synthesize it from 5-HTP, which is itself synthesized from tryptophan. FTP, name this monoamine neurotransmitter, thought to affect mood and sleep, whose reuptake is inhibited by drugs like Prozac and Zoloft.;;serotonin|5-hydroxytryptamine;;
World History;;Its fleet unsuccessfully attacked Helsiborg under Mayor Wittenborg's leadership, and it secured concessions from Eric the Priest-Hater in the Treaty of Tongsberg. A meeting in Wisnac led to its first "Tohopestate" in order to defend against princely influences, and Duke Albrecht of Mecklenburg sought to destroy it by hiring the Vitalenbruder pirates. It established a Kontor at Novgorod and It reached its peak following the Treaty of Straslund with Waldemar IV of Denmark, and by the time its last diet convened in 1669, only Bremen, Hamburg, and its original center remained. FTP, identify this union centered at Lubeck, an association German towns which dominated trade in northern Europe for centuries.;;Hanseatic (League)|Hansa;;
Geography;;It continues to dispute its border between its southern neighbor and this country's Zamora and Morona-Santiago Provinces. Cotopaxi is its highest active volcano, while its two major river systems are the Esmereldas and the Guayas. Its three main regions are La Costa, La Sierra, and El Oriente, and its capital is serviced by Mariscal Sucre International Airport. This country's highest point, Chimborazo, is the point on the earth's surface farthest from the center, and the capital of this country is surrounded by snow-capped volcanoes like Pichincha. Owner of the Galápagos Islands, FTP, name this South American country whose largest city is Guayaquil and whose capital is Quito.;;Ecuador;;
Computer Science;;Rado developed a sigma function for one of these objects, and Martin developed one of the first of a special variety, which are named for Post and are defined as program formulations of simple ones. The Cohen-Kung theorem guarantees that the trajectory of one of them, Langton's Ant, is unbounded, and another example of them is the Busy Beaver. It is undecidable whether a particular one will stop for a certain input, a dilemma called the halting problem, and their namesake lends his name along with Church's to a thesis governing them. Consisting of a tape, action table, state register and a read/write 'head,' FTP, name these simple devices which can be adapted to perform the logic of any computer.;;Turing (machine(s));;
Religion/Mythology;;He frequently holds a key in his right hand, and as the first ruler of Latium he introduced currency and cultivation. Some legends claim he originally came from Thessaly to meet his wife Carmese, and his enhanced abilities came in handy when tracking down the nymph Carna. A possible equivalent of the Etruscan deity Ani, he lost his son Tiberninus to the Tiber river, and when the Sabines attacked he scared them off by causing a hot spring to erupt, after which his temple gates were kept open in times of war. Holding the epithet Quirinus, FTP, name this Roman god of entrances, exits, beginnings, and endings, with two faces.;;Janus;;
Literature;;One character in this play mishandles his stove and floods his room trying to put out a fire, and in act II, he claims to be so disgusted by the sound of his own name that he would rather be a dog. A doctor admits that he made up the story of Molvik's ‘demonic' influence, and another girl is forbidden to go to school in order to stave off her impending blindness. Haakon attempts to erase all memory of an illegal timber operation which landed his partner in jail, for which his son Gregers despises him. FTP, Hedvig treasures the titular animal and her father, the photographer Hjalmar Ekvald, finds his world of illusion come crashing down in what play by Henrik Ibsen?;;(The) Wild Duck;;
World History;;This empire saw the resurgence of the iwan in architecture, and one ruler of this empire built the Taq Kisra at Ctesiphon. Another ruler of defeated and captured the Roman Emperor Valerian at Edessa, and built Gondeshapur. It came to an end following the sound defeat of Yazdegerd III at the battle of Nihawan, which left the Azatan caste completely helpless. Its first ruler established his power by victory at Hormizdagan, and made Zoroastrianism the state religion with the help of his high priest Tosar. That ruler was a son of Babak named Ardashir whose exploits were continued by his successor Shapur I. FTP, name this Iranian dynasty which overthrew the Parthians.;;Sassanid|Sassanian;;
World History;;Herbert Samuel, Rufus Isaacs, and this man were among those accused by Hilaire Belloc of corruption in the Marconi Scandal. His opposition to the Poor Law resulted in the Old Age Pensions Act, and he delivered the famous Mansion House speech in the aftermath of the Agadir crisis. His downfall came when he delivered an ultimatum to the Turks in the Chanak crisis, but this proponent of the "people's budget" and successor of Henry Asquith remains best known for exercising a moderating influence on German reparations after WWI. FTP, name this British prime minister, the final one of the Liberal Party who, along with Clemenceau, Wilson, and Orlando, was a member of the "Big Four" at Versailles.;;(David) Lloyd George;;
Noncomputational Math;;The distances between an arbitrary point to one of these figures sides and vertices is given by the Erdos-Mordell inequality. The relationship between the sides of one of them cut by a segment is given by Stewart's Theorem. A particular condition for collinearity in these figures is called Menelaus' Theorem, which is the dual of Ceva's Theorem. A method of finding the area of these figures is a special case of Bramagupta's formula, and relies on finding the difference between each side and the semiperimeter; this is Heron's Formula. Also containing the incenter, circumcenter, and orthocenter, FTP, name these polygons whose area can be found by the formula ½ times b times h.;;Triangle 3-gon|Trigon;;
Religion/Mythology;;In one story, Gingalin, a son of this figure and Floree, rescues the princess-turned-dragon Blonde Esmeree, while the queens Igraine and Clarissant attempt to trap him in the Castle of Marvels in another story. A duel is fought to win a one year truce for Yglais between the Lord of the Fens and this son of Morgause, who would later die at the hands of a brother. He refuses to partake in the execution of Guinevere as Agravain and Mordred, his brothers, attempt to destroy Lancelot, but he may be best remembered for staying with Sir Bertilak while awaiting his head being chopped off. FTP, name this Knight of the Round Table who, in a tale by the Pearl Poet, sought out the Green Knight.;;Gawain;;
Geography;;Among the territorial possessions of this nation is a sub-Antarctic archipelago including Marion Island and Prince Edward Island. The Karoo is a large desert region in this country, whose harbors include Saldanha Bay and Richards Bay, home to the world's largest coal export center.  The Drakensbergs are its highest mountains, while the Limpopo runs between Zimbabwe and this nation, which completely surrounds Lesotho. Recently, Kgalema Motlanthe became president of this nation, whose previous leaders include Thabo Mbeki, and Frederik de Klerk. The Cape of Good Hope lies at the tip of, FTP, which African nation whose capitals include Bloemfontein, Pretoria, and Cape Town?;;South Africa;;
Biology;;In some species, these bodies may be surrounded by segrosomes, and a convenient method of creating them is the LR/BP clonase gateway system. Some contain an addiction mechanism via the Hok/Sok factors, while another set are referred to as "col". Alkaline lysis followed by column fractionation is one method of isolating them, while they may be introduced via cesium chloride, electroporation, or heat shock. Synthetic ones often contain a polylinker region and are extracted via the miniprep, and they were originally discovered by Joshua Lederberg in his studies of conjugation. Including the F-factor and R-factor, FTP, name these short, circular, extrachromosomal segments of DNA found in bacteria.;;plasmid;;vector
Music;;A piccolo violin tuned a minor third higher is played in the opening section of this work, whose third section consists of two chords known as a "Phrygian cadence". One section of this work employs the valveless trumpet, while "echo flutes" play alongside the violin in another section; while this section called for a recorder, it is often replaced by a flute. The last of them notably omits violins, while the second one is arguably the most famous of these works, composed while its composer traveled to a prince's court in Berlin. Written for a German margrave, this is, FTP, which set of six instrumental pieces, written by Johann Sebastian Bach?;;Brandenburg Concertos;;
Philosophy;;This man wrote about "The Epicurean," "The Stoic," and "The Platonist" in separate essays included in his Essays, Moral and Political, while his "gold-flow" theory is described in the anti-mercantilist work Political Discourses. This author of a History of England also wrote a work introducing a microscope, razor, and fork as tools of philosophical inquiry. Besides A Treatise of Human Nature, he wrote about discussions between Cleanthes, Philo, and Demea in Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion, but he remains best known for a work which discusses a missing shade of blue and contains a section titled "On Miracles". FTP, name this Scottish empiricist philosopher and author of An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding.;;(David) Hume;;
World History;;Among the stories surrounding one of these persons was told in the Senate and claimed that he was originally named Mastarna, while another of them had Mettius Fufetius torn in two by chariots for refusing to help him in battle. Another of them founded the port of Ostia, while yet another formulated the religious calendar and created the office of pontifex maximus. The last of them was expelled by Lucius Junius Brutus after the rape of Lucretia, while the most famous of them warred with the Sabines. Ancus Marcius, Numa Pompilius, and Lucius Tarquinius Superbus were among, FTP, which group of rulers of a certain 700 to 500 B.C. city whose first member was Romulus?;;kings of Rome|Roman kings;;
Art;;This artist portrayed his most famous painting on the wall in a painting with three nude figures changing, and he followed that with a work in which a trombone player stands in the light of the acetylene lamps. In addition to The Models and The Side Show, this artist portrayed his friend Charles Angrand in the first row with a silk hat in an unfinished painting based on a work of the Goncourt brothers called The Circus. A brown dog sits behind a reclining man in a brown hat, both of which are facing the river in Bathers at Asnieres, five figures of which can be found in his most famous work looking across the Seine to the title location. FTP, name this French pointillist artist who also painted a work which contains a monkey on a leash, Sunday Afternoon on the Island of La Grande Jatte.;;(Georges-Pierre) Seurat;;
Religion/Mythology;;A fisherman agreed to be this man's pilot during his search for a Heavenly-rock boat, and this man had earlier told his children about a deity who cleared a cloud-path from heaven and brought order to the world. this figure mother turned into a shark after giving birth, and he once lost a battle because he was attacking into the sun, but was later aided by a three-legged bird in defeating that same enemy. This grandson of a sea-god led a six-year expedition against a certain plain, and his palace's location is currently occupied by the "Eight cords, one roof" monument. FTP, name this great-grandson of the sea-god Ryujin and descendent of Amaterasu, the legendary first emperor of Japan.;;Jimmu (Tenno)|(Emperor) Jimmu;;
Pop Culture;;This athlete scored 27 points in the first quarter and 56 overall in a first round playoff encounter with the Warriors, while he had 44 points and 24 rebounds in a Game 7 against the Supersonics, which would lead to his only Finals appearance. He finished behind Magic Johnson in the MVP voting two years before being traded for Jeff Hornacek and Andrew Lang, and he led the 1992 Dream Team in scoring. This athlete won the 1993 MVP Award and led his team to the NBA Finals against Chicago as a member of the Phoenix Suns, after which a trade teamed him up with Hakeem Olajuwon and Clyde Drexler in 1996. FTP, name this Auburn graduate and Hall of Fame power forward and former Philadelphia 76er and Houston Rocket, the shortest player to lead the league in rebounding.;;(Charles) Barkley;;
Literature;;Hyllus is sent by Deianeira to learn about her missing husband in a work by this author, who also wrote a work whose title character fails to obtain Achilles's armor and goes insane as a result. This author of the fragmented The Tracking Satyrs and The Progeny wrote a work in which Neoptolemus convinces the title injured figure to come to Troy, as well as another which ends with Orestes and the title character carrying off Aegisthus. This author of the plays The Trachiniae and Ajax, along with Philoctetes and Electra, also wrote a set of works in which the incestuous murderer of Laius blinds himself and is exiled. FTP, name this author of the Oedipus Rex trilogy, a Greek tragedian along with Aeschylus and Euripedes.;;Sophocles;;
Chemistry;;This man's work with Michael Kasha showed that phosphorescence relied on an excited triplet state, and Irving Langmuir extended one of his theories to create the concentric theory of atomic structure. He coined the term "activity" in one of his papers, and he proved that the fugacity coefficient for a component of an ideal solution is equal to the coefficient of the pure species, a rule he names with Randall. He's also famous for a theory that superseded the Bronstead-Lowry theory, and for a method of displaying atoms in terms of bonding electrons. FTP, name this American chemist, the namesake of a type of acid that accepts electrons and some dot structures.;;(Gilbert) (Norton) Lewis;;
Literature;;This author wrote about the publicity man for the National Cocoa Corporation acting as the Custodian of the Grain in one work, while he wrote about Lazarus attracting the attention of the title university graduates in another work. In addition to Season of Anomy and The Interpreters, this author wrote about Demoke's rebirth in A Dance of the Forests, but he may be better known for writing one play about Baroka fighting with the schoolteacher, Lakunle, to marry Sidi, as well as another in which Pilkings stops Elesin, the title character, from committing suicide. The Lion and the Jewel and Death and the King's Horseman were written by, FTP, which Nigerian playwright?;;(Wole) Soyinka;;
World History;;Schick and Arguello were arguably merely figurehead rulers in this country, which was the home of Zelaya's conservative rule in the early 20th century before being overthrown by Moncada. United States Marines left during Sacasa's rule of this country, which was also the location of an anticorruption campaign by Bolanos result in the arrest of his predecessor, Jose Aleman Lacayo. The Bryan-Chamorro and Clayton-Bulwer Treaties were signed over the construction of a canal in this country, whose leaders have included Violeta Chamorro and the recently re-elected Daniel Ortega. FTP, name this Central American nation, the home of the Sandinistas and the location of the Iran contra affair, whose capital is at Managua.;;Nicaragua;;
Physics;;Nikuni et al. created a version of these using a group of magnons in an antiferromagnet. Sweeping a magnetic field through them creates a condition in which their particles' degree of freedom couples with their reaction coordinate, creating a Feschbach resonance. Tonks and Girardeau lend their name to a two-dimensional version of this substance, whose wavefunctions are given by the Gross-Pitaevskii equation. The first one was created by Cornell and Weimann by supercooling a group of rubidium atoms, causing them to collapse into a single quantum state. FTP, name this state of matter named for two scientists, in which a group of bosons gel together.;;B(ose-)E(instein) C(ondensate);;
Economics;;In a 1993 paper, Morris used the nuisance example to demonstrate that liability rules can be illustrated by these entities, and Katz, Scott, and Triantis have extended this concept to other contract law ideas. Lenos Trigeorgis has pioneered application of these entities to capital budgeting, which is called the analysis of the "real" type. Cox, Ross, and Rubinstein developed the binomial pricing model for these financial entities, the American type of which can be exercised at any point before expiration. Often priced by the Black-Sholes model, these are, FTP, which financial entities that gives an investor the right to participate in a future financial transaction, including the call and put varieties?;;option(s);;
Literature;;One character wishes to make relics of the narrator's testicles at the end of this work, whose opening reveals that its theme is "radix malorum est cupiditas". Also mentioned early on are a suggestion to avoid the Lepe white wine bought in Cheapside and a story about King Demetrius and a pair of golden dice; this occurs before the knelling of a funeral bell can be heard. An old man directs the main characters to an oak tree, after which one character poisons two bottles of wine while his companions conspire to kill him so that they may split the eight bushels of gold they found. The death of these three Flemish friends due to their greed is told in, FTP, which installment of the Chaucer's Canterbury Tales, whose narrator offers promises of salvation?;;(The) Pardoner's Tale;;
Anthropology;;David Williamson's play Heretic is based on a controversy over this person's work. This author's collaboration with Rhoda Metraux resulted in the publication of Themes in French Culture, while a sketch of American culture was published in And Keep Your Powder Dry. This anthropologist chronicled racism in various remote societies in a collaboration with James Baldwin, while the Tchambuli and the Arapesh are among those studied in Sex and Temperament in Three Primitive Societies. This author of Coming Up in New Guinea may be best known for a work which was criticized by Derek Freeman and discussed the promiscuity of adolescents in the namesake Pacific island. FTP, name this American anthropologist and author of Coming of Age in Samoa.;;(Margaret) Mead;;
United States History;;In writing the majority opinion for Myers v. United States, Chief Justice Taft wrote that the legislation that triggered this event was invalid. Garrett Davis argued for its delay due to lack of complete representation, while John Logan pushed for its commencement. Mention was made of similar situations during King John's time by Benjamin Butler, while Lorenzo Thomas proved unhelpful for the defense. Seven Republicans turned on their party by voting for Benjamin Curtis's party. Edmund Ross cast the deciding vote, and, after nearly twenty years after Justice Chase's decision, the Tenure of Office Act was repealed. FTP, name this event which eventually saw the acquittal of the 17th president for attempting to replace Secretary of War Edwin Stanton.;;impeachment of Andrew Johnson;;
Music;;The third movement of this work inspired Sinfonia by Luciano Berio, and the score calls for the unusual inclusion of two tam-tams, which are stricken alternately and repeatedly in the last movement. One movement of this work states "O believe, you were not born for nothing!" while the fourth movement is titled "Primeval Light". The first movement was derived from a symphonic poem called Totenfeier. The final movement is based on a poem by Klopstock, while the fourth has text taken from Des Knaben Wunderhorn, which also influenced the composer's next two symphonies. FTP, identify this symphony by Gustav Mahler which followed the "Titan" and is often called "Resurrection".;;Symphony No. 2 (in) (C) (minor) (by) (Gustav) Mahler (variations)|Mahler's 2nd (Symphony);;Ressurection (Symphony)|Auferstehung (Symphony)
World History;;During this event, Richard Queen escaped due to his multiple sclerosis, and another group was removed from this event thanks to the efforts of Ken Taylor in what became known as the Canadian Caper. Dames and Moore petitioned the Supreme Court to overturn Executive Order 12170, which was passed due to this event and called for the seizure of 8 million dollars. One attempt to rectify it was called Operation Credible Sport, while another attempt saw two helicopters crashing into each other and was called Operation Eagle Claw. Eventually ended by the Algiers Accords, FTP, name this 444-day crisis that ended with Ronald Reagan's election, the capturing of a group of Americans by student protestors in Tehran.;;Iran Hostage Crisis;;
Chemistry;;Aromatic versions of these compounds can be produced from aryl halides in the Rosenmund-von Braun reaction, and a variation of the Friedel-Crafts reaction that uses one of them as a reagent is the Hoben-Hoesch reaction. Both these compounds and their iso-versions are produced in the Kolbe synthesis, while they are created form carboxylic acids in the Letts synthesis. Also undergoing the Pinner reaction with alcohols, they react with Grignard reagents to form imines, which can then be hydrolyzed to ketones. Usually created by simply reacting an unhindered alkyl halide with a cyanide ion in an SN2 reaction, these are, FTP, what organic compounds which contain a carbon triple bonded to nitrogen.;;Nitrile;;
Literature;;One of this author's novels concerns a man who sees his three-year-old daughter for the first time on his execution day. Another protagonist meets Gwynplaine, who has a smile carved into his face. In addition to The Last Day of a Condemned Man and The Man Who Laughs, this man also wrote historical plays about Torquemada and Oliver Cromwell. The servant of Don Sallustio becomes prime minister in Ruy Blas, and Gilliat attempts to salvage the engine of a ship in order to win the love of Deruchette in his Toilers of the Sea. He is also famous for creating a character that is pursued by Javert, and a man who falls in love with the gypsy Esmerelda. FTP, name this French author of Les Miserables and The Hunchback of Notre Dame.;;(Victor) (Marie) Hugo;;
Religion/Mythology;;The Chinese goddess of this entity obtained her position after swallowing a large pill and is named Chang-e. In Hindu mythology, the figure associated with it was accused of spending too much time with Rohini by the sage Daksha and is also responsible with brewing heavenly liquid, and it is under the domain of Sin in Sumerian mythology. In Aztec mythology, Huitzilopochtli created it by decapitating Coyolxauhqui. The Japanese god of this entity, who emerged from the right eye of his father, killed Uke Mochi in anger. In Norse mythology this entity is constantly chased by Hati, while the Greek figure associated with it put her shepherd lover in an eternal sleep. FTP, the Vedic Soma, the Shinto Tsuki-Yomi, the Norse Mani, and the Greek Selene were all associated with what heavenly body?;;Moon;;
Pop Culture;;One remix of this song, called "Body Rock", was performed by Chamillionaire. Some versions of this song have an additional verse by Remy Martin which states that the narrators "don't pay admission" and "walk around the metal detectors" when entering the dance club. While referring to his childhood, the singer states that "It's a cold world and this is ice", and he derides commercialization with the line "even L'il Bow wow throwin it up". The song ends with the singer proclaiming that "the streets is ours" and "it ain't never gonna stop". FTP, name this 2005 single which states that "my niggas don't dance, they just pull up their pants", and "do the roc-away" before performing the title dance, a #1 hit for the Terror Squad and Fat Joe.;;Lean Back;;
Psychology;;Matthews and Angulo used a similar experiment to distinguish between Type A and Type B personalities, and the original study cited an experiment by Rosenbilith to support its conclusions regarding gender. One follow-up to this experiment noted that the use of film rather than direct observation diminished the earlier results. It was carried out on a group of seventy-two subjects divided into three groups, and Dorothea Ross was instrumental in conceiving it. It was instrumental in the development of social cognitive theory, and the participants often shouted "sockeroo!" in imitation of what they just witnessed. FTP, name this experiment in which children copied the aggressive behavior of an adult who hit the title object, carried out by Albert Bandura.;;Bobo Doll (Experiment);;
Biology;;One sub-pathway in this process is activated by Hageman factor and prekallikrein, and one critical protein in this pathway is Gamma-glutamyl carboxylase, which acts upon Proteins S, C and Z. VKORC recycles one important molecule in this process, which is why warfarin is often used to inhibit this process. Disrupted in delta storage pool deficiency and Bernard-Soulier syndrome, important activators of this process include Tissue Factor and Von Willebrand factor. This process relies on the transformation of fibrinogen to fibrin by thrombin, and is disrupted in hemophilia. FTP, name this process initiated by platelets, the hardening and drying of blood in a wound.;;Coagulation|(Blood) Clotting|OH GOD THE BLEEDING STOPPED;;
World History;;This ruler's modifications of the civil service system included the "Table of Ranks," which ensured promotion based on performance rather than seniority. Initially forced to share power with his sickly half-brother, his diplomatic efforts included the formation of a "Grand Embassy," and the first year of his reign saw the signing of the Treaty of Nerchinsk. He failed to take the Ottoman fortress of Azov in one campaign, and was a signatory to the Treaty of Pruth. He also pushed for expansion and modernization of the Navy and achieved victory over Charles XII at the battle of Poltava. FTP, name this six-foot-eight tall man who won the Great Northern War, a Romanov czar of Russia who implemented extensive westernization.;;Peter The Great|Peter I (of) (Russia);;
Religion/Mythology;;One controversial ritual performed on the eve of this day involves swinging a chicken around your head. In Sephardic tradition, Hashkavot are said instead of Yizkor. ?The temple service for this day featured the pronouncing of the Tetragrammaton, the Kohen Gadol entering the Holy of Holies, and the sending of a goat to Azazel. Occurring one week after the unrelated Fast of Gedaliah, the book of Jonah serves as Haftarah on this day, which is the only day featuring a Ne'ilah neh-EEL-ah service, concluding with the only time the shofar is heard on this day. Starting with the Aramaic prayer Kol Nidrei, for 10 points, name this fast day, the Jewish day of atonement.;;Yom Kippur|Yom HaKippurim;;
Literature;;The narrator of one of these works feels that he "shall stand henceforward in thy shadow," while another discusses the sadness of Electra. The first begins by thinking of how Theocritus had sung "of the sweet years," while the third begins, "Unlike are we, unlike O princely heart!" The first tells of a "mystic Shape" that grabs the speaker from behind before revealing itself to be "Not Death, but Love". The second to last refers to "the passion put to use in the speaker's old griefs" and "the love she seemed to lose with her lost saints". FTP, name this collection of poems, the forty-third of which begins, "How do I love thee? Let me count the ways," a work by Elizabeth Barrett Browning.;;Sonnets from the Portuguese;;
Music;;One of this man's works contains the movements "Sad Birds" and "Night Moths", and Sergei Diaghilev commissioned his choreographic poem La Valse. In addition to the aforementioned Mirrors, this man composed the duet Mother Goose and a piece written for Paul Wittgenstein, the D-Major Concerto for the Left Hand.  He wrote a work for violin and Lutheal called Tzigane, and another one of his works was influenced by his mother's folk songs and consisted of movements entitled Malaguena, Habanera, and Feria. Another work is built on a repetitive snare drum ostinato, and was famously conducted by Toscanini at a higher tempo than marked. FTP, name this composer of Rhapsodie Espagnole, Daphnis and Chloe, and Bolero.;;(Maurice) Ravel;;
United States History;;One result of this event was the creation of the Sedentary Militia by William Fenwick Williams. One diplomat was overheard saying that "We will wrap the whole world in flames" in the aftermath of this event, and it was immediately followed by the capture of the Nashville by John B. Marchand. One party in this incident was immediately ordered to report to Fort Warren, and this incident was partly precipitated by DM Fairfax's review of a law journal. Seeing a violation of Lord Palmerston's neutral stance and the capture of James Mason and John Slidell, FTP, name this incident in which the USS San Jacinto seized the namesake vessel containing British ambassadors to the Confederacy.;;Trent (Affair);;
Physics;;This law is the basis of the Hodgkin-Huxley model, and its namesake also noted that the ear perceives sound as the sum of harmonic tones. One generalization of this law relates the magnetic flux and reluctance and is named for Hopkinson, and this law fails to take Johnson-Nyquist noise into account due to its quantum nature. One method of deriving this law relies on taking the integral of E dot d l, which gives this law's vector form as J equals sigma times E. This law can be derived using the hydraulic analogy, and it is usually used in concert with Kirchoff's rules. FTP, name this law that states that voltage equals current times resistance, or V equals I R, named for a German physicist.;;Ohm('s) (Law);;
Literature;;One of this man's novels focuses on Ben, whose wife Gloria is obsessed with killing the deer in her garden, while another novel focuses on the schoolteacher George Caldwell and his son Peter. In addition to Toward the End of Time and The Centaur, he published a collection of short stories entitled Pigeon Feathers. Alexandra, Jane, and Sukie are seduced by the devil-like Darryl in his The Witches of Eastwick, and another novel details Ahmad Mulloy's suicide attack, Terrorist. He's perhaps most famous for a series of novels about former high school basketball star Harry Angstrom. FTP, name this American author of Rabbit at Rest, Rabbit is Rich, and Rabbit, Run.;;(John) Updike;;
Art;;The frame of this painting contains a gold medal awarded by Charles X of France. On the left a woman in a yellow garment can be seen gathering water, and a boy in a blue hat holding a long stick can be seen next to a canoe and a duck in the right side of this work. A small brown-and white dog is seen in the foreground of this painting looking toward the central scene, and it depicts the cottage of one of the artists' neighbors, Willy Lott. Originally entitled Landscape: Noon and depicting a site near Flatford Mill, FTP, name this painting that depicts a pair of horses pulling the titular agricultural conveyance across a river and shares its title with a tryptich by Hieronymous Bosch, an 1821 work by John Constable.;;(The) Hay Wain;;
Philosophy;;This man's name is part of the title of a collection by Josiah Royce about this man and "other essay in the philosophy of life". He wrote an early work about the "Literary Remains" of his late father, and critiqued absolute idealism in A Pluralistic Universe. Ralph Perry collected and posthumously published his Essays in Radical Empiricism, and this man's views on religion are contained in The Varieties of Religious Experience. He is more famous for a series of lectures that addressed the question of whether the squirrel goes around the tree and was subtitled, "A New Name for Some Old Ways of Thinking". For ten points, identify this American philosopher, the author of Pragmatism, and a founder of that philosophical movement.;;(William) James;;
Noncomputational Math;;Over the space of Schwartz functions, this operation is an endomorphism. This operation taken on the extension of a function is the subject of the Poisson summation formula, and Hankel generalized this operation to radial functions. This operation is unitary by Parseval's theorem, and the Cooley-Tukey algorithm is used to implement a "fast" version of this operation. Along with the Laplace transform, it is often used to analyze differential equations. Also useful in analog signal processing, FTP, name this transform that takes a function to its frequency domain, which is useful in decomposing waves and is named for a French mathematician.;;Fourier Transform;;
Art;;This building occupies the site of the demolished Fort Macquarie tram depot, and Constantine Koukais composed Icon to commemorate its 20th anniversary. Its Forecourt contains the Monumental steps, and its architect's namesake "room" is the only interior space entirely designed by him. The Bennelong Restaurant stands to one side of this structure. Originally conceived by Ove Arup, its interior contains both pink granite and brush box plywood and contains a Playhouse and Studio. This structure's most notable feature was built with one million glossy Swedish tiles. FTP, name this building largely designed by Jorn Utzon and has several white shells as its roof, a certain theatre venue in a major Australian city.;;Sydney Opera House;;
World History;;An important account of this period was written by Ernest Mason Satow, and other important diplomatic figures in this period were Rudolf von Geist and Lorenz von Stein. One important political force in this era was the "Freedom and People's Rights Movement", which partially succeeded in decreasing the power of the oligarchy. This period saw the creation of the breakaway Ezo republic, and its principles were outlined in the Charter Oath. Also seeing an uprising under Saigo Takamori, the Satsuma Rebellion, this period saw the creation of an elected Diet. FTP, name this period of Japanese history which saw the creation of a modern constitutional monarchy.;;Meiji (Restoration);;
Literature;;One character in this work is attacked by dogs after asking another man for a lantern and is rescued by a cook. That same character has a dream in which he feels a cold hand after attempting to stop a tree from tapping against his window. Hindley reacts badly after his wife Frances dies after giving birth to Hareton, and one of the main characters marries Edgar Linton. Ellen Dean narrates part of this novel, which begins with Mr. Lockwood's visit to the main setting of Thrushcross Grange. FTP, name this novel about the romance of Heathcliff and Catherine Earnshaw by Charlotte Bronte.;;Wuthering Heights;;
Geography;;Tributaries include the Clinch, the Duck, and the Big Sandy Rivers.  The official start of this river was moved upstream 51 miles in 1933 from Lenoir City to where James White's Fort lies at the confluence of the Holston and the French Broad Rivers. Huntsville, Alabama lies on this river, on whose shores you can find Fort Henry.  Named for a town now submerged by Tellico Lake that used to be a capital for the Cherokee, it flows into the Ohio River near Paducah, Kentucky. With its headwaters in Knoxville, Tennessee, for 10 points, name this river with a namesake "Valley Authority" created by the New Deal which shares its name with a state whose capital is Nashville.;;Tennessee (River);;
Miscellaneous;;A 1925 work by Henri Pirenne chronicled the emergence of medieval ones, and this entity titles a posthumously published work by Weber that was later incorporated into Economy and Society. In a book partly written as a response to Robert Moses, Jane Jacobs wrote of the "Death and Life of Great American" ones. A book containing such chapters as "The Regional Framework of Civilization," was written by Lewis Mumford about "The Culture of" these entities. Articles such as "Tweed Days in St. Louis" are collected in a Steffens work about the "Shame of" these, and Robert Halpern wrote a book about "Rebuilding the Inner" type. FTP, identify these locations, examples of which include New York and Los Angeles.;;city|cities;;
Literature;;In one section of this work, a man is beheaded after attempting to plunder a woman made of precious gems in the City of Brass. In another, Yunan dies from turning the pages of a poisoned book after unjustly killing Daban. One character in this book is buried alive with his dead wife by cannibals before being enslaved by the Old Man of the Sea. Cassim is killed after his forgetfulness traps him inside a cave in another story in this work, which ends with the marriage of Shah Zaman to Dunayazad. Translated into English by Richard Burton, it includes the stories of the seven voyages of Sinbad. FTP, name this work narrated by Scheherezade, which contains the story of Ali Baba and the forty thieves.;;One Thousand and One Nights|(The) Arabian Night(')s(') (Entertainments);;
Philosophy;;In the introduction to this work's first edition, its author claimed that "everything which bears the least semblance of an hypothesis must be excluded," from the considerations of this text.  It contains a chapter that points out the flaws of the physico-theological, and ontological arguments, while the history, architectonic, discipline, and canon of the titular concept are addressed in its second section on the "Transcendental Doctrines of Method". Containing a derivation of "pure conceptions of the understanding," called categories, for ten points, identify this philosophical work which argues for synthetic a priori truths, the first major critique of Immanuel Kant.;;Critique of Pure Reason|Kritik der reinen Vernunft;;
World History;;In the 1430s, a manual entitled Straight Talk on Agricultural Matters was in wide use in this nation, although authorship has not been definitively attributed to John McCain. The first full history of this nation appeared in 1495 and was entitled Comprehensive Mirror of the Eastern Kingdom, and like China, this nation also experienced a Three Kingdoms era, though in this nation it involved the kingdoms of Silla, Paekche, and Koguryo. Toyetomi Hideyoshi twice tried to invade it, but his last attempt was defeated at Noryang Point, and until 1910, this nation was ruled by the Yi, or Choson, dynasty. For ten points, identify this nation which was split into north and south halves at the 38th parallel in 1953.;;Korea;;
Biology;;Ancymidol and paclobutrazol are used to inhibit the synthesis of this class of compounds, and this class of compounds is derived from an ent-Kaurene intermediate, which is synthesized from geranylgeryanyl diphosphate produced by a terpenoid pathway. These hormones can be glycosylated in order to decrease their activity, and they operate by acting on the DELLA proteins. They are often used in the growth of seedless grapes, and they were originally discovered by scientists studying foolish seedling disease, or Bakanae. FTP, name this class of plant hormone which is responsible for bolting and stem growth.;;Gibberelin(s);;
Religion/Mythology;;One member of this sect split from it and created the "Ring of Light" group. This sect believes that a series of smaller enlightenments is necessary to reach the "Final Realization". They believe that America is the Beast of revelation mentioned in the Bible, and that a war between the US and this religion's native country will lead to Armageddon. Originally beginning as a meditation club, they reorganized themselves as "Aleph" five years after some of their members used sharpened umbrellas and chemical weapons to kill twelve people. FTP, name this religious cult that carried out a sarin gas attack in the Tokyo subway in 1995.;;Aum Shinrikyo;;Aleph
Literature;;The title character eventually marries the sister of William Walters in one work, while another title character goes to Virginia with his master and prospers from running a plantation in The History of Colonel Jacque. This author hailed a "hieroglyphic state machine, contrived to punish fancy in," in his poem "A Hymn to the Pillory," and a fable taken from Roger L'Estrange begins his pamphlet "The Shortest Way with Dissenters". The narrator H.F. Narrates a work based on the events of 1655, A Journal of the Plague Year, and he wrote of a woman who accidentally marries her own brother and a man who spends 35 years away from home after being shipwrecked. FTP, identify this autor of Moll Flanders and Robinson Crusoe.;;(Daniel) Defoe;;
World History;;This man's grandfather was nicknamed "Diamond," for his wealth, and his first appearance in Parliament was as MP for Old Sarum. Dismissed from the military for a sarcastic speech in support of Frederick Louis against George II, this man attacked Carteret's foreign policy during the War of the Austrian Succession. Becoming paymaster general of the royal forces in 1746, this man declared in 1755 that "I am sure I can save this country, and nobody else can," and formed a joint ministry with Lord Newcastle. He would not hold the prime ministership until late in life, when he formed a cabinet with Augustus Fitzroy and Charles Townshend. FTP, identify this British politician called the "Great Commoner".;;(William) Pitt (the) Elder(,)|(First) (Earl) (of) Chatham;;(William) Pitt
Physics;;The losses in these types of materials depend only on the power factor as long as applied voltage and frequency are constant, and result due to the fact that current does not lead voltage by exactly 90 degrees. This term describes a type of heating that occurs in materials such as thermosetting glue that are subjected to a high-frequency field, and if the polarizability of a material is known, the Clausius-Mosotti relation allows the calculation of this type of constant. Intrinsic, thermal, and discharge are all types of a namesake "breakdown" which occurs in these materials. Referring to materials characterized by the property of capacitance, for ten points, identify this general term for insulators wedged into a capacitor.;;dielectric(s);;
Music;;The second movement of one of these works incorporates variations on the French song "La Gentille et Jeune Lisette". Another includes strange pauses in its final movement, and is named for an oboe theme that listeners interpreted as clucking. In addition to The Queen of France and The Hen, one of these works begins and ends with a brass fanfare, and is titled Hornsignal. A set of six of them are named for Paris, while in another of these compositions, soft variations on "Ah, vous dirai-je maman" are interrupted by a sudden fortissimo chord. FTP, name these works by an Austrian composer known as the "father" of this genre, which include the Clock, Farewell and Surprise.;;symphonies (of) (Joseph) Haydn|(Joseph) Haydn('s) symphonies;;
Literature;;One writer with this surname left behind three volumes of poems to be published posthumously under the editorship of Ada Dwyer. While alive, that writer had produced Men, Women, and Ghosts, which contained her best known poem, "Patterns". Another writer with this surname created such characters as Homer Wilbur and Birdofredum Sawin in a series of publications that attacked the policies of James K. Polk, while a third writer with this surname dedicated to Elizabeth Bishop his poem "Skunk Hour" and wrote of "A Quaker Graveyard in Nantucket". More famous, however, is that poet's work dedicated to Colonel Robert Shaw. For ten points, identify this surname common to poet Amy, the author of The Biglow Papers James Russell, and a poet best known for the poem "For the Union Dead," Robert.;;Lowell;;
Pop Culture;;One character on this show bought a diamond necklace for a duck, which died after drinking too much liquor at Dolores' bar. In its third season, businessmen like Kintell Williamson and Fatface Rick formed the New Day Co-Op, and the creation of Hamsterdam contributed to incumbent mayor Clarence Royce's loss to Tommy Carcetti. In the fourth season of this show, Marlo Stanfield's crew replaced an organization run by Stringer Bell and Avon Barksdale, which was investigated by Lieutenant Cedric Daniels and Detective Jimmy McNulty. Created by David Simon, FTP, name this HBO crime drama set in Baltimore, named for a method of electronic surveillance.;;(The) Wire;;
Religion/Mythology;;In Chinese legend, the immortal Chiu-Shou was one of these which took human form to fight in wars, and the Shinto god Aizen-Myoo has one of these creatures in his hair. To defeat Hiranyashka, Vishnu chose as his fourth avatar a cross between a man and one of these. As punishment for making love in one of Zeus' temples, Atalanta and Melanion were transformed into these. In Egyptian myth, the wife of Ptah and embodiment of the "Eye of Ra" possessed the head of one of these and was named Sekhmet, while this creature's body was supplied to the griffin, manticore, and chimera. FTP, Heracles frequently wore the hide of what type of creature, one of which he killed in Nemea?;;lion;;
Chemistry;;One alternative to this reaction uses diorganochromium and is named for Takai, while one variant is further modified by using KHMDS and is named for Still. The ability of one intermediate to interconvert is called stereochemical drift, and one modification uses a sulfur-containing compound in order to create epoxides. In addition to the Corey-Chaykovsky reaction, and ester version of this reaction was developed by Horner, Wadsworth, and Emmons, while the erythro betaine can be converted to the threo version using phenyllithium in a version named for Schlosser. The formation of an oxaphosphetane drives, FTP, this reaction which uses a phosphonium ylide to create alkenes from carbonyls, named for a German.;;Wittig (reaction);;
Art;;A skeleton steers a boat with a yellow sail in this artist's painting Death at the Helm. This artist depicted a ghostly girl in white, a naked woman with red hair, and an ashen-faced woman wearing a black robe in Woman in Three Stages. His self portraits include ones "after Spanish influenza" and "with a skeletal arm," and he portrayed a woman with a red halo in his painting Madonna. Three figures in black suits and huge eyes appear in his painting Anxiety, whose undulating red sky also appears in the background of his painting of a figure holding his hands to his face. FTP, name this expressionistic Norwegian painter of The Scream.;;(Edvard) Munch;;
Literature;;A poetry collection containing such poems as "Nothing to be Said" and "Dockery and Son" was published by Philip Larkin and titled after "The Whitsun" ones of these. In The Autumn of the Patriarch, Leticia Nazareno gives birth to her son Emmanuel during one of these events, and a double one takes place in Panfilo's tale of Cimone in The Decameron. Frankie Addams longs to be the title character in Carson McCullers' novel about "The Member of" one of these events, and Leonardo and another character kill each other at the end of a play by Garcia Llorca about a "Blood" one. For ten points, identify these events, a "Delta" one of which was the subject of a Eudora Welty novel, and at which people get married.;;wedding(s);;
Biology;;The expression of this protein is partly controlled by the binding of NeuroD1 and Par1, and its secretion is inhibited by SIRT4, which ADP-ribosylates glutamate dehydrogenase. Artificial versions of it include Glargine and Lispro versions, and its structure consists of a central zinc ion coordinated to histidine residues in a hexamer. Originally extracted by Banting and Macleod, this hormone partly operates by upregulating the translocation of GLUT4 to the plasma membrane. By up-regulating protein kinase B and PFK-2, this hormone promotes glycogen synthesis and opposes gluconeogenesis. Antagonistic to glucagon, FTP, name this peptide hormone secreted from the beta cells of the Islets of Langerhans, responsible for lowering blood sugar.;;Insulin;;
United States History;;This man's campaigning was crucial to the re-election of Hattie Caraway, and during part of his time in public service, he was opposed by Jared Sanders and his "Dynamite Squad," whose attempts to impeach him erupted in the "Bloody Monday" brawl. In his first gubernatorial campaign he came in third to Hewitt Bouanchaud and Henry Fuqua, but would later win an election after campaigning on a slogan borrowed from William Jennings Bryan. Adela Rogers St. Johns covered this man's assassination by Carl Weiss, which took place before he was able to build a coalition around his "Share-the-Wealth" program. Nicknamed "Kingfish," FTP, identify this notoriously corrupt governor and Senator from Louisiana.;;(Huey) (Pierce) Long(,) (Jr.);;
Art;;One work in this style depicts a crucified man on horseback kissing a naked woman above a group of mourners. Besides Evocation, another work in this style was inspired by a visit to St. Lazare, and portrays a meeting between a female prisoner and a guard, the titular Two Sisters. A woman holding a baby and two unfinished nude sketches appear in another work in this style, La Vie. Many works in this style were inspired by the suicide of Carlos Casamegas, including a painting of a man sitting cross-legged, playing the title instrument. Including The Old Guitarist, and lasting from 1901 to 1904, FTP, name this style followed by the Rose period, in which Pablo Picasso painted many melancholy works.;;blue (period);;
Psychology;;Russell and Schlossberg's circumflex theory of these entities measures them by four quadrants, including one bounded by misery and sleepiness. The Cannon-Bard theory asserts that they are caused by the activation of the thalamus, and according to Stanley Schachter's two-factor theory, they arise from a combination of arousal and cognition. The James-Lange theory states that they are caused by the body's responses to an external stimulus, and Paul Ekman identified six basic ones common to different cultures, including surprise and disgust. FTP, name these psychological states, which include anger and sadness.;;emotion(s);;
World History;;At the end of his life, this man landed in Etruria and captured Rome, after which massacres ensued as he ordered the death of Marcus Antonius and Publicus Licinius Crassus. After coming to the aid of Quintus Lutatius Catulus during a war against the Cimbri, he won a victory at Vercellae, but violated the law during the war by granting citizenship to two cohorts of Camertes. During the Numantian War, this man served under Scipio Aemilianus alongside Jugurtha, whom he would later defeat after taking over the African command from Metellus. This man obtained fame with his military reforms, including making his legionnaires carry their own supplies, leading them to be known as his "mules". FTP, identify this 7-time consul, a rival of Sulla.;;(Gaius) Marius;;
Literature;;One character in this story is instructed to smell the perfume of a flower, whose leaves turns coal-black upon touch; a polished plate of metal is used to try to take a picture of that character, but her features are blurred and indefinable. After reading about Albertus Magnus and Paracelsus, one character enters a laboratory, where she witnesses a flower lose its splotches in little time. With the help of Aminadab, the protagonist gives his wife a potion for the title entity, which is shaped like a small hand and eventually dissolves. However, the scientist Aylmer's desire for the removal of Georgiana's titular imperfection leads to her death at the end of, FTP, which short story by Nathaniel Hawthorne?;;(The) Birthmark;;
Philosophy;;One variation of this statement is used to eliminate anthropomorphic causes of animal behavior, while another variation is used to explain away malice. Those variations are named for Lloyd Morgan and Hanlon, and one statement counter to it is known as Crabtree's Bludgeon. Walter of Chatton criticized its application and developed an "anti" version of it, and it was first formulated in terms of experience, sacred scripture, and the principle of sufficient reason. Also known as the lex parsimoniae and used extensively in evolutionary biology and other sciences, FTP, name this reductionist principle named for a 14th-century English nominalist philosopher that states "entities must not be multiplied beyond necessity".;;Ockham's Razor;;
World History;;One notable ambassador to this dynasty was Kibi no Makibi, and this dynasty was founded partly by the chancellor Li Shimin. It was ended by a rebellion lead by Huang Cho, and was weakened by the rise of military governors known as jiedushi. One ruler of this dynasty required visitors to perform oral sex on her as a sign of respect, and briefly interrupted this dynasty with the Second Zhou. That ruler, Empress Wu, was usurped by Zuanzhong. This dynasty saw the rise of the civil service exam system, as well as the rebellion of a Sogdian Turk, An Lushan. With its capital at Chang'an, FTP, name this Chinese dynasty that preceded the 5 dynasties and 10 kingdoms period and lasted from 618 to 907 AD.;;Tang (Dynasty);;
Chemistry;;Gardner, Rand, and Haynes used this reaction to synthesize docosanedioc acid. One modification of this reaction uses scandium trifloromethane sulfonate and BTBSH to overcome the side production of dimers and is named for Meyer, while another variation is used on alpha-beta epoxy carbonyls and is named for Wharton. Modern instances of this reaction are performed in a pot of ethylene glycol instead of the sealed tubes used in the original version, in a modification named for Huang and Minlon. Its second step relies on three equivalents of hydroxide and is driven by the evolution of nitrogen. FTP, name this alternative to the Clemmensen reduction, which uses hydrazine to reduce a carbonyl to an alkane in strongly basic conditions.;;Wolff-Kishner (reaction|reduction);;
Pop Culture;;This object was created after its occupant used the Skull of Gul'dan to open portals and was thrown back, resulting in his death. It was located next to the Violet Citadel and a plain containing the skeletons of several dragons. It was surrounded by four obelisks, and was shattered using the same weapon used to kill King Terenas, a cursed blade called Frostmourne. Located in Northrend, this object was destroyed after Arthas Menethil defeated Illidan Stormrage, resulting in the release of the Lich King and the merging of Arthas and Ner'zhul's souls. FTP, name this royal seat located in Azeroth's wasteland, which titles the expansion to Warcraft 3.;;(The) Frozen Throne;;Icegrown glacier
Art;;The top right of this painting sees a group of people gripping a broken column, while the bottom of this painting has some people on a boat being pulled into the water. A group of people with musical horns hover next to a man gripped by a serpent and an imp near the center of this painting. Daniele de Volterra partially censored this painting, which was thought obscene by Cardinal Carafa, who is depicted as Minos in the bottom right corner. The artist inserted himself as a figure holding his flayed skin, and the central figure of this work stands on a cloud next to a woman in blue and pink.  FTP, name this Sistine Chapel fresco depicting the second coming of Christ, by Michelangelo.;;(The) Last Judgment;;
Psychology;;Eichenbaum used an odor discrimination task to show hippocampal LTP in these organisms, and Karl Lashley repeatedly lesioned the cortex of a group of these animals in order to find the engram. Harvey Carr used them to prove the "chain of responses" hypothesis, and noted that they would run headlong into a wall while searching for food. In addition to the Kerplunk experiment, another psychologist used these organisms to formulate the cognitive map. Another subject initially made friends with one of these animals, until he associated it with a loud noise. FTP, name these animals used by Edward Tolman and John Watson, which will often run in mazes searching for cheese.;;Rats|Mice;;
Literature;;Among the minor characters in this work are the dentist Mr. Tench and Coral Fellows, the daughter of the owner of a banana company. The protagonist of this work stays at the home of Mr. Lehr shortly after being released from jail, having been caught at the home of Padre Jose. A brief affair with Maria results in the child Brigida, but the protagonist flees soon thereafter, whereupon he meets the mestizo; it is when the protagonist walks the mestizo back across the border that leads to his death. Another priest arrives in town after the execution of the alcoholic whiskey priest, suggesting the perseverance of the Catholic Church at the end of, FTP, which novel by Graham Greene?;;(The) Power and the Glory;;
United States History;;The appellate court judge involved in this case, Leon Brazille, cited Johann Blumberbach in his decision. A similar law from Arizona was previously upheld in Kirby vs. Kirby, while the Monks case also upheld the Arizona statute.  A previous case that had a similar decision was Perez v. Sharp, and this case extended a decision made three years earlier in Laughlin v. Florida.  This case overturned Pace v. Alabama, and the unanimous decision by Earl Warren stated that the law in question had no "overriding purpose independent of invidious racial discrimination".  FTP, name this 1967 Supreme Court decision that struck down Virginia's Racial Integrity Act and all bans on interracial marriage.;;Loving (v.) (Virginia);;
Computer Science;;A metric version of this problem is the subject of the Christofides algorithm. One method of solving this problem is the Lin-Kerninghan method, which is a generalization of 2-opt and 3-opt and relies on pairwise exchange. One solution to it is the Nearest Neighbor algorithm, which involves going from the current point to the adjacent edge with the lightest weight. The Chinese postman problem is a dual of this problem, and a recent exact solution to one instance was done on a group of fifteen thousand German towns. FTP, name this NP-hard problem that involves minimizing the path that a person takes to visit every city on a given map.;;Traveling Salesman (Problem);;
World History;;One group formed the Politiques movement in the aftermath of this event, and Francis Walsingham barely escaped from the backlash of this event. It began when the ringing of a bell of the Church of St-Germain L'Auxerrois, and occurred shortly after the First Peace of St. Germain. It was sparked by an assassination attempt on Gaspard de Coligny, who was recently reinstated as a royal advisor, and by the marriage of Henry III and Marguerite of Valois. Engineered largely by Catherine de Medici and the Guise family to end the influence of a certain group on royal policy, FTP, name this 1572 massacre of Hugenots in France.;;St. Bartholomew's Day Massacre;;
Religion/Mythology;;The release of fifty-two kings is celebrated during this time, while some celebrate it by making 21 different offerings and 21 different threads over the course of 35 days. Its last day consists of brothers and sisters meeting to express affection, while another day is celebrated with a mountain of food. Its second day celebrates the death of an evil demon, while its fourth day is devoted to the goddess of wealth. Mahavira attained nirvana during this holiday, making it sacred to the Jains, while another group celebrates the return of a king from fourteen years of exile. FTP, name this festival in which people ignite lamps to symbolize guiding Rama back to his kingdom, the Hindu festival of lights.;;Diwali|Deepavali;;
Art;;A group of men wearing grey look upon a dwarf in his An Assault on His Dignity. He depicted a group of soldiers lying down in a grassy field in his Field Drill for the Prussian Infantry, while his more characteristic images include one of a man brandishing a whip called Prairie Fire. His Shotgun Hospitality shows a group of travelers making a fire near a wagon, and his most famous self-portrait is of a thinner version of himself on a horse. His most famous work, which was made popular through depictions of Theodore Roosevelt and the Rough Riders, shows a man attempting to control a rearing horse. FTP, name this painter and sculptor who depicted the American West, the creator of The Bronco Buster.;;(Frederic) (Sackrider) Remington;;
Literature;;Hikaru Sulu and Pavel Chekov are the subject of one of this author's short stories found in the collection East, West. His most recent novel links stories from an Italian Renaissance city with those of Akbar's court, while the narrator and Ormus Cama compete for the love of Vina Apsara in another work. In addition to The Enchantress of Florence and The Ground Beneath Her Feet, this author wrote about the Flapping Eagle falls through a hole in the Mediterranean Sea in Grimus, and he wrote a collection of stories featuring Saleem Sinai as well as a novel featuring Saladin Chamcha and Gibreel Farishta. Shalimar the Clown and Shame are other works by, FTP, which Indian novelist of Midnight's Children and The Satanic Verses?;;(Salman) Rushdie;;
Music;;One of his works was a setting of the Whitman poem "From Noon to Starry Night" entitled The Mystic Trumpeter, and a work titled after his hometown was premiered alongside Walton's Balshazzar's Feast. This man's tour of the Sahara inspired his Beni Mora, which was published after his first of two Suites for Military Band. His time as a teacher inspired his Brook Green Suite, while eastern influence can be seen in his Choral Hymns from the Rig Veda and an opera about the title figure's appeal to Yama to spare Satyavan, entitled Savitri. His most famous work was expanded by Colin Matthews, and has movements like "The Bringer of War". FTP, name this English composer of St. Paul's Suite and The Planets.;;(Gustav) Holst;;
United States History;;One side in this battle kept Fraser's Highlanders in reserve during the initial charge. One side planted their troops solidly between the Broad and Pacolet Rivers to prevent desertion, and this battle saw an early retreat covered by cavalry under William Washington and James McCall, and subsequent reorganization into three lines. The American cavalry managed to complete a full three-hundred sixty degree turn around the hill at the center of this battle, and managed to surprise the malnourished and tired British in a classic pincer. A victory for Brigadier General Daniel Morgan over Colonel Banastre Tarleton, FTP, name this key 1781 battle during the southern campaign of the revolutionary war named for a city in South Carolina.;;(Battle) (of) Cowpens;;
Physics;;These particles are the subject of the MSW effect, and the Seesaw mechanism predicts a currently undetected super-heavy one of these particles. The Maki-Nakagawa-Sakata matrix describes a particular interaction of these particles, which was confirmed by the Homestake experiment. In addition to their flavor oscillation, they emit Cerenkov radiation when passing through a detector like the Super-Kamiokande. Originally posited to explain the conservation of energy and momentum during beta decay, they were detected by Reins and Cowan using a reactor. FTP, name these leptons that come in tau, muon, and electron flavors, created during annihilation reactions and with a name meaning "little neutral one".;;(Anti)neutrino(s);;
Religion/Mythology;;In Euripedes' Cyclops, the title figure calls Silenus by this name after getting drunk. One of his brothers was blinded upon seeing the Palladium and was named Illus. This figure was often depicted with a rooster, which was given to him as a gift. His father was given either a golden branch or a group of swift horses after his ascension. Supplanting Hebe in one role,  he was taken by Eos along with his brother Tithonus in one version, while in a more famous version his abductor turns into an eagle. The son of Tros, FTP, name this namesake of a Galilean moon, the cupbearer and lover of Zeus.;;Ganymede;;
Literature;;The title character thinks of Rose, his maid, who is presumably being raped by the groom in one story by this author, who also wrote an ape who trained at the title locale to become a human in another story. In addition to "A Country Doctor" and "A Report to An Academy," this author also wrote about the death of the title character in the Black Woods in another story, while this author also wrote about Karl Rossman's wanderings in the title country in another work. A novel about the land surveyor K. hoping to work at the title building was written by this author of "The Hunter Gracchus" and Amerika, and he also wrote about the mysterious arrest of the banker Josef K in another novel. FTP, name this Czech author of The Castle, The Trial, and a story about Gregor Samsa's transformation into a bug, "The Metamorphosis".;;(Franz) Kafka;;
Biology;;In Drosophila, the growth of these structures is controlled by the interaction of Stilt and Robo receptors, while in vertebrates they are guided by a gradient of Ephrins and the interaction between Semaphorins and Plexins. One type of them tend to gather in Remak bundles, and upon destruction, they are digested by macrophages in a process called the Wallerian degeneration. These structures begin at the hillock, and are often surrounded by oligodendrocytes or Schwann cells. They operate by saltatory conduction, in which an impulse leaps between spaces in their myelin sheaths known as the nodes of Ranvier. FTP, name these long projections between the cell body and synapse of a neuron.;;Axons;;neurons|nerve fibers
Religion/Mythology;;This figure was denied immortality and asked for invulnerability against all races except for man, while his brother accidentally asked for eternal sleep. This son of the sage Vishrava gained control of his grandfather Samali's army and had to perform thousands of years of penance after being trapped under Shiva's big toe. After conquering the three worlds, his brother Kubera chastised him for his cruelty. He used his glider Dhadu Morana in his attack on another character, which lead to Jatayu attacking him. Sugriva managed to ascertain his location, which lead to the formation of an army commanded by Jambavan, Hanuman, and the husband of a woman this figure had kidnapped, Sita. FTP, name this ten-headed rakshasa, ruler of Lanka, and enemy of Rama, the villain of the Ramayana.;;Ravana;;
Literature;;The death of Elizabeth's husband, the coal miner Walter, is detailed in this author's "Odour of Chrysanthemums", while the story of the rector's daughter Yvette Saywell is described in The Virgin and the Gypsy. This author of The White Peacock wrote about Kate Leslie's trip during the Mexican Revolution in one work, while Rawdon Lilly's relationship with a union official who strives to be a musician in another work. In addition to The Plumed Serpent and Aaron's Rod, this author wrote about the characters Constance Reid and Paul Morel in more famous works. FTP, name this British author of Women in Love, Lady Chatterley's Lover, and Sons and Lovers.;;(D.) (H.) Lawrence;;
United States History;;In one section, the speaker compares those on his side to the followers of Peter the Hermit in the First Crusade, and states that "brother has been arrayed against brother". The speaker states that he is there on behalf of "those pioneers away out there", and calls them a part of "the broader class of businessmen". Its last section notes how the United States has grown from 3 million to 70 million, and advocates adopting bimetallism. FTP, name this speech given at the 1896 Democratic National convention by William Jennings Bryan, which ends with the proclamation that "you shall not crucify mankind on" the title object.;;Cross of Gold (Speech);;
Pop Culture;;Alternate versions of this character were recently hunted down by Slaymaster, and in one storyline, this character acquired the power to turn invisible after coming in contact with the Crimson Dawn. At one point, this character had to give up some of her power so that the Shadow King would remain imprisoned on the Astral Plane, and she was recently resurrected by her brother to aid in the fight against the Foursaken. This member of STRIKE switched bodies with the assassin Revanche after passing through the Siege Perilous, and this fraternal twin sister of Captain Britain currently serves with the Exiles after time with the X-men. FTP, name this telekinetic ninja who creates blades with her psychic powers, with real name Elizabeth Braddock.;;Psylocke;;Elizabeth Braddock|Betsy Braddock
Art;;In one painting by him, a woman in white holds up a dog with her feet as her dress falls. Two lovers embrace on a bed as one reaches for the door in his The Bolt, and a man sneakily tiptoes behind a woman in a straw hat in his Blind-Man's Bluff. He depicted a young girl in a golden dress in the appropriately titled A Young Girl Reading and a large parasol sits against a large statue in one component of his The Progress of Love. A stone angel makes a silencing gesture in his most famous work, where the central figure, dressed in pink and illuminated by a shaft of light, kicks off her shoe as she is pushed from behind. FTP, identify this French Rococo artist who depicted a man looking up a woman's skirt in The Swing.;;(Jean-Honoré) Fragonard;;
Physics;;These objects are dispersed away from a Fermi surface in Kohn Scattering. A third one of these particles is created when two of them collide in the Umklapp process, which is distinguished from their normal process by conservation of momentum. In florescence, their namesake sideband is shifted to a higher frequency during absorption. Usually divided into thermal, optical, and acoustic types, Debye integrated over all of their vibrational modes in order to derive his specific heat model. They obey the oscillatory conditions of their Brillouin zones, and they are usually used to explain thermal and electrical conductivity. FTP, name this quasi-particles, the quantized versions of lattice vibrations.;;Phonon(s);;
Religion/Mythology;;One of the most important holy sites for this group is the tomb of Nebi Shu'eib, or Jethro, and their other prophets include Sabalan and Al-Ya'afuri. They regard the calf as a symbol of negative forces, and call their theology hikma. Their secular juhal members are not granted access to holy books, a privilege reserved for the uqqal, and their emblem represents the 'superior ministers' as a five-colored star.  Founded by Al-Hakim and based on seven central principles, FTP, identify this religious sect primarily concentrated in Israel, Lebanon, and Syria, an offshoot of Ismaili Islam whose members refer to themselves as muwahudeen.;;Druze;;
Literature;;In another work, this character's grandson returns home after studying in England thanks to a scholarship from the UPU, but he is eventually arrested for corruption. In the work in which this character appears, a man who sells this character's yams brings him bags of cowries and news of the demise of Abame while he is staying in Mbanta for seven years. This character, who commits suicide after realizing the clan leaders of Umuofia will not fight against the British; this occurred after he exiled himself when his gun accidentally went off, killing Ogbuefi Ezeudu's son. FTP, name this protagonist of Chinua Achebe's Things Fall Apart.;;Okonkwo;;
Biology;;This enzyme's functions are duplicated by the ALT pathway, and its promoter contains 5 elements that bind the transcription factor Sp1. The Mad1/Max dimer of the Myc family downregulates it and the formation of G-quadroplexes have been shown to slow its activity. Another method of regulating its activity involves the formation of a t-loop, which prevents it from latching on to a 3' overhang. This protein consists of two components, a reverse transcriptase and a built-in RNA template, and its activation is used to abrogate the Hayflick limit. The solution to Crick's end-replication problem is, FTP, what protein which is upregulated in stem cells and tumors and lengthens the repeat regions at the ends of chromosomes?;;Telomerase;;
World History;;The winning side in this war suffered an early loss at the battle of Worth. A key engagement in this war took place near Saint Privat, while the engagement near Mars-la-Tour was the last major cavalry engagement in western Europe. Its immediate cause was the candidacy of Leopold for the Spanish throne, though some of the pretext was provided by an imagined insult to Count Benedetti. After retreating from Gravelotte, Marshall Bazaine was trapped near Metz, and thus was unable to assist MacMahon when von Moltke crushed him at the battle of Sedan. For ten points, identify this conflict set off by the Ems dispatch which resulted in the deposition of the Emperor and establishment of the Third Republic, as well as the 1871 proclamation of Willhelm I as German emperor.;;Franco-Prussian (War);;
Economics;;This man recently discussed his work with Mabub ul Haq in a preview of his upcoming book The Idea of Justice and his more recent works include Inequality Reexamined and Identity and Violence. Together with Martha Nussbaum, he developed the capability approach as outlined in his essay "Equality of What". He argued that shortages stem from inequality in distribution in Poverty and Famines, and his book Collective Choice and Social Welfare proposed that it is impossible to maintain a commitment to "minimal liberty" and Pareto optimality. FTP, name this Indian economist who built on the work of Kenneth Arrow by advancing the Liberal paradox.;;(Amartya) Sen;;
Religion/Mythology;;A red and gold tree called Glasil grows outside of it. One creature that lives on it has a cold river dripping from its antlers, while another brews amazing mead. In addition to the hart Eikthyrnir and the goat Heidrun, another creature living here regenerates every day after being cooked by Andhrimmnir and is named Saehrimmnir. Its inhabitants are woken every morning by the rooster Gullinkambi, who will also signal a time when its inhabitants, known as Einherjar, must pour through its five hundred and forty doors to battle Fenrir. Also the home of the Valkyries, who carry people here, FTP, name this Norse "hall of the slain" where those who die honorably spend their days perpetually battling each other.;;Valhalla;;
Literature;;The protagonist of this work breaks the ivory handle of a parasol after visiting a woman upon three fateful flips of a coin. He later plans a duel with Cisy over a future lover, who he tried to visit after pursuing a career in the Council of State and whose history he learns from Vatnaz. This novel opens with the protagonist riding on a boat down the Seine to attend law school and visit his friend, Charles Deslauriers, after which he meets Dambreuse and Rosanette, who eventually becomes the protagonist's lover. Madame Arnoux is the love interest of Frederic Moreau, the protagonist of, FTP, which novel by Gustave Flaubert?;;Sentimental Education|(L')Education Sentimentale;;
Biology;;The transcripts of the episomal form of this virus are unstable because they contain a series of uracil residues in their poly-A tail, and one version of it causes epidermodysplasia verruciformis. Classification is based on sequence homology in the L1 gene, while its E6 and E7 proteins bind to Rb protein and p53. High concentrations of alpha-defensins are one method of combating this virus, and of the 96 known types, types 6, 11, 16, and 18 are targeted by a quadrivalent vaccine developed by Merck. Usually infecting cutaneous tissue, FTP, name this virus class targeted by Gardasil, which causes warts and cervical cancer.;;(Human) Papillomavirus|HPV;;
World History;;One of this nation's early epics was The Legend of the Magic Crossbow, and this nation was temporarily ruled by a pair of rebellious sisters in the first century. The Twelve Lords Uprising occurred after the death of one ruler of this nation, while the Champa kingdom existed here until its conquest by the Ly dynasty. This nation's second war with the Song ended with an amphibious assault at Cau, and it nation repelled its third Mongol invasion at the Battle of Bach Dang River. This country's final period of dynastic rule began after the defeat of Tay Son rebels by Gia Long. Also the subject of the Paris Peace Accords, this country's final emperor was Bao Dai, who was succeeded by Prime Minister Ngo Dinh Diem. FTP, name this country with capital at Ho Chi Minh City.;;Vietnam;;
Music;;Regarding the first movement of this work, the composer wrote of children 'wrought up by their own cries like swallows in evening'. The two tenor trombones and bass trombone play reminiscently of priestly chanting in the second movement, and the lower instruments deliver a pulsating rhythm reflecting a tomb. An English horn solo signals dawn in the final movement, where composer called for 6 bucinas, and the third movement, depicting the Janiculum, closes with a gramophone recording of a nightingale. FTP, a gigantic crescendo representing a march along the Appian Way concludes what symphonic poem from a trilogy by Ottorino Respighi set in the Italian capital?;;Pines of Rome|Pini di Roma;;
World History;;This man was removed from power after refusing to support a series of land reforms, and he served as the vice chairman of the Revolutionary Command Council.  He led his country through the War of Attrition after his resignation.  As part of one conflict, he blockaded Eilat under the suggestion of his defense minister Amer.  He led a revolution with Muhammad Naguib and the Free Officers Movement in 1952, and after gaining control of the government he allowed the deposed Farouk I to leave without incident. A leader of the non-aligned movement who ordered the construction of the Aswan High Dam, FTP, name this Egyptian prime minister responsible for the Suez Crisis.;;(Gamal) (Abdel) Nasser;;
Literature;;A friend of the protagonist in this work writes a review column called "The New Democracy," and one section of the final chapter consists of a dialogue between ‘Q' and ‘A' within the protagonist's mind. The protagonist's last romantic fling starts when he overhears a girl reciting Verlaine in the middle of a storm and ends when that girl, Eleanor Savage, sends her horse galloping off a cliff. After returning to New York, the protagonist learns that his father figure, Monsignor Darcy, has died, and that his greatest love, Rosalind Connage, is now engaged. The protagonist returns to the Princeton campus in the final scene of, FTP, what novel about Amory Blaine, the first by F. Scott Fitzgerald?;;(This) Side of Paradise;;
Physics;;The Knudsen type of this process occurs in long pores, and Dynkin's formula describes the Ito type. Ehrenfest developed a model of this to help explain the statistical interpretation of the second law of thermodynamics. Einstein and Smoluchowski linked Boltzmann's constant and the absolute temperature together by a constant in determining this value, while its flux is related to the concentration field and its resultant change on the field over time are described by Fick's Laws. Graham's Law also describes, FTP, which chemical process through which substances, primarily gases, mix as a result of random movements of their components.;;Diffusion;;
Philosophy;;In an article entitled Fact, Fiction, and Forecast, Nelson Goodman invented the words "grue" and "bleen" to illustrate the "new riddle" of this concept. Rudolf Karnap attempted a mathematical defense of this concept in his Logical Foundations of Probability, while Karl Popper rejected its use in science, contending that it could be replaced with falsification. David Hume notably pointed out the problem of this concept in section 4 of his Enquiry using the example of saying that the sun will not rise tomorrow is just as logically valid as saying it will. For ten points, identify this philosophical concept which refers to a method of reasoning from particulars to generalities.;;induction;;
Literature;;In Heinrich Boll's "The Seventh Trunk", the nun notices a spot of this on a girl's blue dress. In Wallace Stevens's "Sea Surface Full of Clouds," the summer "hued the deck/And made one think of rosy" types of this "and gilt umbrellas," while in Randell Jarrell's "Thinking of the Lost World," the chain of memory is set off by a spoonful of this kind of tapioca. Captain Bluntschli stuffs his pockets with this instead of ammunition in George Bernard Shaw's Arms and the Man, while Tita likens her feeling before a marriage proposal from John Brown to cooking this title entity of a Laura Esquivel novel. Robert Cormier wrote a novel about a war over, FTP, which sweet?;;chocolate;;
Music;;This man got his start playing with Jay McShann, after which he joined the band of Earl Hines for a year.1950 saw the release of an album featuring him "With Strings," and the hits "Kim" and "Leap Frog" feature his typical flowing melodic lines, as do "Billy's Bounce," "Thriving on a Riff," and "Now's the Time". His improvisational treatment of Ray Noble's "Cherokee" led to the creation of "Koko," often cited as the first bebop song, and continued a long tradition of collaboration with Dizzy Gillespie.  FTP, name this jazz saxophonist and composer of "Yardbird Suite" and "Ornithology," colloquially known as "Bird".;;(Charlie) Parker;;Bird