History;;It extended as far as Montmedy, and Wilhelm von Leeb's Army Group C faced it to prevent diversion of forces from it. Its namesake served as minister of war from 1929 to 1931, and it was known for its air conditioned chambers. Also containing an underground rail network, it was rendered useless when it was bypassed by an attack through the Ardennes forest by way of the Netherlands and Belgium. For 10 points, name this heavily fortified French defensive position that failed to prevent German invasion in World War II.;;(The) Maginot (Line)
Literature;;To pay a debt at an inn, this character rolls up a companion in a blanket and gives him away. This character thinks his brains are melting because of curds in his helmet, and he returns to his home after his defeat at the hands of the Knight of the White Moon. After reading many chivalric romances, including Amadis of Gaul, this character renames a barmaid Dulcinea, and tilts at windmills that he believes are dragons. He is accompanied on his quest by Sancho Panza. For 10 points, identify this protagonist of a novel by Miguel de Cervantes.;;(Don) Quixote
Chemistry;;In the presence of tetrahydrofuran, a compound of this element reduces alkenes in an anti- Markovnikov fashion. This element forms a compound with rhenium that can surpass the hardness of diamond, and its oxide is added to silica to produce a durable form of glass used in labware. It is the lightest element used in p-type doping, and its hydride is a Lewis acid. For 10 points, identify this element with atomic number 5 and symbol B.;;Boron
Mythology;;A tree called Laerad spreads over this locale, and its leaves are eaten by a goat and a hart atop its roof. This place with 540 massive doors and a roof of golden shields is home to a cook who uses the same cauldron to cook the cosmic boar Saehrimnir every day. The rooster Gullenkambi awakens the residents of this locale, who spar with each other all day and are known as the Einherjar. For 10 points, name this "Hall of the Slain" where Valkyries escort fallen warriors in Norse myth.;;Valhall(a)
Miscellaneous;;Two of his former allies suspected him of being the "Holliday" figure. He sought the aid of those allies in tracking "The Roman", whom he later shot in the head. He once tried to seduce a lesbian whom he was attracted to, Renee Montoya, until she fought back and was rescued by Batman. Poison Ivy attempted to kill him for running over a rare flower at the construction site of Stonegate Penitentiary, and Billy Dee Williams played him as DA Harvey Dent in one film. For 10 points, name this dualistic villain played by Aaron Eckhart in "The Dark Knight".;;Two-Face|(Harvey) Dent
Literature;;In a poem by this man, the speaker regards autumn as a "blind giant" and a "faceless man" while sitting in a café with two friends. In addition to "Clear Night," he wrote of a traveler who sees a holy man covered in ash in his poem "Vrindaban". His literary criticism includes The Traps of Faith and The Bow and the Lyre, and he described the conjunctions of the planet Venus and the sun in an ancient Aztec calendar in his poem "Sun Stone". Formerly his country's ambassador to India, for 10 points, name this Mexican poet of The Labyrinth of Solitude.;;(Octavio) Paz
Music;;The sixth character dance in it depicts Polcinelle, the clown, and its pas de deux is an Intrada followed by a work whose melody is played by a celesta. It represents substances like chocolate, coffee, and tea with Spanish, Arabian, and Chinese dances. Named for a gift from Herr Drosselmeyer, this ballet includes the Waltz of the Snowflakes and the Dance of the Sugarplum Fairy. For 10 points, name this ballet about Clara, which begins on Christmas eve, a composition by Tchaikovsky about a toy which turns into a prince.;;(The) Nutcracker|Schelkunchik
United States History;;This man defeated Frank Lowden to win his party's presidential nomination. As president, he signed the Norris-LaGuardia Act and created the Reconstruction Finance Corporation. The Secretary of Commerce for Warren Harding, he headed the American Food Administration in World War I, and this president chose to sign the Hawley-Smoot Tariff in response to the calamity that doomed his presidency. For 10 points, name this president who lost the 1932 election to Franklin Roosevelt during the Great Depression.;;(Herbert) Hoover
Biology;;Structures found within it include ones discovered by Cajal, which are thought to be involved in the modification of snRNPs. Alpha-solenoid and beta-propeller folds can be found in the pores located on the double membrane envelope of this structure, which is continuous with the rough endoplasmic reticulum. Red blood cells lack this structure, which contains protein-DNA complexes called euchromatin and heterochromatin. For 10 points, identify this organelle, which houses the cell's genetic information.;;nucleus
World History;;The ones who resorted to public assassinations were known as Sicarii, or dagger men, and, unlike the Herodians, they refused to pay taxes. One group of them fought the Tenth Fretensis legion led by Flavius Silva, and their revolt began when Agrippa II was expelled from Jerusalem. The historian Josephus fought for them, and scores of them commited suicide at the Masada rather than surrender. For 10 points, identify this Jewish sect that was known for its firm opposition to Roman polytheism, whose name is now synonymous with fanatic.;;Zealot(s)
Literature;;One character in this novel infuriates the narrator when he calls during a funeral to request his tennis shoes. In addition to Ewing Klipspringer, this novel's character's include the coffee shop owner Michaelis, who reports that he saw his neighbor run out into the Valley of Ashes. The title character, the former protégé of Dan Cody, is murdered in his pool after Myrtle Wilson is run over by the drunken Daisy Buchanan. For 10 points, name this novel in which Nick Carraway describes the downfall of Jay Gatz, written by F. Scott Fitzgerald.;;(The) Great Gatsby
Geography;;The lowest point in this body of water is the Fram Basin, which is interrupted by the Nansen Cordeilla. It includes the Lomonosov Ridge, which may contain oil and gas reserves and is the subject of competing land claims due to dubious continental shelf extensions. Touching Cape Morris Jesup, this body of water has the highest percentage of continental shelf of any other ocean and includes ports at Barrow, Prudhoe Bay and Murmansk. For 10 points, identify this ocean which in 2007 lost nearly 10 million kilometers of sea-ice during the summer thaw.;;Arctic(Ocean)
Religion;;Before the Mincha prayer associated with this holiday, observers give Machatzit Hashekel or 3 halves of a shekel as charity. This holiday has a "Shushan" version, which is celebrated on its following day in walled cities, and it always occurs one month before Passover. Celebrated on the Fouteenth of Adar, some of its practitioners get so drunk as to be unable to differentiate between "Cursed be Haman!" and "Blessed be Mordechai!" For 10 points, identify this Jewish holiday, which celebrates Esther's victory over Haman's evil plans.;;Purim
Psychology;;In an experiment by Bruce Alexander, these subjects chose to drink untainted water despite being addicted to morphine. Edward Tolman's experiments with these subjects led him to develop the theory of cognitive maps. In the "kerplunk" experiment, these subjects were conditioned to run into a barrier. John Watson used loud noises to condition Little Albert to fear white ones. Often placed in mazes by researchers, For 10 points, name these rodents frequently used in psychological experiments.;;Rat(s)
World History;;This king's success at the Battle of Spurs during the War of the League of Cambrai led his brother in law James IV of Scotland to invade, only to be defeated at Flodden Field. This man met with Francis I at the Field of the Cloth of Gold, which accomplished nothing as his minister Cardinal Wolsey declared war on France soon after. He removed Wolsey from power after failing to receive an annulment with his wife, Catherine of Aragon. For 10 points, name this Tudor Monarch from 1509 to 1547 who had six wives.;;Henry VIII|Henry the Eighth;;Henry
Physics;;The effect in which a suddenly magnetized iron bar rotates in the opposite direction of an applied current is named after de Haas and this man. This man introduced the idea of stimulated emission while proving Planck's radiation equation. He also developed the equivalence principle and postulated that the speed of light is the same in all reference frames, and his paper "On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies" introduced special relativity. For 10 points, name this man who won the 1921 Nobel Prize in Physics for his explanation of the photoelectric effect.;;(Albert) Einstein
Art;;This artist depicted a woman in a black dress and a red belt pointing one finger downward in his portrait of the Duchess of Alba. He depicted a desperate looking long haired, bug-eyed god getting ready to eat a child's arm from its socket in Saturn Devouring His Son, one of this artist's Black Paintings. Following controversy in his native country, he painted a clothed version of La Maja Desnuda. Another of his paintings depicts a line of French soldiers on the right shooting prisoners on a certain date. For 10 points, identify this Spanish painter of Third of May, 1808.;;(Francisco Jose de) Goya (y Lucientes)
Literature;;One poem by this man includes the phrase "Knowledge overwhelming makes a God of me!" and refers to the title sun titan's ascent to godhood. In addition to "Hyperion", this poet wrote a poem which describes the courtship of Porphyro for Madeleine on the title night. Besides "The Eve of St. Agnes," this poet asked "Ah, what can woe thee, wretched wight" in a poem about a woman who "takes [the speaker] to her elvin grot". For 10 points, name this poet of "La Belle Dame Sans Merci" who wrote "beauty is truth; truth beauty" in "Ode on a Grecian Urn".;;(John) Keats
Math;;The Kleene-Rosser paradox in lambda calculus is resolved by invoking it, and operations utilizing its mu form may be computed by Turing machines. The Hofstadter Q-sequence uses this process, whose tail form can easily use less stack space by being transformed into iteration. A process for computing the greatest common divisor may be implemented using this, essential to the Ackermann function. For 10 points, identify this programming technique which reduces problems to base cases, commonly used for computing the terms of the Fibonacci sequence.;;Recursion
Music;;His Missa sunt bona mixta malis only has the Kyrie and part of the Gloria extant, while a later mass of his became named for Lord Nelson. One of his cantatas includes parts for Adam and Eve, while one of his string quartets includes the theme of Deutschland Uber Alles and is nicknamed "The Emperor". One of his symphonies was written so the performers gradually leave the stage and snuff their candles, while another includes a timpani beat in the andante. For 10 points, name this composer of The Creation and the "Farewell" and "Surprise" symphonies.;;(Franz Joseph) Haydn
Literature;;August Wilson's play The Piano Lesson mentions ghosts of a dog of this type. An old pair of this type considers dinner "a casual affair" in Gwendolyn Brooks' "The Bean Eaters". This color describes a house owned by Henry Wimbush in an Aldous Huxley novel, while it also describes a town which Jack Potter brings his "bride" to in a Stephen Crane story. For 10 points, name this color, which also appears on wallpaper that drives a woman insane in a short story by Charlotte Perkins Gilman.;;yellow
Geology;;One feature of this type is carved from existing bedrock by a glacier, has a smooth upper portion and a craggy bottom portion, and is known as a sheepback. Another feature of this type is often found in conjunction with kettle lakes and occurs when a melting glacier retreats; those are termed kames. Tear- shaped ones are formed when a glacier deposits a large rock and sediment builds up behind it, and are called drumlins. For 10 points, name these geologic features, raised areas of land that are smaller than mountains.;;hills|sheepback|rochemoutonne
Art;;This painting hangs across from a fresco of the crucifixion by Giovanni Donato. Painted on the back wall of the dining hall of Santa Maria delle Grazie, its left foreground depicts Bartholomew, James, and Andrew all standing. Another figure clutches a sack of gold in his right hand, and looks at the central figure, whose arms are spread open on the table in front of him. This painting depicts the emotional reaction of the disciples to the words "One of you will betray me". For 10 points, name this painting of the final meal of Christ by Leonardo da Vinci.;;(The) Last Supper
World History;;His service as archon of Athens was memorialized in an inscription in the Theater of Dionysus, and he was given the title Olympius after the temple of Zeus was dedicated. During his reign, cults for his late companion Antinous were established, and towards the end of his reign his rival Julius Servianus was executed. He initially picked Lucius Aelius Caesar to be his successor, and he faced the Jewish revolt of Bar Kokhba. For 10 points, name this Roman emperor, the successor to Trajan known for his eponymous wall at the border between England and Scotland.;;Hadrian
Literature;;At the beginning of this play, the servant Tranio convinces his master that he should seek pleasure in life. Three characters in this play disguise themselves as music tutors, and later, Vincentio is able to diffuse a situation with his words. In this drama set in Padua, Gremio, Hortensio, and Lucentio are thwarted by Baptista, who denies them permission to marry his younger daughter, Bianca, until her older sister is married. For 10 points, identify this Shakespearean drama about Petruchio and Katharina.;;(The) Taming of the Shrew
Chemistry;;A chondroitin salt of this anion is used along with glucosamine to treat arthritis. Ferrous and ammonium cations are found along with this anion in Mohr's salt, and its barium salt is coated with quinoline poisoned palladium in Lindlar's catalyst. Hydrated magnesium salts of it are called Epsom salts. This anion's calcium salt is frequently used as a desiccant, and a hydrated form of that salt is found in minerals like gypsum. For 10 points, identify this anion whose copper salt is called "blue vitriol" and has formula SO4.;;Sulfate
Psychology;;This psychologist published his work on the process of learning the consequences of an action in On Reflecting Abstraction. This psychologist noted the ability of some subjects to remember that an object was present after it was no longer visible, called "object permanence". He posited that people arrange knowledge in schemas, and created a theory of development which begins at the sensorimotor stage and ends with the formal operational stage. For 10 points, identify this Swiss psychologist who theorized a four-stage model of cognitive development in children.;;(Jean) Piaget
Literature;;One of this author's works consists of fictional letters written by women like Oenone and Briseis to their lovers. In addition to Heroides, this author wrote a poem based on a calendar of festivals, Fasti. He wrote Tristia, a poem lamenting his sorrows, after being exiled to Tomis by Augustus, possibly for writing Ars Amatoria, or The Art of Love. Another of his poems begins by describing Apollo's pursuit of Daphne, who turns into a laurel tree, and recounts numerous mythological transformations. For 10 points, name this Roman poet ofMetamorphoses.;;(Publius)  Ovid(ius) (Naso)
World History;;Jean-Paul Laurens depicted the excommunication of the second ruler of this dynasty, which occurred when that ruler attempted to marry his distant cousin Berthe of Burgundy. Another member of this dynasty clashed with Pope Boniface VIII and moved the papacy to Avignon. In addition to Robert the Pious and Philip the Fair, this dynasty included Louis IX, commonly known as St. Louis. For 10 points, name this French dynasty that succeeded the Carolingians and was succeeded by the Valois, which was founded by Hugh in 987.;;(The)Capet(ian Dynasty)
Music;;Serge Lifar and Leonid Lavrovsky were among the choreographers who revised this one-act ballet, originally staged by Bronislava Nijinska in a version starring Ida Rubenstein. Said by its composer to be made for performance in factories, its score occasionally departs from the main key of C major. However, its tempo and content remain unchanged throughout. The only other dynamic aspects of the music for this piece are the rotation of the melody among different instruments and a steady crescendo. For 10 points, name this 1928 ballet, adapted from a Spanish folk dance by Maurice Ravel.;;Bolero
Religion;;It does not permit a form of temporary marriage called mutah, and it does not believe that the coming of the Mahdi necessarily betokens the end of the world. The highest religious official in nations with many adherents to this belief is the Grand Mufti. Believers more readily accept the hadith of Aisha, despite her opposition to Ali. Its ulema adhere to one of four major traditions, or madhhab, in its religious law, called sharia. Belief in the Rashidun, or rightly-guided caliphs is an essential part of, for 10 points, what sect of Islam often contrasted with Shia?;;Sunni|Sunnism
Chemistry;;Molecular orbital theory can explain the relationship between it and absolute hardness in Lewis acid- base complexes. One equation for measuring it relies on Slater's rules and is named for Allred and Rochow. Germanium has an anomalously high value for this property compared to silicon due to effective nuclear charge. Increasing from left to right and from the bottom to the top of the periodic table, this property is highest in fluorine, which has a value of 4.0 on the Pauling scale. For 10 points, name this property that measures an atom's ability to attract electrons.;;electronegativity
Geography;;This kingdom was created after its first king won a battle known as "the leaping of the mullet fish". The leader of the Committee of Safety, Lorrin Thurston, forced its leader to sign the Bayonet Constitution. It was officially annexed by the Newlands Resolution, and was first ruled by King Kamehameha I. Its only president, Sanford Dole, took power after Queen Lil'uokalani was deposed. Its current senators include Daniel Inouye and Daniel Akaka, and in 1959, it became the 50th state. For 10 points, name this state whose capital is Honolulu.;;Hawaii|Hawai'i
Geography;;This nation's Great Manmade River project pumps fossil water from the Tazerbo and Sarir in the Kufra Basin and notable rock art can be found at Tadrart Acacus near Ghat. This country's highest point, Bikku Bitti, lies adjacent to an area this country was pushed out of in 1987, the Aozou Strip. It saw a battle of the Desert War during World War II at the seaport of Tobruk. Also containing Al 'Aziziyah, which recorded the highest temperature on Earth, for 10 points, name this nation led by Colonel Muammar Al-Qadafi with its capitol at Tripoli.;;(Great Socialist People's) Libya(n Arab Jamahiriya)
Biology;;The net fluid movement across them is measured by the Starling equation, and superfused ATP causes constriction of these near regions where pericytes are located about these structures. Discontinuous endothelial cells allow for higher permeability of one variant of these, which are usually just one cell thick. They form the vasa recta, which is critical in the production of urine in the kidney. Occurring in formations known as "beds," for 10 points, name this smallest of the three major animal blood vessels.;;capillaries
Pop Culture;;One new character in this game met his most famous associate at the brig in Camp McIntyre, while another who has "borne witness to the entropy of entire realities" will be returning. A yellow variant of a substance featured in this game's predecessors provides more resources, and a canceled feature is a black hole affecting aerial units. One race's new Corruptor and Roach units brought balance complaints, while the Phase Prism will change the mechanism of transportation for the Protoss. For 10 points, name this upcoming successor of Brood War.;;StarCraft II|StarCraft Two
Literature;;One of this author's novels includes a Soviet U-boat captain named Alexander Marisenko, and is narrated by the father of Konrad, Paul Pokriefke. The narrator is married to Ilsebill in another of his novels, which is named for a mythical fish. In addition to Crabwalk and The Flounder, this author wrote a novel about Pilenz's persecution of Joachim Mahlke, which followed a novel about a man who decides to stop growing after receiving an instrument for his third birthday, Oskar Matzerath. For 10 points, name this author of Dog Years, Cat and Mouse, and The Tin Drum.;;(Gunter) Grass
Noncomputational Math;;A cuboid with integer sides and diagonals are special cases of this man's namesake bricks, and he lends his name to a set of polynomials which are related to the Bernoulli numbers. His namesake line connects the circumcenter, orthocenter, and the centroid, and he names a constant whose irrationality is yet to be confirmed, along with Mascheroni. For 10 points, identify this mathematician whose namesake formula relates complex exponents to the sine and cosine functions, and whose namesake number is the base of the natural log.;;(Leonard) Euler
Art;;This structure is usually constructed of a series of voussoirs. A skyscraper in Hong Kong that uses one of these for support is named for it. Arabic architects used a pointed version of this for mosques, while the Romans used them for support in aqueducts and also as triumphal monuments. A tapered pointed version of this is called a "Gothic" one. For 10 points, identify this structure, one of which was built in Paris by Napoleon and named "de Triomphe".;;Arch(es);;Arc
World History;;One ruler by this name oversaw a war against the Turks that ended in the Treaty of Adrianople, and another ruler by this name was advised by Pyotr Stolypin after dismissing Sergey Witte. The former espoused the doctrine of Official Nationality and was the brother of Constantine, and the latter was forced to issue the October Manifesto. The first's claim to the throne was opposed by the Decembrists, and the second was advised by the monk Rasputin. For 10 points, give the shared name of these tsars of Russia, the latter of whom was executed in 1918.;;Nicholas
Mythology;;The Etruscan equivalent of this god appears on the Chimera of Arezza and was the consort of Thalna and Uni; his name was Tinia. This god's oracle claimed that he was a consort of Dione and was interpreted through the rustling of oak leaves at Dodona. In some myths, he is said to have turned into an eagle to abduct his cupbearer, Ganymede, who replaced his offspring Hebe in that role. The father of Ares and Hephaestus, for 10 points, name this husband of Hera and chief Greek god.;;Zeus
Literature;;This character visits an old teacher of his, Mr. Antolini, but is scared away by what he perceives to be homosexual advances. Earlier, he is beaten by a hotel bellhop named Maurice after he refuses to pay a woman for her services. This character watches his sister ride a merry-go-round, but considers his older brother Philip to be a phony. The novel in which he appears begins when he gets kicked out of Pencey Prep. For 10 points, identify this older brother of Phoebe, the narrator of J.D. Salinger's Catcher in the Rye.;;(Holden) Caulfield|Holden (Caulfield)
Literature;;One American author of this last name told of Carolyn Simpson's rejection of Molly Bolt in Rubyfruit Jungle. An early American author of this last name wrote novels subtitled "memoirs of a sleep-walker" and "the transformation," Edgar Huntly and Wieland. Countee Cullen wrote a "ballad of" this type of "girl," while a character with this surname sees Goody Cloyse in the woods, heading to a witches' sabbath alongside his own wife, Faith. For 10 points, a Nathaniel Hawthorne story describes a "Young Goodman" named for what color?;;brown
Physics;;Its strength is proportional to the sine squared of a mixing angle, and it violates CPT symmetry. Carlo Rubbia and Simon van der Meer won the 1984 Nobel Prize in Physics for helping discover the particles that carry this force, the W and Z bosons. It is responsible for beta decay, and Glashow, Salam, and Weinberg unified it with the electromagnetic force. For 10 points, name this fundamental force, which is not as strong as the strong force.;;Weak (nuclear) force
Astronomy;;While studying the activities of lunar volcanoes one night, this man described them as greater in intensity than the nucleus of comets. He concluded that the Solar System is moving in the direction of the star Lambda Hercules, for which he coined the term "Solar Apex". He discovered the smallest known spherical astronomical object, Mimas, as well as Enceladus, two moons of Saturn. However, he is more famous for discovering Titania and Oberon, as well as the planet they orbit. For 10 points, name this German-British astronomer who discovered Uranus.;;(Sir) (Frederick) (William)  Herschel
World History;;In the leadup to this battle, the victor held a convention in Caen to assemble over 700 ships, which landed at Bulverhythe. The losing army consisted mainly of professional soldiers known as Housecarls, and their main defensive formation was the "shield wall". The losing commander of this battle had recently won the Battle of Stamford Bridge, and had crowned himself King Harold II Godwinson. Depicted on the Bayeaux Tapestry, for 10 points, name this decisive engagement in the Norman conquest of England, a 1066 victory for William the Conqueror.;;(Battle of) Hastings
Literature;;This author wrote about a man who kills himself after his father sentences him to death by drowning in his short story "The Judgment". In another of his short stories, an official of a prison camp is killed by a device which uses knives to gouge literal sentences in his body. One of his novels begins with a chapter titled "The Stoker," and focuses on Karl Rossman. In addition to "In the Penal Colony" and Amerika, he wrote a short story about the transformation of Gregor Samsa into an insect. For 10 points, name this author of The Trial and "The Metamorphosis".;;(Franz) Kafka
Philosophy;;This work allows that a person could problematically conceive of a never-before-seen shade of blue if given all other shades of blue. It divides "Relations of Ideas" and "Matters of Fact" in drawing a contrast between analytic knowledge like algebra and synthetic knowledge of nature, a concept that is known as its author's namesake "fork". Drawn from its author's earlier Treatise on Human Nature and said to have awoken Immanuel Kant from his "dogmatic slumber," for 10 points, name this philosophical work about knowledge by David Hume.;;(An) Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding
Sports;;He was traded for a draft pick currently dropping passes for the Buccaneers, Troy Williamson, along with Napoleon Harris. Though he played basketball at DuPont High School with Miami guard Jason Williams, he set a 1997 record by receiving 25 passes from Chad Pennington at Marshall. He may be better known for an act performed in a January 2005 game against the Packers, and for his tenure with the Raiders, after which he was traded to the Patriots. For 10 points, name this receiver who caught 23 touchdown passes from QB Tom Brady in 2007.;;(Randall)(Gene)(Randy) Moss
United States History;;Lewis Mumford compared these entities to magnets and containers in his book about this concept "in history," and Jane Jacobs wrote about the "Death and Lifeof Great American" ones. Ernest Burgess developed a model for these using concentric rings that centers on the central business district, while Lincoln Steffens attacked their corruption in a book about the "shame" of these entities. Planned ones include Chandigarh, Astana, and Canberra. For 10 points, name these highly populated entities, whose American examples include Phoenix and Chicago.;;cities
Art;;A 1998 work by Tracey Emin is entitled "My" one of these objects. One painting primarily set on one of these objects depicts a woman, a ghastly demon, and a horse emerging from a curtain, and was painted by Henry Fuseli. A large red one of these objects is found in Delacroix's Death of Sardanapalus, and the right side of Jan Van Eyck's The Arnolfini Marriage also contains a red one of these objects. For 10 points, name this piece of furniture, on which the title figures of the paintings Olympia and Venus of Urbino recline.;;bed(s)
Literature;;In this novel, "Crazy Mary" threatens to "cut some of that shape off" with a corn knife while chasing a character who lives with Mr. Ordinsky and Colonel Raleigh before eventually settling down with Tiny Soderball. That character, Lena Lingard, befriends the title character while she works for the Harling family in Black Hawk. After the title character's violinist father commits suicide, she marries Anton Cuzak to help support the Shimerda family. For 10 points, name this novel about Jim Burden's relationship with the titular Bohemian girl, written by Willa Cather.;;My Antonia
World History;;In this war, a warning by Laura Secord enabled Lieutenant FitzGibbon to win the Battle of Beaver Dams, and in its early stages, General Isaac Brock captured Fort Detroit, only to be killed leading a charge in the Battle of Queenston Heights. Tecumseh was killed during Battle of the Thames, and this war caused talk of secession at the Hartford Convention. It was supported by the War Hawks, and this war saw the burning of the District of Columbia. For 10 points, name this war nicknamed "Mr. Madison's War," formally named for the year in which it started.;;War of 1812
Biology;;SNARE proteins facilitate reassembly of Golgi bodies during this event, and subpore complexes bind to partially decondensing chromosomes, resulting in several karyomeres. In plant cells, the creation of the new cell plate occurs during this stage, and in animals it generally produces a cleavage furrow, ultimately resulting in two identical daughter cells. Formation of nuclear envelopes also begins to occur during this event. Occuring between anaphase and cytokinesis, for 10 points, identify this stage of mitosis.;;Telophase
Literature;;This work includes stories about a hunchback who chokes on a fish bone during a dinner with a tailor and a fisherman who draws a donkey from the sea. In another of its stories, the former slave girl Morgiana kills a man masquerading as an important guest. It describes a character who battles with the Old Man of the Sea during his seven voyages, and its frame story reveals that it is narrated by the sister of Dunayazad, Scheherezade. Containing stories about Sinbad, as well as "Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves," for 10 points, name this collection of Middle Eastern tales.;;One Thousand and One (Arabian) Nights
Biology;;Some heterozygotes of this disease are resistant to Salmonella typhi bacteria. In addition, it affords carriers some protection against cholera. This disease is associated with an abnormality in its namesake transmembrane conductance regulator that is expressed in the mucus membrane lining of the intestines and lungs. This autosomal recessive disease is characterized by the disruption of chloride ion transfer across cell membranes. For 10 points, name this disease that is sometimes referred to as CF.;;cystic fibrosis
Literature;;One film version of this work is set after the Chernobyl explosion and sees its director Jean-Luc Godard play "Professor Pluggy," a man obsessed with Xeroxing his own hand. Another film version of this play centers on the allocation of the First, Second, and Third Castles; in that version the treacherous Lady Kaede convinces Jiro to have Lady Sue (soo-WAY) killed. Kyoami was that film version's take on this work's Fool. Adapted into Akira Kurosawa's film Ran, for 10 points, name this Shakespeare play about three daughters of the ruler of Britain.;;King Lear
Mythology;;The dwarf god Bes wore a crown of these objects, while Shu was depicted with a single one. Another object of this type served as a guideline for whether a person could venture to the Field of Reeds. Those who failed the test associated with this type of object would have their heart devoured by Ammit in accordance with the Book of the Dead. For 10 points, name this type of object possessed by Ma'at, against which Anubis balanced the weight of the heart during the Egyptian underground ritual.;;feather(s)
Geography;;Located in a namesake geologic basin that contains the Fountain Formation and the Pierre Shale, this city was the site of Montana City, and was the base for gangsters like Soapy Smith. Containing a downtown amusement park called Elitch Gardens, it was selected to hold, but never actually held, the 1976 Winter Olympics, and used to be the seat of Arapahoe County. Surrounded by suburbs including Lakewood, Littleton, and Aurora, for 10 points, identify this city on the South Platte River, the capital of Colorado.;;Denver
Literature;;In this novel, "Aged P" responds to all questions with "All Right John!" while living in a miniature castle designed by his son John Wemmick. One character torments the protagonist with a cane she calls "The Tickler". The protagonist falls into a trap laid by Orlick but is saved by Herbert Pocket, who is the beneficiary of the Satis House estate after the death of Miss Havisham, who trained Estella to break the hearts of men. For 10 points, name this novel about Pip, by Charles Dickens.;;Great Expectations
Chemistry;;An empirically obtained version of it uses three substance-specific components and is called the Antoine equation. A general version of this relation does not assume a constant change in enthalpy or entropy over a temperature range, and it is derived by assuming no change in Gibbs free energy. It states that the latent heat divided by the temperature times change in volume is the slope of a coexistence curve describing a phase change. For 10 points, identify this equation named for a German and French scientist.;;Clausius-Clapeyron (equation)
World History;;One cause of this event, which was codenamed Operation Hummingbird, was Franz von Papen's speech at the University of Marburg, and this action was spurred on by an army which was limited to one hundred thousand men by the Treaty of Versailles. Its victims included Kurt von Schleicher and Gustav von Kahr, but its main attack was against Ernst Rohm and the SA. For 10 points, name this 1934 purge orchestrated by Hitler which purged his potential rivals out of the Nazi Party.;;Night of the Long Knives
Music;;He wrote a symphony that begins with a "Trauermarsch" and includes a rondo that references Lob des hohen Verstandes. In addition to that fifth symphony in C sharp minor which includes an Adagietto, his first symphony includes a contrabass playing a minor key adaptation of "Frere Jacques". This composer's eigth symphony begins with the hymn "Veni, Sancte Spiritus," and is named for the large ensemble required to play it. For 10 points, name this Austrian composer of the Titan Symphony, the Resurrection Symphony, and the Symphony of a Thousand.;;(Gustav) Mahler
World History;;This polity first developed agriculture during its Mumun period. Its nobility was divided into classes called "sacred bone" and "true bone" during its rule by the Kingdom of Silla, and it was later ruled by the Gokoryo Dynasty established by Wang Kon. It defended itself from foreign invaders with hwachas and turtle ships during its final dynasty, the Choseon, and it was divided at the 38th Parallel in an agreement signed in its city of Panmunjeom. For 10 points, name this Asian location currently divided into countries led by Lee Myung-bak and Kim Jong-il.;;Korea
Physics;;Most of these particles are pseudoscalars and have 0 spin and negative parity. The decay of one of these resulted in the Tau particles and the Theta particles, which had identical masses but opposite parities, thus leading to CP violation. The most famous one of these was independently discovered by Richter and Ting, and is called the "charmonium" or the "J-psi" particle. For 10 points, identify these particles which are made of a quark-antiquark pair, and whose name comes from Greek for "middle".;;Meson(s)
Literature;;One work named for this character includes scenes where Astolfo rides a hippogriff to Ethiopia and then to the moon. That poem includes the knights Bradamant and Rinaldo, as well as the Chinese princess Angelica, who inspires a mad passion in this character. This character is the subject of an Ariosto poem where he is "furioso," and also names a poem about his betrayal by Ganelon in Rauncevaux pass. For 10 points, name this French knight who blows Oliphant to alert Charlemagne of his death in his namesake "Chanson," or song.;;Roland|Orlando
Literature;;A person of this rank marries Mosca despite being in love with Fabrizio del Dongo in The Charterhouse of Parma. The first narrative poem by Chaucer is titled "the book of" a person of this rank. Another person of this rank is strangled on the orders of her brothers Ferdinand and the Cardinal in a John Webster play about one "of Malfi". In a poem, the portrait of a woman of this rank is "painted on the wall" by Fra Pandolf. For 10 points, name this noblewoman who titles a Robert Browning poem about "My Last" person of this rank, the wife of a duke.;;duchess
Biology;;The release of this catecholamine cannot be controlled in pheochromocytoma, and both it and an unmethylated precursor are transported by VMAT1. While it triggers vasoconstriction in smooth muscle, it dilates blood vessels in skeletal muscle. In the liver, its interaction with its beta-receptors causes glycogen to be broken down into glucose for energy. Frequently used to treat anaphylactic shock and secreted by glands that sit above the kidneys, for 10 points, identify this hormone and neurotransmitter responsible for the "fight or flight" response.;;Adrenaline|Epinephrine
Religion;;William Holman Hunt depicted this figure carrying a lantern and knocking on a wooden door in The Light of the World. An extremely foreshortened Andrea Mantegna painting depicts the corpse of this figure, who was controversially painted "in the house of his parents" by John Everett Millais. This figure is recognized by Cleophas in Caravaggio's painting The Supper at Emmaus. For 10 points, name this religious figure commonly depicted in paintings of his entry into Jerusalem, temptation by Satan, and crucifixion.;;Jesus (Christ)|(Jesus) Christ
World History;;One of the claimants in this war chose to abdicate the Polish throne upon the death of his brother Charles IX. Another of the claimants had the support of the Holy Catholic League, and was assassinated by royal bodyguards; this was the one "of Guise". The surviving claimant, the lone Huguenot, founded the Bourbon dynasty and converted to Catholicism, supposedly saying, "Paris is well worth a mass". For 10 points, name this late-sixteenth-century War of Religion, which saw a battle for the French throne between three guys with the same name.;;(War of the) Three Henrys
Pop Culture;;She starred in a music video where her character's love interest emerges from her tears and slays a Rajah, and she recently introduced a new line of vegan shoes. In addition to "Carmencita," she is set to star opposite Jake Gyllenhall and Toby Maguire in the Jim Sheridan directed film Brothers. She starred as a toy store manager in Mr. Magorium's Wonder Emporium and as Evey in V for Vendetta. For 10 points, name this actress who starred opposite Zach Braff in Garden State and played Padme in Revenge of the Sith and Attack of the Clones.;;(Natalie) Portman
Chemistry;;Chitosan is a polysaccharide used effectively in bandages and ineffectively as a weight loss miracle because it swells as this quantity increases. Instruments used to measure it sometime account for its variation due to temperature, and those instruments generate a current at an electrode with high resistivity. The physiological one is fairly constant since deviations can denature enzymes. For ten points, give the term for this quantity, the negative base-ten logarithm of a solution's concentration of hydronium ions.;;pH;;Acidity|Basicity
United States History;;The majority opinion in this case analyzed the creation of Lord Ellenborough's Act and ruled in favor of James Hallford. This decision expanded a previous case's doctrine of penumbras. Decided along with its companion case Doe v. Bolton, its majority opinion was written by Justice Harry Blackmun, who argued that the 14th Amendment guaranteed citizens the right to privacy, and ruled that the act in question was legal up to the first trimester. For 10 points, name this 1973 case that established a woman's right to an abortion.;;Roe (v.) (Wade)| Wade (v.) (Roe)
Literature;;One character with this surname is has a vision of the Devil, who mocks him for asserting that "all men will unite to take from life all it can give". Another character with this surname studies with Father Zossima. One tells the story of "The Grand Inquisitor," while another member of this family desperately pursues Grushenka before being falsely convicted for Smerdyakov's murder of Fyodor. For 10 points, Aloysha, Dmitri, and Ivan are all members of what family, which appears in a namesake novel by Fyodor Dostoevsky?;;Karamazov
Mythology;;The anonymously authored Vulgate Cycle is sometimes named for this man, and he titles its longest section. Chretien de Troyes chronicled his rescue of a woman abducted by Meleagant in a story that labeled this man "The Knight of the Cart". This son of King Ban of Benwick accidentally killed Sir Gareth and faced off against the Dolorous Guard and fathered a son with Elaine who went on to capture the Holy Grail. For 10 points, name this father of Galahad, one of the strongest Knights of the Round Table.;;(Sir) Launcelot (du Lac)
World History;;An agreement reached between this monarch and his Russian counterpart at Bjorko was ratified by neither country, leaving the state of a railroad connecting his capital city with Baghdad unresolved. He appointed Theobold von Bethmann-Hollweg to succeed Otto von Bismarck as Chancellor and backed Admiral von Tirpitz's suggestion that he begin to build a navy to rival Britain's. He abdicated and fled to the Netherlands on November 9, 1918, two days before his country officially lost World War I. For 10 points, name this last Kaiser of Germany.;;Wilhelm II|William II;;William|WIlhelm
Biology;;The fingers of this species exhibited large apical tufts. They used Mousterian tools, had an average cranial capacity of 1200 to 1800 cubic centimeters, and evolved from Homo ergaster. They lived from 130,000 to 28,000 years ago, coexisting with Homo sapiens, and the back of their skulls contained a protruding occipital bun. For 10 points, name this species of early humans whose skulls featured heavy brow ridges and low, sloping foreheads, named for their discovery in a German valley.;;Neanderthal(s)
Pop Culture;;This man directed a film where Rita Heyworth played Elsa Bannister, The Lady From Shanghai. He directed an adaptation of Booth Tarkington's novel The Magnificent Ambersons, as well as a movie that includes "News on the March" and focuses on a man whose run for governor is ruined by an affair with the singer Susan Alexander. He formed the Mercury Theatre Company, and created and presented a radio adaptation of The War of the Worlds. For 10 points, name this director who portrayed a man who pines for his sled Rosebud in Citizen Kane.;;(George) (Orson) Welles
Geography;;One island in this body of water includes the locales of Darren and Alzour. In addition to containing Tarut Island, it bordered the early Dilmun and Lakhmid civilizations on its south shore, and the port of Siraf was a notable Sassanian port which served its north shore. Its west end is marked by the Shatt al- Arab, while its east end is separated from the Gulf of Oman by the Strait of Hormuz. Qatar juts into, for 10 points, what sea, containing the Tigris delta, which shares its name with the former name of Iran?;;Persian Gulf
Geology;;Differential traveltimes of PKP are often used to explain "super-rotation" in this region. The boundary between this area and another sees S-Waves dissipate. This area is separated into an inner solid region, and an outer liquid region, the rotation of which likely gives rise to the Earth's magnetic field. For 10 points, name this region of compressed nickel and iron, located below the Gutenberg Discontinuity with the mantle at the center of the earth.;;(Inner) Core
Literature;;One writer from this country wrote The Other Shore and One Man's Bible. In a novel from this country, Sandy and Pigsy accompany Aware-of-Vacuity, the Monkey King, on a mission to retrieve some scriptures. A block of jade descends from heaven to start the events of another novel from this country. In addition to Journey to the West and The Dream of the Red Chamber, its literature includes the story of Wei, Wu, and Shu fighting for prominence, the Romance of the Three Kingdoms. For 10 points, name this country, home to such authors as Lu Xun and Du Fu.;;China|Zhong Guo
Religion;;One figure in this work orders to chop a tree plentiful in fruits, whose stump is then banded, and the reigns of Darius of Mede and Cyrus the Great are described anachronistically in it. Its final book describes the destruction of Bel and the Dragon. Its namesake has visions of four beasts coming out of the sea, and another involving a two horned ram from the East and also recounts the writing of "mene, mene, tekel upharsin" at Belshazzar's feast. For 10 points, identify this book from the Old Testament, whose namesake survives after being cast into a lion's den.;;(Book of) Daniel
World History;;The 1380 Battle of Kulikovo occurred near this city and, and in 1610 a Swedish army occupied this city to bail out Vasili Shuisky. The Nazi Operation Typhoon was a plan to capture this city, and the capital was moved from here in 1712. This city was burned to the ground after General Kutuzov won the 1812 Battle of Borodino, which prevented Napoleon Bonaparte from occupying it, and the foundation for the Kremlin was laid here in 1367. For 10 points, name this city which in 1918 became the capital of Russia again.;;Moscow
Physics;;One approximation for this process assumes negligible changes in temperature and only accounts for density changes in the buoyancy term; that approximation for it was developed by Boussinesq. This process occurs when a quantity equal to the product of the Grashof number and Prantl number is above 1700. Another law which assumes this process relates rate of heat transfer to surface area and difference in temperature, and was developed by Newton. For 10 points, identify this process, the primary mode of heat transport in fluids, which is different from conduction.;;convection
Literature;;The speaker of the opening monologue of this play says he is the opposite of a stage magician because he gives you truth in the "disguise of illusion". One character discusses Fitzhugh, who became "The Wolf of Wall Street," and learns that her daughter has quit typing school. This play ends with the revelation that Betty is engaged to Jim O'Connor, ruining Amanda's plans to find a "gentleman caller". For 10 points, name this play about Tom and Laura Wingfield, a work by Tennessee Williams named for Laura's collection of fragile animals.;;(The) Glass Menagerie
Music;;His serial works include In Memoriam Dylan Thomas, as well as a ballet choreographed by George Balanchine that includes a sarabande and a galliard, Agon. He composed a work that includes the fugal interplay of an oboe and flute, "Expectans expectavi Dominum," in his Symphony of Psalms, and one of his scores represents Ivan Tsarevich's struggle against Katschei. Another of his works opens with a bassoon ad libitum and includes "The Adoration of the Earth". For 10 points, name this composer of The Firebird and The Rite of Spring.;;(Igor) (Fyodorovich) Stravinsky
Computer Science;;Brian Kernighan's criticism of this language mentions how arrays of different lengths are considered different types, making operations on an arbitrary string impossible. Complex types can be defined in "record" blocks, and pointers are dereferenced with the carat. This language features a "repeat-until" loop. The program as a whole terminates with a period, and its main output function is "write". Its object-oriented dialect called Delphi by Borland, for 10 points, name this programming language, named for a French mathematician with a famous wager.;;PASCAL
Mythology;;In one work, this character is enthralled by the songs of The Shaper, and gets philosophical insight from a dragon. In another, he is "the shape of a man" but "bigger than any man," and his mother is impervious to the sword Hrunting. He is the spawn of Cain, and his head requires four men to carry it after he is killed by a Geatish warrior who frees the mead hall Heorot from this character's deadly attacks. For 10 points, name this monster, the antagonist of Beowulf.;;Grendel
Physics;;Subtracting the magnetic pressure from this quantity gives the Lorentz force, and Laplace's Law states that pressure is equal to twice this quantity over the radius. In free-body diagrams, it must be represented as a vector pointing away from the object of interest because it can never push, only pull. A two-dimensional form allows small animals to walk on water and is known as the "surface" variety. For 10 points, identify this type of force exerted by taut strings, cables, and cords.;;Tension;;Force
World History;;In this conflict, one general the siege of Turin, and its main peace was supplemented by the treaties of Rastatt and Baden following victories by Eugene of Savoy. Queen Anne's War was its American analogue, and John Churchill gained renown with his victory at Blenheim in this conflict, and this war was preceded by a will granting Philip V the throne following the death of Charles II. For 10 points, name this war that lasted from 1701 to 1714 that was ended by the Peace of Utrecht which dealt with who would rule the namesake Iberian country.;;War of the Spanish Succession
Literature;;In one of his plays, a magnifying glass reveals that the text on a toothbrush reads, "Fully guaranteedhog's setae". That play ends with Winnie buried up to her neck in a mound of earth. In addition to Happy Days, he wrote a trilogy of novels including Molloy,Malone Dies, and The Unnamable. In another of his plays, Nagg and Nell live in trash cans while Clov serves Hamm. For 10 points, name this author of Endgame, who wrote about Vladimir and Estragon in Waiting for Godot.;;(Samuel) Beckett
Philosophy;;This thinker portrayed himself as "Theophilus" and his interlocutor as "Philalethe" in a chapter-by- chapter rebuttal of a work by John Locke. In addition to his Discourse on Metaphysics and the posthumously printed "New Essays on Human Understanding," he inspired Schopenhauer's discourse on the "Fourfold Root" of an idea that he devised, the "principle of Sufficient Reason". For 10 points, name this author of the Monadologie, a philosopher parodied as Pangloss in Candide and co-inventor of calculus.;;(Gottfried) (Wilhelm)  Leibniz
World History;;This civilization's government was ruled by a leader called the halach uinic and a head priest called the Ah Kin Mai. Its kings included Chan-Balum and Pacal, and it used the milpa system of agriculture. This civilization built cities at Uxqal and Palenque, and adopted a base-twenty system of mathematics. They used the tzolkin, a 260-day calendar, and suddenly abandoned their cities in the 9th century. For 10 points, name this Pre-Columbian civilization that built Chichen Itza and was based in the Yucatan Peninsula.;;Maya(n)(s)
Economics;;A "prisoner's dilemma" situation can determine their level under an oligopoly, and companies which cannot affect their general level are "takers" of these. Thorstein Veblen advocated technocracy in a book about "The Engineers and" the "system" of these. Market segmentation is one reason for their namesake "discrimination". In basic economic graphs, demand increases, and supply decreases, as these rise. For 10 points, what are these values, which are often plotted against quantity on supply-demand graphs, and which rise in periods of inflation?;;price(s)
Art;;The suicide of this artist's friend Casagemas inspired him to paint La Vie. He designed the sets and costumes for the ballet Parade, and depicted a man wearing a bright red costume next to a harlequin in his 1905 painting The Family of Saltimbanques. This artist of The Old Guitarist painted a screaming horse, an arm holding a candle, and a bull in a work commemorating the bombing of a Basque village. Along with Georges Braque, he developed Analytic Cubism. For 10 points, name this Spanish painter of Les Demoiselles d'Avignon and Guernica.;;(Pablo) (Diego José Francisco de Paula Juan Nepomuceno María de los Remedios Cipriano de la Santísima Trinidad Ruiz y) Picasso
Literature;;In one poem by the author, the speaker asserts that when "seraphs swing their snowy hats," he will drink from "tankards scooped in pearl". This poet wrote "Diadems drop and Doges surrender / Soundless as dots on a disk of snow" after describing people "safe in their alabaster chambers". In another of this author's poems, the speaker says the title creature came "between the light and me" so "I could not see to see". For 10 points, name this American poet of "I Heard a Fly Buzz When I Died" and "Because I Could Not Stop For Death".;;(Emily) Dickinson
Geography;;In 1448, residents of this city rebelled against Frederick II Irontooth. One meeting here was convoked by Count Gyula Andrassy and revised the Treaty of San Stefano. Another meeting here established free navigation on the Niger, created the Congo Free State, and sparked the scramble for Africa. In addition to that 1885 conference, this capital of the kingdom of Prussia was divided into four quadrants among the Allies after World War II. For 10 points, name this German city, the location of a wall torn down in 1989.;;Berlin
Chemistry;;The Zundel cation displays a symmetric example of these structures that have been studied in the bifluoride ion, and those structures possess significantly higher energies than asymmetric ones.. The existence of these between every nth carbonyl group and n+4 th amino group imparts the alpha-helical structure to amino acid chains, and they are also responsible for causing the crystalline arrangement of water molecules in ice. For 10 points, identify these structures which impart greater stability to compounds containing the lightest element.;;H(ydrogen) bond(s)|H(ydrogen)-bonding
Literature;;The protagonist of this work imagines an ugly Socrates lecturing Phaedrus. The protagonist is inspired to go on a journey when he encounters a red haired man in a Byzantine graveyard, and is later disgusted by an old fop he meets on a boat, who pretends to be young with painted cheeks and a dyed wig. Despite being warned that the sirocco was aggravating the cholera epidemic on Lido, the title event happens while the protagonist observes Tadzio on an Italian beach. For 10 points, name this novella about the demise of Gustav von Aschenbach, written by Thomas Mann.;;Death in Venice
Biology;;Members of this phylum contain a network of birefringent calcium carbonate crystals along its skeleton, and the structure of the ossicles in it is called the stereom. The madreporite is a perforated plate which is connected to the stone canal in the water vascular system of these organisms, which usually move using five rows of tubed feet. This phylum includes classes like Asteroidia and Holothuroidea, and all members exhibit radial symmetry. For 10 points, identify this phylum, whose name means "spiny skinned" and is exemplified by sea urchins and starfish.;;echinoderms|Echinodermata
Music;;One of the two mainstream theories about this work notes that sketches for a scherzo part of it exist, and the ending of its slow second movement in E major clashes with the first movement in B minor. The other theory states that this work was purposely broken up in order to create the entr'acte for the Rosamunde incidental music. Whether this 1828 work was ever intended to have more than two movements is still the subject of debate. For 10 points, name this work which was followed by the Great Symphony, a piece by Franz Schubert named for its incomplete status.;;Unfinished (Symphony)
Pop Culture;;Her son Max was wrapped in a flag in an advertisement wherein she sang "America the Beautiful" for the Rock the Vote campaign. Along with Missy Elliot, she sang "Car Wash" for Shark Tale. Her self titled album contains a song which asks "Who is that girl I see staring straight back at me"? which also appeared on the Mulan soundtrack, and another of her songs describes a character who is "sweet talking" and "sugar coated". For 10 points, identify this singer best known for songs like "What a Girl Wants," "Genie in a Bottle," and "Candyman".;;(Christina) Aguilera
Geography;;This country's west portion includes a river formed from salt lakes near Peak Hill in the south edge of its Robinson Ranges, and which flows to the sea at Kalbarri. Northwest of its town of Meekatharra is Mount Augustus, one of the claimants to the title of "world's largest monolith". Jervis Bay Territory is often considered a state on its east seaboard, which also features the Great Dividing Range. Also featuring the Yarra River, Ayers Rock, Darwin, and Alice Springs, for 10 points, name this country next to the Great Barrier Reef, whose capital is Canberra.;;(Commonwealth of) Australia
Literature;;At one point in this work, a woman is concerned that people might hear her having sex with the title character, who replies "I can go anywhere and do anything". It opens with an excerpt from the "Song of Everlasting Sorrow" before transitioning to the "Paulownia Court," and at one point, the title character is exiled to the town of Suma. His descendents, Niou and Kaoru, both love Ukifune, while the title character has an affair with his mother-in-law, Fujitsubo. For 10 points, name this Heian Era novel by Murasaki Shikibu about an amorous prince.;;(The) Tale of Genji
Noncomputational Math;;In base 2, these objects are designated primitive if they generate maximum period linear feedback shift registers. The Chebyshev ones are a special case of the Jacobi ones, as are the Legendre ones. A Taylor series of order n corresponds to one of these with degree n, and irreducible ones cannot be factored, though the fundamental theorem of algebra guarantees they have at least one complex root. For 10 points, identify these mathematical objects whose terms are all proportional to a power of a variable, examples of which include 3y and x squared plus 1.;;polynomial(s)
Music;;One character in this opera asserts in the aria "Non mi dir" that she cannot yet marry Ottavio, and the title character sings about hosting a wedding party in "Fin ch'han dal vino," the champagne aria. One character switches cloaks to mislead a murderous mob led by Massetto, who is infuriated by the treatment of his new wife Zerlina, and earlier Elvira learns about the title figure's history in Leporello's "catalogue" aria. The statue of the Commendatore drags the title character down to Hell at the end of, for 10 points, what opera about a womanizer, by Mozart?;;Don Giovanni
Mythology;;According to Apollodorus, the first king of this city and his goddess-wife turned into dragons after conquering Illyria. One myth holds that the first king of this city had a daughter named Agave who gored her son Pentheus to death during a Dionysiac festival. This city was punished after the young boy Chrysippus was raped by its king, Laius. Argive commanders join Polynices in battle against this city's leader Eteocles, the son of Oedipus, in an Aeschylus play about "Seven Against" this city. For 10 points, name this Greek city founded by Cadmus.;;Thebes
United States History;;Samuel Curtis introduced the bill proposing this idea, which was planned by Theodore Judah. It was financed by the "Big Four," who included Mark Hopkins, Charles Crocker, and Collis Huntington. It led to the creation of "Hell on Wheels" towns, and was constructed by companies owned by Thomas Durant and Leland Stanford. It was finally completed at Promontory Point, Utah with a golden spike. Built by the Union Pacific and the Central Pacific, for 10 points, name this route which connected Omaha and Sacramento.;;Transcontinental Railroad
Astronomy;;A spiral associated with it is named for Eugene Parker who noted the similarity between Biermann and Chapman's theories for this phenomenon. First observed by the Lunik II satellite, comprehensive information about it was gathered by Mariner 2, which noted the direction of the flux of positive ions. The discontinuity formed by its interaction with a planetary magnetic field is called the bow shock, and its radiation pressure causes comets to have tails. For 10 points, identify this two word term which describes the stream of particles ejected by the sun's corona.;;Solar Wind
World History;;Works by this man include The Story of the Malakand Field Force, which was derived from his service in India, and The River War. He lost his admiralty post due to his championing of the disastrous Dardanelles expedition during World War I, and as Colonial Secretary, he negotiated the treaty that created the Irish Free State. For 10 points, name this man whose 1946 speech in Fulton, Missouri warned against the Soviet Iron Curtain and who, as Prime Minister, rallied the British against Nazi Germany during World War II.;;Winston Churchill
Mythology;;The Celtic gods of this type are Goibhniu and Gofannon, while Wayland is a god of this type in the Northern European mythos. In the Kalevala, the creator of the Sampo is this type of god named Ilmarinen. The Greek god of this type was thrown from Mount Olympus, and had his workshop under Mount Etna where he made Athena's Aegis breastplate. For 10 points, name this type of god exemplified by Vulcan and Hephaestus, who typically make metal items for the other gods.;;Forge|(Black)smith
Literature;;The protagonist of this play decides to die on Mount Cithaeron, and accuses Tiresias of plotting against him. Before the action of this play, the title character had killed a man in a chariot who offended him. The title character believes himself to be the son of Polybus and Merope, and he deforms himself with a pair of golden brooches. The title character's wife hangs herself by her own hair after learning the cause of a pestilence afflicting Thebes. For 10 points, identify this play about a man who kills his father and has sex with his mother, Jocasta, a play by Sophocles.;;Oedipus (Rex)
Geology;;Tufa and coquina are two types of this rock. A streak of HFeO2 is present in the Fencepost variety of this rock, while a more common impurity in this rock is aragonite. It can be identified through an effervescent reaction, in which it reacts with dilute acid to release carbon dioxide. At lower pressures, this turns into dolomite, while higher pressures turn this into marble. For 10 points, name this sedimentary rock mostly composed of calcite, often used in cement.;;lime stone
United States History;;This position was held by Harry Daugherty during the Harding Administration, and Daugherty subsequently went to trial on charges of fraud and graft, and one man who held this post was famous for riding on horseback to the Continental Congress to cast Delaware's vote for independence. That man, Caesar Rodney, served from 1808 to 1809, and John Mitchell went to jail for his actions while serving as this under Nixon. For 10 points, Edmund Randolph was the first man to serve in what position, the chief law officer of the United States?;;Attorney General
Art;;The noble family that sponsored this work is depicted in sculpture in two decorative balconies on either side of it. The altar area on which this piece resides has four black marble columns, and gilded light rays stream in from above this sculpture. This work located in the Santa Maria della Vittoria's Cornaro Chapel depicts an angel piercing the title figure with an arrow. For 10 points, name this Gian Lorenzo Bernini statue that shows a venerated woman from Avila in rapture.;;(The) Ecstasy of (Saint) (St) Teresa
Literature;;This poet wrote about "The awful shadow of some unseen Power" in "Hymn to Intellectual Beauty". The title figure leads Fraud and Hypocrisy in his poem inspired by the Peterloo Massacre, "The Masque of Anarchy". He wrote a poem comparing the title entity to a "Wild Spirit, which art moving everywhere" and "the breath of Autumn's being," as well as a sonnet about a figure who warns "Look on my works, ye Mighty and despair". For 10 points, name this poet of "Ode to the West Wind" and "Ozymandias".;;P(ercy) (Bysshe) Shelley
World History;;The last monarch of this line was known as the Sailor King, and another king of this line became unpopular after thousands of people lost vast fortunes in the South Sea Bubble. One fought in the Battle of Dettingen, becoming the last British monarch to lead men into battle, and another issued the Proclamation of 1763 and ruled alongside people like George Grenville and William Pitt the Younger. For 10 points, name this royal British house with monarchs like William IV and George III that originated with a namesake German electorate.;;(House of) Hanover|Hanoverians
Chemistry;;A molecular interpretation of Michaelis-Menten kinetics assumes that a fast one occurs between enzyme and substrate, and the van't Hoff equation predicts how the properties of this state change with respect to temperature. The Henderson-Hasselbalch equation assumes that the acid does not dissociate and the conjugate base does not hydrolyze in this condition, and in special cases the law of mass action gives the masses of reactants and products present. For 10 points, identify this condition, during which the forward and reverse reaction rates are the same.;;(chemical) equilibrium
Religion;;One of its basic principles is anekantevada, which asserts the legitimacy of multiple points of view, and it holds that time passes in repeated utsarpinis and avsarpinis. Those who gain particular insight into the nature of dharma are called tirthankara. Its two sects are known as Svetambara and Digambara, meaning white clad and sky-clad. For 10 points, identify this Indian religion whose followers embrace nonviolence.;;Jain(ism)|Jain Dharma
Miscellaneous;;An advertisement for Citroen sees a giant levitating one of these made out of cars, and a large mural made of these objects is made to spell out "Hybrid" in a Honda Advertisement. In another advertisement, one of these is made to twist so fast as to burst and splatter its colors on a wall while a PS3 is visible in the background. Invented by an interior designer from Hungary, it has more difficult variants called the "Revenge" and "Professor". For 10 points, identify these objects, all of whose sides are made of the same color when it is solved.;;Rubik's Cube(s)
Geography;;Stanford professor Joseph Greenberg created a controversial classification for languages from this place which removed the Hamitic family. One language spoken on this continent is Malagasay, which belongs to the Austronesian family, and this continent is also home to the Khoisan languages, which use clicks. Major languages spoken on this continent include Hausa, Xhosa, and Amharic. For 10 points, name this linguistically diverse continent that is home to Swahili and Afrikaans.;;Africa
Religion;;One of these occurred when Russian patriarch Nikon began to enforce reforms resisted by the Old Believers. Another of these was ended when the Council of Constance removed both Gregory XII and Benedict XIII and elected Martin V. Another of these in 1054 was started by the patriarch of Constantinople and led to the creation of the Orthodox Church. For 10 points, name these events in which fundamental differences cause a church to split into two different factions.;;Great Schism(s);;Schism(s)
Computer Science;;The XML-defined SVG file format notably does not encode one of these objects, and tweening and similar operations are easy in Flash because Flash does not use them. The Windows GDI provides a function that reflects the old slang for "blitting" these objects, and the Lempel-Ziv-Welch algorithm provides lossless compression for these objects and is used in the gif file format. For 10 points, identify this common way to store an image, which, when uncompressed, associates a color value with each pixel and is sometimes abbreviated bmp.;;bitmap
Literature;;One author from this country described a boy nicknamed Mudito in The Obscene Bird of Night. Another writer from here lamented the suicide of a rail employee in the "Sonnets of Death" from her collection Desolación. In addition to Jose Donoso and Gabrila Mistral, this country was home to a man who wrote a poetic history of South America in Canto General as well as Twenty Love Poems and a Song of Despair, Pablo Neruda. For 10 points, name this country, also described in The Infinite Plan, Eva Luna, and The House of the Spirits by Isabel Allende.;;Chile
World History;;At the battle of Sellasia, this city's army was defeated by a joint force of the Achaean League and Macedonia after reforms by Cleomenes III. This city's envoy Antalcidas concluded a treaty with Artaxerxes II in 386 B.C., and it was ruled by two lines of kings, the Eurypontids and the Agiads, who were overseen by five ephors. This city was legendarily reformed by Lycurgus, and it was also ruled by Lysander. For 10 points, name this ancient Greek city state famed for its militaristic nature.;;(THIS IS) Sparta
Art;;One work in this genre depicts angels and shepherds praying around a vision of the infant Christ. Another example of this genre depicts the Ingelbrechts on the left, as well as an annunciation given to Mary, who is wearing red and reading the Old Testament. In addition to those ones by Hugo van der Goes and Robert Campin named Portinari and Merode, other examples include the Isenheim, painted by Matthias Grunewald. For 10 points, name these religious paintings designed to be placed in churches on their namesake structures.;;Altarpieces
Physics;;The Eotvos rule relates this quantity to surface tension, and the Einstein relation states that the diffusion coefficient is proportional to this quantity. One of these named for Boyle is the value for which the second coefficient of the virial equation is zero. This quantity is raised to the fourth power in the Stefan-Boltzmann law for blackbody radiation, and this quantity will eventually approach equilibrium for objects in contact according to the zeroth law of thermodynamics. For 10 points, identify this quantity usually measured in degrees or Kelvins.;;temperature
Literature;;In one story by this author, a nine-year old recovering alcoholic named Hogan is part of a group of children led by Grover Snodd, which protests the racism of their parents. In addition to "The Secret Integration," he wrote about the Whole Sick Crew in his debut novel, which is named for a mysterious woman sought by Herbert Stencil. In another of his novels, Roger Mexico attempts to save a man who can predict when German rockets will land, Tyrone Slothrop. For 10 points, name this American author of The Crying of Lot 49 and Gravity's Rainbow.;;(Thomas) Pynchon
Geography;;While exploring this body of water, Jacques-Yves Cousteau discovered a species of frog that apparently never comes up for air. It contains floating reed islands collectively named after the Uro tribe, which include Toranipata and Santa Maria, and on its banks is the city of Puno. The Island of the Sun and Island of the Moon are on the Bolivian side of this lake in the Andes Mountains. For 10 points, name this highest navigable lake in the world, split between Peru and Bolivia, the largest freshwater lake in South America.;;(Lake) Titicaca
Music;;He wrote a three movement work in which a soprano singing psalm 23 is interspersed with men singing psalm 2 in Hebrew for its namesake festival, entitled Chichester Psalms. Another of his religious works includes a rock band and a ballet company and is a setting of the Roman Catholic Mass. He commemorated the death of President Kennedy in his third symphony, named for the Jewish prayer for the dead, and composed the song "Maria". For 10 points name, this composer of Fancy Free, the Jeremiah and Kaddish symphonies, and West Side Story.;;(Leonard) Bernstein
Literature;;Tadasu drinks breast milk from his stepmother in a Jun'ichiro Tanizaki work named for one "of Dreams". An ear is nailed to this structure in an Ivo Andric novel named for one "on the Drina," while a play by Arthur Miller about Eddie Carbone is titled "A View from" this structure. Another novel with this word in the title sees Brother Juniper burn at the stake for blasphemy after investigating five deaths after one collapses. For 10 points, name this structure which spans such literary locales as San Luis Rey.;;bridge(s)
Biology;;Polycistronic varieties of this molecule appear in archaea, and such proteins as PAP and CstF enhance it in a process known as polyadenylation. A 5 prime cap is added to it to prevent its degradation by endonucleases, while another process uses spliceosomes to patch it up after the removal of introns. Its most well-known intermolecular interaction begins after the activity of a namesake polymerase, and ends when it reads the terminator region of that molecule. For 10 points, name this RNA molecule involved in DNA transcription.;;m(essenger) RNA|mRNA;;RNA
Geography;;This country's Lapua Movement succeeded in banning Communist activities, and a 1918 civil war saw Gustav Mannerheim's government forces emerge victorious. The Continuation War, which saw this country aid Germany's invasion of the Soviet Union, was a sequel to the Winter War in which the Soviet Union preemptively invaded this country. The 1975 Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe led to some "Accords" named after this country's capital. For 10 points, name this country led by Tarja Halonen, whose major city is Helsinki.;;Finland;;Suomi
Chemistry;;In a namesake reaction, some of them can react with the bases of methyl ketones to create carboxylic acids. The heaviest example is the rarest naturally occurring element on Earth, and the deficiency of another member is often the cause of a goiter. Normally featuring odd-numbered oxidation states, these elements all have an outer shell electron configuration of ns np (N S 2 N P 5). For 10 points, name these elements that lack one electron in their outer shell, examples of which include bromine, chlorine, and fluorine.;;Halogen(s)|Group 7a|Group 17
Pop Culture;;Skye Sweetnam ponders "maybe I should change my world" while contemplating this action, which "could be the cure". The initiator of this action strikes after the singer lets his guard down, causing the singer to lament "why do I do these things I do to myself" in a Something Corporate song. This action's recipient was the singer's "experimental game" in another song, which notes that this action "felt so wrong, it felt so right," and notes that it is accentuated by the recipient's cherry Chapstick. For 10 points, name this activity performed and enjoyed in a Katy Perry song.;;Kissing (a girl)
Literature;;One character in this story expresses his delight at a casserole and fails to notice that a tablecloth has been in use for three days. After a party, the main character is unable to find a cab until she reaches the Seine. Although they assure Madame Forestier that the title object is being repaired, the central characters must purchase a new one which takes a decade to pay off, although the original is a fake. For 10 points, name this short story about Matilde, who loses the title piece of jewelry at a ball, written by Guy de Maupassant.;;(The) Necklace
Biology;;Cycads are some of the only plants to have them, and they are unique to eukaryotes. Like a longer structure, they have a 9+2 arrangement of constituent structures which make up the axoneme. The Fallopian tubes use them to conduct eggs from ovary to uterus and the trachea has a lining of them for cleaning purposes. Rotifers have a crown of them, which in some species makes them spin like wheels, and several of them are also found on paramecium. For 10 points, identify these short organelles which allow many eukaryotic cells to move.;;Cilia|cilium
Mythology;;This character was given gold necklaces by Peitho, clothing and instruction on sewing by Athena, and speech by Hermes. Her name in fact refers to the gifts she received from all the gods. She was given as a wife to a man whose name means "afterthought," Epimetheus, as a revenge for the theft of fire by Epimetheus's brother Prometheus. For 10 points, name this primordial Greek woman who was only able to prevent the escape of hope after opening a jar given to her by Zeus that contained all the world's evils.;;Pandora
Geography;;Juan Padilla founded the first settlement in what is now this state, and its notable political leaders have included the vice-president of Herbert Hoover, Charles Curtis, and Senator Nancy Kassebaum. The 1936 Republican presidential nominee, Alfred Landon, was from this state, where Bushwhackers massacred over two hundred people in 1863. Border Ruffians entered this state to support the Lecompton Constitution, and this state was the site of the Pottawatomie Massacre. For 10 points, name this state that bled in a fight over slavery in the mid-1850s.;;Kansas
Music;;Much of his employment was in the artistic faculty of the foundling home Ospedale della Pietà. His innovations include the regular use of the ritornello form and standardizing the "fast, slow, fast" structure of the concerto. "The Hunt" and "Storm at Sea" are among the lesser works from his cycle The Contest Between Harmony and Invention, which also depicts such images as heat-induced fatigue and freezing rain in such movements as "La Primavera". For 10 points, name this Italian composer of the calendar-themed "The Four Seasons".;;(Antonio) (Lucio) Vivaldi
Literature;;This poet wrote a collection with his brother entitled Poems by Two Brothers. One of his poems deals with a woman unable to leave her tower who weaves a tapestry inspired by a reflection in a mirror. In another of his poems, a classical hero resolves "To strive, to seek, to find, and not to yield". In addition to "The Lady of Shallot" and "Ulysses," the death of Arthur Hallem prompted this man to write In Memorium A.H.H. For 10 points, identify this poet, the author of "Crossing the Bar" and "The Charge of the Light Brigade".;;(Alfred(,)) (Lord) Tennyson
Music;;This jazz performer's first recorded solo is on the Dizzie Gillespie track "We Love to Boogie," and his avant-garde recordings near the end of his career include Intertsellar Space and Stellar Regions. This man, who recorded Impressions, was part of Miles Davis' first great quintet, and developed his fast "sheets of sound" technique on recordings like My Favorite Things. His first album of original recordings was Giant Steps. For ten points, identify this jazz saxophone player of A Love Supreme.;;(John) Coltrane
Philosophy;;This author criticized how the Bible is taught in his early work Daybreak, and tackled veracity in On Truth and Lies in a Nonmoral Sense. He appended an "Attempt at Self-Criticism" to his first work, which divided the title concept into Apollonian and Dionysian aspects. This author of the The Birth of Tragedy claimed that "God is dead" in The Gay Science. For 10 points, name this German philosopher of Thus Spake Zarathustra and Beyond Good and Evil.;;(Friedrich) (Wilhelm) Nietzsche
Geography;;This country's highest peak, Mount Nyangani, is located in its Nyanga National Park. Despite such governmental operations as "Drive Out Trash" and "Roundup," homelessness is a major problem in its cities, which include Chitungwiza and Bulawayo. Electric fences mark this country's border with Botswana, while the more pleasant Victoria Falls are on its border with Zambia. For 10 points, name this landlocked South African country where fancy new 100-billion-dollar bills can buy you things in its capital, Harare.;;Zimbabwe
World History;;This man signed the Treaty of Eternal Peace with Khosrow I, and sent a fleet to defeat the Ostrogoth king Witigis. The eunuch Narses was one of his trusted generals, and his two ministers were Peter Barsymes and John of Cappadocia. He attempted to quell the Monophysite controversy by imprisoning Pope Vigilius, and he fought the Green and Blue factions during the Nika revolt. For 10 points, name this Byzantine Emperor who oversaw the building of the Hagia Sophia; the husband of Theodora whose most well known general was Belisarius.;;Justinian I;;Justinian
Physics;;The Maki-Nakagawa-Sakata matrix predicts the oscillations of one group of these, a behavior which gives them mass. The Koide formula gives a possibly serendipitous relationship between the masses of another group of them, while the Michel parameters give the distribution of decays that occur within that group. Particles from both groups are produced in beta decay. Incapable of interaction via the strong nuclear force, for 10 points, identify this class of fundamental particles which include the neutrino and the electron.;;lepton(s)
Literature;;Older works in this language are referred to by their predominant letters, such as the "N Poem" and the "Great Poem on T". A landmark work of nonfiction in this language was the memoir The Days, and it was also used for the novel Season of Migration to the North. It is the vernacular of the poet Adonis and of the author of Children of the Alley, Sugar Street, and Palace Walk. For 10 points, identify this tongue, whose most influential writings may be the records of certain sayings known as the hadith and the text said to be dictated by the angel Gabriel, the Quran.;;Arabic
Art;;Ithiel Town commissioned this artist's painting of a man looking at a pyramid, a Greek temple, and a Gothic cathedral, The Architect's Dream. He was unable to finish The Cross of the World, but did complete two cycles of paintings, one based on Volney's Ruins, the other depicting mankind as a figure journeying down a river. In addition to The Voyage of Life and The Course of Empire, he painted a storm passing over a bend in the Connecticut River in The Ox-Bow. For 10 points, name this American painter, the founder of the Hudson River School.;;(Thomas) Cole
World History;;On the urging of his doctor Moses Hamon, this ruler issued a decree denouncing anti-Semitic blood libels. His admiral Barbarossa won the Battle of Preveza over the Holy League, and he defeated Louis II of Hungary to win the Battle of Mohacs. Due to the influence of his wife Roxelana, he had his longtime grand vizier Ibrahim Pasha murdered. The son of Selim the Grim, he twice unsuccessfully attempted to besiege Vienna. For 10 points, name this Ottoman sultan who ruled from 1520 to 1566, known as "the Magnificent".;;Suleiman I|Suleiman the Magnificent;;Suleiman
Economics;;Paul Samuelson illustrated this concept with a man who is both the best attorney and secretary in Chicago. First introduced in an essay by Robert Torrens, this concept is modeled by the Hecksher-Ohlin theorem. Another economist explained this concept in On the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation, which used the example of the trade between British cloth and Portuguese wine. For 10 points, name this theory developed by David Ricardo, which states that countries should export goods that have the lowest opportunity costs, unlike absolute advantage.;;comparative advantage
Physics;;The Huemul project was supposed to achieve a controlled version of this process, but met with little success. The Shiva and ultimately the Nova lasers attempted to contain this process, though more mainstream attempts include producing heat by inducing a current running through a toroidal magnetic field in a tokamak. It occurs in sufficiently large stars through the C-N-O cycle, and it no longer returns additional energy after iron. For 10 points, identify this phenomenon in which at sufficient temperatures, several small nuclei form a larger one.;;(Nuclear) Fusion
Literature;;In this novel, an intimate dinner party is ruined when one character's prized wedding gift, an unused pickle dish, is broken. The unnamed narrator is intrigued about the "ruin of the man" when he first meets the title character at the post office, and later learns more about him from Harmon Gow and Ruth Varnum. The title character cheats on his wife Zeena with Mattie Silver, and ends up paralyzed from a failed suicide attempt. Set in Starkfield, for 10 points, name this novel about a man injured in a tragic sledding accident, written by Edith Wharton.;;Ethan Fromme
Chemistry;;An apparatus named for Kugelrohr performs one type of it over short paths. One type of this process exploits Raoult's law to increase or decrease the vapor pressure of the substance, and may be more useful than another type which produces better results when the number of theoretical plates are increased, but cannot separate azeotropes. Those are the "steam" and "fractional" varieties of this process. For 10 points, identify this lab procedure where pure vapors of a liquid are captured and condensed, which is used to obtain a pure liquid from a mixture.;;Distillation
Literature;;One character in this play steals a pen after he discovers that Bill Oliver has forgotten him, making his plan to sell sporting goods in Florida impossible. The title character becomes jealous when he hears that Bernard will argue a case before the Supreme Court, and his son recounts his visit to Boston, where he witnessed his father's affair with an unnamed woman. The protagonist's son, Biff, is far more skeptical of the American Dream than Happy. For 10 points, name this play which ends shortly after the suicide of the title character, Willy Loman, written by Arthur Miller.;;Death of a Salesman
Geography;;This nation's early history is described in the Landnamabok, and the end of the Middle Ages in this nation is generally marked by the 1550 beheading of Bishop Jon Arason. Known during parts of its history as Thule, the United States took defensive responsibility of this country in 1941 following the German occupation of Denmark. For 10 points, name this nation, whose Althing is the oldest legislative body in Europe and whose first recorded settler, Ingolfr Arnarson, named his homestead Reykjavik.;;Iceland
Physics;;A stepwise change in current potential curves of nanometer size objects is named for this man, while crystals with particles of same charge occurring in plasmas are also named for him. The type of friction associated with the contact of two surfaces was first developed by him, and he also names the repulsion associated with two objects of like charges. For 10 points, name this Frenchman whose namesake law states that the force between two charges is proportional to the product of their charges and the inverse square of the distance between them.;;(Charles) (Augustin) (de)  Coulomb
Geography;;From 1953 to 1986, this city was led by Gaston Defferre, and this city's Panier district and Old Port were dynamited by its German occupiers during World War II due to its resistance activity. This city was the center of the French Connection heroine smuggling scheme, and during the French Revolution, volunteers from this city sang the "War Song of the Rhine Valley," which was renamed for this city. For 10 points, identify this French port city, the namesake of the French national anthem.;;Marseilles
Chemistry;;Atmospheric chemistry follows a given volume of air rising upward and its corresponding temperature change, defining a dry and moist lapse rate given this adjective, and adequately gradual perturbations do not take a system out of its original eigenstate according to a theorem called this formulated by Fock and Born. In a reversible one of these processes, the product of pressure with volume raised to gamma is held constant. For 10 points, give this adjective that describes all thermodynamic processes that do not involve a transfer of heat.;;adiabatic
United States History;;In 1806, this man served as counsel for Aaron Burr, and he was a member of the Ghent commission that negotiated peace with Britain. He fought a duel with John Randolph in which neither man was wounded, and he helped solve the nullification crisis with his support of the Tariff of 1833. Nicknamed the Great Pacificator for his shepherding the Missouri Compromise, for 10 points, name this Kentucky stateman who was known for his American System of economic development.;;(Henry) Clay
Literature;;In one of his verse plays, Puritans and Cavaliers attempt to assassinate the title Lord Protector of England, Cromwell. Another of his plays focuses on the suitors of Dona Sol, which include Don Carlos and his brother, the title figure. In addition to Hernani, one of his novels is partially set in the Revolt of 1840, and involves the lover of Marius and daughter of Fantine, Cosette, who is cared for by a bread thief chased by Javert. The creator of Jean Valjean, as well as Quasimodo, for 10 points, name this author of Les Miserables and The Hunchback of Notre Dame.;;(Victor) (Marie) Hugo
Chemistry;;The partial derivative of this quantity with respect to mass gives the chemical potential of a system. Dividing it by the product of the Universal Gas Constant and Temperature gives the logarithm of the equilibrium constant for a reaction. This quantity is equal to the negative product of temperature and the change entropy plus the change in enthalpy, and a reaction is spontaneous if the change in this quantity is negative. For 10 points, identify this quantity represented as G.;;Gibbs Free Energy
Sports;;This man shaved his mustache after receiving $10,000 from Remington, and threw a game-losing interception in the first Monday Night Football game. His last season saw him play in just three games for the L.A. Rams, while recently he has gained notoriety for drunkenly slurring "I want to kiss you" to Suzy Kolber during an ESPN broadcast. The only Hall of Fame quarterback to play primarily for the franchise that Brett Favre just joined, for 10 points, name guarantor of victory over the Colts in Super Bowl III, a legendary Jets quarterback.;;(Joe) Namath
Literature;;One author of this last name argued that the educational reforms advocated by 1960s student protesters ruined the special character of universities in The Closing of the American Mind. Another person of this last name said that writers must overthrow their predecessors in The Anxiety of Influence and gave essential reading lists in The Western Canon. In a novel, a woman by this name has an affair with Blazes Boylan, and a man of this name journeys through a June day in Dublin. For 10 points, give this last name of Molly and Leopold in James Joyce's Ulysses.;;Bloom
Art;;In this painting, a man with curly grey hair covered by a red cloak stares to the left, in front of a man holding his head in his hands. A hatchet lies in the foreground of this painting, which depicts a pyramid of bodies to the right of a single billowing sail. Its most dramatic figure may be a shirtless man standing on a barrel waving a shirt at a distant ship. For 10 points, name this painting of the survivors of a shipwreck, by Theodore Gericault.;;(The)  Raft  of  the  Medusa
Mythology;;The Japanese Shichi Fujukin gods live in one of these, and the Celtic Manannan mac Lir has one that responds to spoken commands. Skidbladnir is one which Freyr can collapse into his pocket, while Naglfar is one made entirely of fingernails. Another one of these, which could talk because it was built in Dodona, lent its name to a group of people including Telamon, Atalanta, Orpheus, and Heracles, who sought the Golden Fleece under the leadership of Jason. For 10 points, name these conveyances, whose mythical examples included the Argo.;;Ship(s)|Boat(s)
Geography;;An amusement park named Playland once existed in this city's Bitter Lake neighborhood, and part of state route 99 through this city is known as the Alaskan Way Viaduct. A former utilities plant gives its name to this city's Gas Works Park, and neighborhoods in this city include Green Lake and Rainier Beach. This city's namesake "Center" includes the Experience Music Project and a tower built for the 1962 World's Fair. Located on Puget Sound, for 10 points, name this large Washington city which includes the Space Needle.;;Seattle
World History;;In 1938, the publication of over three hundred pages of letters written by Dorothea Lieven to this man confirmed suspicions that he had used Lieven to spy on his Russian and British counterparts. A leader of the Holy Alliance, the murder of August von Kotzebue led this man to call a congress which resulted in university restriction, newspaper censorship, and other Carlsbad Decrees, and he was forced to flee to England following the Revolutions of 1848. For 10 points, name this Austrian prince and conservative who hosted the Congress of Vienna.;;(Klemens) (Wenzel) (von) Metternich
Religion;;One group in this movement publishes such periodicals as Issues and Mishpochah Message and was founded by Martin Rosen. Some of these sects trace their lineage to a community led by James in the 30s CE, and many groups of this type advance a doctrine of "completion" through accepting a figure they usually call "Yeshua". They are not permitted to use the Law of Return to claim Israeli citizenship, and no rabbinical group in the U.S. considers them Jewish. For 10 points, name this religious movement which combines Jewish rituals with acceptance of Christ.;;Messianic Judaism|Jews for Jesus
Music;;In one of this composer's operas, the noisy singer Aminta marries Sir Morosus, who cannot stand any sound. In addition to The Silent Woman, he wrote an opera about Matteo's efforts to woo Arabella, as well as The Egyptian Helen and Elektra. In another of his operas, Baron Ochs sends Octavian to present a silver rose to Sophie. The title character of another of his operas performs the Dance of the Seven Veils for Herodias while carrying John the Baptist's head on a platter. For 10 points, name this composer of Der Rosenkavalier, Salome, and Also Sprach Zarathustra.;;(Richard) Strauss
Literature;;In this novel, Don Crespi unsuccessfully introduces the cinema. One character in this novel spends his time crafting intricate golden fish, while another character perishes because of too much loneliness. Pilar Ternera is an intimate acquaintance of many of the men in this novel, and it opens by mentioning one character's execution by a firing squad. This novel is set in Macondo and features characters from the Beundia family like Jose Arcadio and Aureliano. For 10 points, identify this novel by Gabriel Garcia Marquez.;;(One Hundred|100){1}? Years of Solitude
Miscellaneous;;Members of this field include Pitirim Sorokin, Georg Simmel, and the author of Gemeinschaft and Gesellschaft, Ferdinand Tonnies. Its major theories are symbolic interactionism and structural functionalism, and an early member of this field developed the term "anomie" in his study Suicide. Another member of this field studied "ideal types" in works like The Protestant Ethic and the "Spirit" of Capitalism. Associated with Emile Durkheim and Max Weber, its name was coined by Auguste Comte. For 10 points, name this discipline that studies society.;;Sociology
Literature;;This poet wrote that "electrons deify one razorblade into a mountain range" in "Pity this Busy Monster, Manunkind," while he remembered a pacifist who had entered army training with him in "I Sing of Olaf, Glad and Big". He also wrote of a place "with up so floating many bells down" where the title character "danced his did" in the poem "Anyone lived in a pretty how town," and about a prison in his novel based on Pilgrim's Progress, The Enormous Room. For 10 points, name this American author who used creative capitalization in his poems.;;(Edward) (Estlin) (e.e.) (e e) Cummings
Music;;One composer from this nation is the namesake of a pizzicato where the string is snapped. One composer from this country depicted a Viennese Musical clock and Napoleon in Hary Janos, while another wrote the 6 volume piano collection Mikrokosmos and the operas The Miraculous Mandarin and Duke Bluebeard's Castle. A group of works named for this country include the Racoczy march and were based on gypsy melodies. For 10 points, name this home nation of Zoltan Kodaly (ko-DIE) and Bela Bartok, the namesake of rhapsodies by Liszt.;;Hungary
Biology;;Its NCp7 protein acts as a chaperone for RNA molecules. A fusin co-receptor is usually present on the surface of cells infected by it, and the infection is initiated by the binding of gp120 to CD4 proteins on certain cells. Patients infected with it can die of a rare cancer named Kaposi's sarcoma, and symptoms for it include swelling of lymph nodes. Classified as lentivirus, it uses reverse transcriptase to integrate its genome into the host cell. For 10 points, identify this virus that causes AIDS.;;H(uman) I(mmunodeficiency) V(irus)
Literature;;One man tries to find out the truth about an affair in this play by pretending to be Mr. Brook, and shortly thereafter a man is stuffed into a laundry basket and thrown into the river. A plan to embarrass a man by dressing him as Herne the Hunter is launched by the mother of the woman who loves Fenton, but is betrothed to Dr. Caius. This play includes the scheming Mistress Quickly, and it opens with love letters to Mistress Ford and Mistress Page. For 10 points, name this Shakespearean comedy depicting the comeuppance of Falstaff.;;(The) Merry Wives of Windsor
Astronomy;;A recent study has suggested that this object contains four magnetic poles, and much earlier, Iosif Shklovsky proposed that a colorful region of this object was attributable to synchrotron radiation. It contains knotty filaments, an indicator of its accelerated expansion from the time of its creation, which was observed by the Chinese in 1054. It contains an object first confirmed in 1968, a namesake pulsar spinning at 30 cycles per second. Located in Taurus, for 10 points, name this cloudy entity which resembles a certain animal, the first of the Messier objects.;;Crab Nebula
Literature;;The narrator of this poem says the world "seems to lie before us like a land of dreams" and claims that the "turbid ebb and flow of human misery" was brought to mind when "Sophocles long ago, heard it on the Aegean". Beginning with "the sea is calm tonight," it goes on to describe the setting as a "distant northern sea". For 10 points, name this poem which ends by describing a "darkling plain / Swept with confused alarms of struggle and flight, / Where ignorant armies clash by night," written by Matthew Arnold.;;Dover Beach
Art;;This artist painted works like Going West as a student of Thomas Hart Benton. He painted Orange Head during his nervous breakdown, and cave paintings inspired his works The She-Wolf and Guardians of the Secret. The husband of painter Lee Krasner, his paintings Autumn Rhythm, Blue Poles, and Lavender Mist demonstrate his characteristic style of "action painting". For 10 points, name this American abstract expressionist, who created many works by dripping paint directly onto the canvas.;;(Jackson) Pollock
Physics;;The first four varieties of these were named based on the properties of their spectroscopic lines, and the Hartree-Fock method concerns another type. Doubling the azimuthal quantum number and adding one gives the number of these in a subshell. Molecular ones may be approximated by linear combination of atomic ones, while the Pauli exclusion principle states that their contents must have opposite spin. "Hybridized" according to the number of atoms to which an atom must bond, for 10 points, give this term for the regions in which an electron is likely to be found.;;orbital(s)
World History;;Following the declilne of the Silingi and Alani branches of this group, the Asdingi became its dominant branch, and they were Arian Christians. They were destroyed by the Byzantines following the deposition of the usurper Gelimer, and their prominent leaders included Gaiseroc and Gunderic. For 10 points, indentify this Germanic group that settled North Africa, whose name has become synonymous for willful destruction.;;Vandals
Pop Culture;;At a sleepover in this movie, one of the central characters confesses "I love you" and then "boops" another character on the nose. This movie ends with four characters splitting up to buy cosmetic coverup and a blanket, while another episode in this film features a purchase made with an eighty- dollar bill. A masked bandit punches Fogell at a liquor store in this movie, leading to his meeting with officers Michaels and Slater, who later burn their squad car in a parking lot after shooting it. For 10 points, name this Judd Apatow flick featuring McLovin.;;Superbad
Miscellaneous;; One measure of this is Kendall's tau, and one form of this can be used to estimate the periodicity of a signal. A rank-order version coefficient for this is named for Spearman, though a statistic introduced by Francis Galton, Pearson's r coefficient, is the most widely used. When r equals negative one, this is said to be completely negative; this is completely positive when r equals one. For 10 points, name this measure of association between two variables, which often implies but does not equal causation.;;correlation (coefficient)
World History;;Like Thomas Paine, he wrote a pamphlet entitled "The Crisis," though his was in support of building workhouses. He joined with such men as Charles Babbage to found the Statistical Society of London, though his major work uses little data. That work argues that vice, misery, and self-restraint are the only ways to prevent the arithmetic increase of food supplies from being outstripped by the geometric increase of food consumers. For 10 points, name this author of An Essay on the Principle of Population, who predicted inevitable starvation of the poor.;;(Thomas) Malthus
Music;;Possibly at the suggestion of Nicholas Rubinstein, this piece was commissioned for the dedication of the Church of Christ the Savior. It starts with the melody of "save the people," a church chant, and uses a diminuendo to represent casualties. The Marseillaise (mar-say-AZE) heard near the start is countered later by "God save the Tsar," which is then topped by the cannon bursts in the finale. For 10 points, name this piece commemorating the Russian victory over Napoleon in the namesake year, written by Pyotr Tchaikovsky.;;(The) 1812 Overture
Mythology;;The idea for making this object came from Helenus, who realized his cause was lost after the theft of the Palladium. Epeius supervised its creation, and after this item was finished, its creators retreated to Tenedos and burned their tents. Sinon's explanation of this item was challenged by Laocoon, who was quickly killed by a sea serpent. Such figures as Ajax the Lesser, Menelaus, and Odysseus were concealed inside it. For 10 points, name this wooden animal idol in which Greek soldiers hid, leading to the end of a mythical ten-year war.;;(The) Trojan Horse
United States History;;He accepted a three hundred and twenty nine dollar loan from the Credit Mobilier, and his campaign biography was written by Horatio Alger. His administration was plagued by the Star Routes scandal, and this man's appointment of William H. Robertson to run the New York Customs House angered Roscoe Conkling. He defeated Winfield Scott Hancock in the general election, and he was opposed by the Stalwarts. For 10 points, name this President, who was assassinated by Charles Guiteau in 1881.;;(James) Garfield
Literature;;Professor Nikolai Stepanovitch reunites with the failed actress Katya in Harkov in this author's work "A Boring Story". One of this author's title characters declares his love for Yelena, who instead pursues Astrov. That character was first introduced in "The Wood Demon," and unsuccessfully shoots Professor Serebrakov. In another of his works, Lopakhin chops down the estate of Madame Ranevskaya. For 10 points, name this Russian author of Uncle Vanya, The Cherry Orchard, and The Seagull.;;(Anton) Chekov
Physics;;The Bergeron diagram method calculates the effects of one phenomenon called this which occurs in electrical circuits. A model named for Lambert is useful for its diffuse type, and Phong shading simulates the luminance effects related to its specular type. The total internal type occurs above the critical angle, while another law states that the angle of incidence is equal to the angle of this. For 10 points, identify this optical phenomenon whose "retro" type reverses the direction of light entirely.;;Reflection
Philosophy;;This thinker used the example of a Jew failing a French poetry exam to contrast the views of the two title people in his work Anti-Semite and Jew. He broke from Husserl's description of the self in his The Transcendence of the Ego. In another of his works, historian Antoine Roquentin feels that inanimate objects encroach on his freedom and cause the title sensation. Another of his works describes "the history of negation" and "bad faith". For 10 points, name this existential philosopher of the novel Nausea and Being and Nothingness who also wrote plays like No Exit.;;(Jean-Paul) Sartre
World History;;One of its few opponents in Parliament was Helen Suzman, and the BOSS bureau helped enforce it. The Sullivan Rules were an exception to it, and it was instituted by Daniel Malan. Enforced by the Population Registration Act and Group Areas Act, it was sometimes known as "separate development", and F.W. de Klerk repealed most of the legislation supporting it. For 10 points, name this state-sanctioned policy of racial segregation that was opposed by the African National Congress and Nelson Mandela in South Africa.;;Apartheid
Literature;;An unattributable work by this author, "The Mosquito," comprises a namesake appendix along with the Catalepton. He wrote of the love between Corydon and Alexis as well as a prophecy of the coming of a Messiah in two of his Eclogues. Hesiod's Works and Days formed the basis for another of his works, which deals with cures for goat diseases, strong thoroughbred horses, and mythological bees. In addition to The Georgics, he wrote of Evander, Lavinia and Dido in an epic poem about the founding of Rome. For 10 points, name this author of The Aeneid.;;(Publius)  Virgil(ius) (Maro)
Chemistry;;A deficiency of this element results in the weakness of elastin, and can promote the formation of aneurysms, and retention of this element in the liver causes Wilson's disease. This element's sulfate salt is reduced to its corresponding oxide in the presence of aldehydes in the Benedict's test. Along with arsenic, this element is found in compounds such as Paris green, and is found along with tin in bronze. For 10 points, identify this element whose latin name is cuprum.;;Copper
Geography;;It contains the islands of Olkhon and Bolshoy, and this lake's Proval Bay was created by an 1862 earthquake in the Selenga Delta. This lake is fed by the Selenga River, and the town of Listvyanka is located on it. The Angara River flows from this lake, and this lake is the home of the golomyanka fish, which gives birth to live young. Containing one fifth of the world's surface fresh water, for 10 points, name this Siberian lake, the oldest and deepest lake in the world.;;(Lake) Baikal
Religion;;Conrad Grebel exposited their beliefs to Ulrich Zwingli, who allowed the Zurich council to decide between them, while Martin Luther, speaking from Wartburg, provided stiffer resistance to the ministry of the Zwickau Prophets. Under the leadership of Melchior Hoffman they orchestrated the Munster Rebellion in an attempt to establish a theocracy. For 10 points, identify this religious group that sprung out of the Radical Protestant Reformation, whose central tenet arose from the idea that religious initiation should be deferred until after infancy.;;Anabaptist(s)
Literature;;One character in this work bemoans "these strange flies, these fashion-mongers, these perdona- mi's". When that character dies, another exclaims "fire-eyed fury be my conduct now". Balthasar unwittingly provided that character with false information, causing him to purchase poison from an apothecary. In act one, a character delivers a speech about Queen Mab on the way to a ball. The title character's refusal to duel the "prince of cats," Tybalt, leads to Mercutio's death. For 10 points, name this Shakespeare play which ends with the suicide of the title "star-crossed lovers".;;Romeo and Juliet
Music;;In this opera's aria "Vecchia Zimara," Colline sings about his sorrow for selling his coat, and in "Che Gelida Manina" the tenor says he will help the soprano who cames to his apartment to find a light for her candle. Alcindoro is left with the bill at Café Momus after the mezzo-soprano sings the aria "Quando M'en Vo" where she regains the affections of Marcello, and later Musetta sells her earrings to buy medicine to help a character dying of tuberculosis in Latin Quarter. Ending with Mimi dying in the hands of Rodolfo, for 10 points, name this opera by Puccini.;;La Boheme
Biology;;The gene SLC2A9 encodes a transporter of this molecule, which is the starting material in the Reichstein process. Unlike humans, most animals can synthesize vitamin C in a four step process starting with it, and PET scans often use a fluorinated analog of this molecule. Together with galactose, it makes up the dissacharide lactose, and numerous molecules of this hexose make up the storage molecules cellulose and starch. For 10 points, name this sugar that is broken down into two molecules of pyruvate in glycolysis.;;glucose
Literature;;The main character of this novel borrows a book by the Brothers Goncourt from a woman who makes her black servants do her sewing because she believes it is unhealthy. That character had eloped from her strict Kentucky family to marry a man who gets angry when she ignores Reception Day. The protagonist rejects Mademoiselle Reisz's attempt to temper family obligations with an artistic talent, and has affairs with Alcée Arobin and Robert LeBrun before walking into the sea. For 10 points, name this novel about Edna Pontellier by Kate Chopin.;;(The) Awakening
Geography;;Prior to World War II, this country's Rexist Party became a fascist organization under the leadership of Leon Degrelle, and the St. Michael's Agreement of 1992 turned this nation into a federal state. King Albert I led this country's resistance to German invasion in World War I, and King Leopold II gained international condemnation over his harsh rule of the Congo Free State. For 10 points, name this country that joined the Netherlands and Luxembourg to form the Benelux Economic Union in 1948, with its capital at Brussels.;;Belgium
Literature;;This author wrote about Lawrence Oberman and Morton Gross's attempt to cheat inventor Charles Lang out of a patent in The Water Engine. One character rants about Gracie and Ruthie's theft of a piece of toast in this author's play about Teach's attempt to steal a rare nickel, American Buffalo. In another of his plays, James Lingk tries to get a refund from Ricky Roma, and Shelley Levene is arrested for stealing new leads from the Mitch & Murray real estate agency. For 10 points, name this American playwright of Glengarry Glen Ross.;;(David) Mamet
Biology;;One type of them secretes perforin and granzymes, and another type was discovered in birds in an organ called Bursa of Fabrisius. Their specificity arises due to the recombination of Variable, Diversity, and Joining genes. All receptors on their surface are identical and contain light and heavy chains. Basophil and Neutrophil are granulocytes which are examples of these cells which bind to antigens. Consisting of NK, B, and T cells, for 10 points, identify these cells that are sometimes called lymphocytes.;;White blood cells|lymphocytes
Mythology;;One creature of this type broke Loeding and Dromi. Examples of this type of creature are named Geri and Freki and eat Odin's leftover food. Other examples of this type of animal are Hati and Skoll, who chase the horses Arvak and Alsvid in the hopes of devouring the moon and sun. Another animal of this type was bound by the Gleipnir chain after biting off Tyr's hand, and will swallow Odin at Ragnarok. For 10 points, name this type of animal, exemplified by Fenrir.;;wolf|wolves
Literature;;This author titles books by Alphonse Daudet and Franz Grillparzer. This author wrote "I want to die / honestly / rather than be abandoned / tearfully" in one poem, and also penned an ode to Anactoria. Another of this author's poems asks "Let not my spirit be harnessed by this anguish / and affliction / But come here, by me as you did once before" and is addressed to the Goddess Aphrodite. Sometimes called the tenth muse, for 10 points, name this author who lived on Lesbos, a female Greek poet.;;Sappho
Pop Culture;;This band got an early hit with "Stupid Car", which appears on their first release, Drill. The promotional video of one single featured the singer in a white suit; that song, "Stop Whispering", and others off of Pablo Honey were poorly reviewed, but their second album, The Bends, produced the songs "High and Dry," "Just," and "Fake Plastic Trees". Their singles "Pyramid Song" and "Karma Police" appeared on Amnesiac and OK Computer. For 10 points, name this English band which released In Rainbows with optional payment and recorded the song "Creep".;;Radiohead
Music;;Sleeping Beauty includes one of these for Garlands, and one named for Silver and Gold is frequently incorporated into The Merry Widow and was composed by Franz Lehar. This musical form traces its origins to the German landler and replaced the scherzo in some symphonies. Franz Liszt composed one named for Mephisto. Another composer wrote one representing the Danube River and one entitled Tales from the Vienna Woods. For 10 points, name this dance in 3/4 time whose "king" is considered to be Johann Strauss.;;Waltz
United States History;;This organization's first director was Ella Josephine Baker, and this organization joined with SNCC to organize the pioneering Albany Movement in 1961, which attempted to desegregate the namesake Georgia town. Weakened by the 1971 departure of Jesse Jackson's Operation Breadbasket, Ralph David Abernathy became this group's leader in 1968, and this organization played a key role in organizing the 1963 March on Washington. For 10 points, name this civil rights organization, founded by Martin Luther King, Jr. in 1957.;;SCLC|Southern Christian Leadership Council
Physics;;The general equation for it features a quantity equal to the product of the permittivity constant, permeability constant, and the time derivative of the E-field, which vanishes in the absence of time- varying E-fields. That quantity was introduced in On Physical Lines of Force by James Maxwell, and is called the displacement current. For 10 points, identify this law which states that the magnetic field in a closed loop produced by a current is proportion to the current enclosed in the loop, and is named for a French scientist.;;Ampere's (Law)
Geography;;Its tributaries include the Salado, Conchos, and Puerco, and its basins include Lake Toronto and the Falcon Reservoir. Its sources lie in the San Juan Mountains, and its early course flows into the San Luis Valley. Before it flows into the Gulf Coastal Plain, this river flows into the Big Bend, and it is the fifth longest river in North America. For 10 points, name this river on which lie Ciudad Juarez and El Paso, the border between Mexico and the United States.;;Rio Grande
Literature;;One character in this novel slights another by remarking that he is no mood to prefer ladies slighted by other men. Later, the protagonist and two of her sisters wish to visit Brighton, and Lydia accepts an invitation from an officer's wife, and later runs away with Wickham. The protagonist of this novel is not intimidated by Lady Catherine's insistence that she reject a proposal so that Lady Catherine's daughter can marry the man that she loves. For 10 points, identify this novel about Elizabeth Bennett and Mr. Darcy, a work by Jane Austen.;;Pride and Prejudice
World History;;He was victorious at a battle near Gniew over his cousin Sigismund III in a war that ended with the Treaties of Stzumska Wies and Altmark. He constructed a pontoon bridge over the Lech River to win the Battle of Rain. An equestrian statue with the inscription "Freedom of belief for all the world" commemorates his victory over Count Tilly's Catholic forces at Breitenfeld, and he was advised by Axel Oxenstierna. For 10 points, name this "Lion of the North," a king of Sweden who died at the Battle of Lutzen during the Thirty Years' War.;;Gustav Adolphus|Gustav II;;Gustav
Chemistry;;When an exponent often added to generalize it is equal to gamma, the specific heat ratio, it describes any isentropic process. Deviations from this law that occur above the inversion temperature are modeled by the Joule-Thomson effect, and its constant of proportionality has units of energy and is given by the product of particle number, temperature, and the ideal gas constant. Increasingly accurate for low gases as altitude increases, for 10 points, identify the gas law which describes an inverse relationship between pressure and volume at fixed temperatures.;;Boyle's (Law)
Music;;One of these by Michel Chion includes a movement where a tape plays voices hissing and screaming the word "Sanctus," while an earlier one by Berlioz calls for four brass bands at each end of the stage. One includes a non-canonical Pie Jesu movement, while a more famous one includes an Agnus Dei written by Franz Sussmayr, and recycles its opening for the Lux Aeterna section. For 10 points, name these works which include the Dies Irae, a Roman Catholic mass for the dead which was set by Faure and Mozart, who died while writing it.;;Requiem (mass)
Economics;;At efficiency in the Keynesian Cross, this equals the total output of an economy. An externality is beneficial if the social type of this is higher than the private type. A Giffen Good has an upward sloping curve that measures this, while Say's law states that this is created by the presence of a good. Price elasticity is computed by dividing change in price over change in this variable, which can be measured as an individual's marginal utility for consumption of a good. For 10 points, identify this measurement of desire for a good, often paired with supply.;;(aggregate) demand
Geology;;One type of these substances forms in rock consisting of olivine and pyroxene, a basic rock known as peridotite. In addition to the harzburgitic variety, an eclogitic variety forms from the organic detritus pushed down by subduction. They are usually found in a blue igneous rock which forms at pipes and is called kimberlite, and calcite crystals mistaken for these substances were found in a volcanic tuff cone in Hawaii, a namesake "Head". For 10 points, name this allotrope of carbon, the hardest known naturally- occurring mineral.;;Diamond(s)
World History;;This man met his wife while fighting in the War of Tatters, and he sacked Gualeguaychu while campaigning against Manuel Oribe in Uruguay. He won victories for the rebels at Luino and Mozzarone during the revolutions of 1848, but lost and was exiled when the French besieged his capital. He returned to lead the Expedition of the Thousand in 1860, and his military exploits coupled with the political machinations of Cavour led to the crowning of Victor Emmanuel II. For 10 points, name this leader of the Red Shirts, the "Father of Italian Independence".;;(Giuseppe) Garabaldi
Religion;;Rites in this religion include the Ritual For Evil Spirits and the Road Gods' Ritual. Along with water and salt, a wand with white paper streamers is often used in purification ceremonies in this religion, and its holidays include Adults Day, when those who have recently turned twenty begin wearing adult clothing. Its symbols include gates known as torii and shrines which are rebuilt every twenty years. It worships gods and nature spirits known as kami and has proven compatible with imported Buddhism. For 10 points, name this indigenous faith of Japan.;;Shinto(ism)
Literature;;One writer from this country envisioned his poem "Siren" as the end result of a productive sleep, while another wrote about an "abiku" who frequents the bar Azaro in The Famished Road. A work set in this country focuses on the rivalry between Lakunle and Baroka over Sidi, while another work written by an author from this country concerns a character who beats his wife during the Week of Peace, and accidentally kills Ikemefuna's son when his gun explodes. For 10 points, name this country, the setting of Things Fall Apart, and the home of Chinua Achebe.;;Nigeria
Art;;Three men on horseback with spears attack the title creature, which stands on top of an alligator, in this artist's painting The Hippopotamus Hunt. He painted a triptych including The Elevation of the Cross and The Descent of the Cross, and he taught Anthony van Dyck. His two versions of the Massacre of the Innocents were identified due to similarities to his painting of a strongman asleep in a woman's lap as a man perches over him with scissors, Samson and Delilah. For 10 points, identify this Baroque Flemish artist who painted many large, fleshy nudes.;;(Peter) (Paul) Rubens
Geography;;The origins of this former nation were laid at the Pittsburgh Convention of 1918, and Thomas Masaryk and Edvard Benes were among its leaders. In the Spring of 1968, this nation experienced a brief period of liberalization that was ended when Alexandr Dubcek was removed from power, and this country's region of Sudetenland was annexed by Nazi Germany in 1938. For 10 points, name this former Central European nation that broke into two republics following the Velvet Divorce, which came after the playwright Vaclav Havel helped lead the Velvet Revolution in 1989, a country whose capital was Prague.;;Czechoslovakia
Computer Science;;Damgard's development of "claw-free" Hash functions was an important contribution to this field and essential to many techniques in this field are properties of the discrete logarithm, which are applied in a method named for Diffie and Hellman. One of the best-known algorithms in this field relies on the difficulty of factoring the product of two large primes, a public-key algorithm called RSA. For 10 points, identify this study of concealing communication, exemplified by Vigenere and Caesar ciphers.;;cryptography|encryption
Literature;;One American author of this last name wrote The Barracks Thief and This Boy's Life. Another author of this name wrote about a student who reunites with Joel Pierce and Robert Weaver at Harvard, Eugene Gant, in Of Time and the River and You Can't Go Home Again. A third author with this last name described the Merry Pranksters in The Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test, and wrote about a racial crisis sparked by Sherman McCoy in The Bonfire of the Vanities. For 10 points, give this last name of authors Tobias, Thomas, and Tom.;;Wolfe|Wolff
Philosophy;;This man downplayed differences between Protestant and Catholic concepts of God in his Letter to Voetius. The four rules he used in all of his investigative work included dividing problems into simple parts and accepting only the self-evident as true; he codified his approach in Rules for the Direction of the Mind and Discourse on Method. He used that approach to write a religious text, the Meditations on First Philosophy. For 10 points, name this skeptical philosopher who started his investigations by declaring "Je pense, donc je suis" or "I think, therefore I am".;;(Rene) Descartes
United States History;;With the encouragement of Senator Arthur Vandenberg, this man defeated Bartel Jonkman to win a House seat. He was a leader of the House's "Young Turks", and he served as a member of the Warren Commission. Elected minority leader in 1965, he was panned for his performance in a presidential debate in which he stated that, "There is no Soviet domination of Eastern Europe", and his presidency was noted for its Whip Inflation Now program. For 10 points, name this only President not to be elected to any national office, who pardoned his predecessor, Richard Nixon.;;(Gerald) Ford| (Leslie)  King
Physics;;The Peclet number is equal to the ratio of this quantity for convection to that for diffusion. A Pitot Tube is used to measure this quantity in gases, while its value in liquids can be determined using a Venturi Meter. Both of these devices make use of the idea that, like volume, as pressure increases, this decreases, a principle known as Bernoulli's Equation. When this is constant, acceleration is zero. For 10 points, name this kinematic quantity, the derivative of position, whose magnitude is equal to speed.;;velocity;;speed
Art;;This artist's version of the Last Judgment portrays the Archangel Michael standing on a skeletal bat covering the roof of Hell. St. Donatian and St. George present the title character to the Virgin Mary, who wears a red robe, in his painting The Madonna With Canon George van der Paele. This artist painted a self-portrait with a red turban, and collaborated with his brother Hubert on the Ghent Altarpiece. He also painted a mirror reflecting a couple holding hands during the title ceremony. For 10 points, name this 15th century Flemish painter of The Arnolfini Wedding.;;(Jan) Van Eyck
Geography;;They extend south from the Kuma and Manych river basins, and between their two ranges lie the Shirak Steppe. They include the Dykshu, Bezingi, and Karaugom glaciers, and the largest lake in this mountain system is Sevan. Mount Aragats is located to the west of Lake Sevan, and the Talish Mountains are located in this system. Divided into the Greater and Lesser ranges, for 10 points name this mountain system located between the Caspian and Black seas with their highest peak at Mount Elbrus.;;Caucasus (Mountains)
Miscellaneous;;One film from this country features a man who steals away on a horse with his future wife Dora at her wedding, and ends up getting shot after convincing his son Joshua to play a game that requires one to earn 1,000 points to win a tank. Another film from this country sees a flyer-poster seek out the man who stole his means of transportation. The country of origin for Eight and a Half, The Bicycle Thief, and Life is Beautiful, for 10 points, name this country whose notable filmmakers include Federico Fellini and Roberto Benigni.;;Italy
Literature;;One of her poems accuses a character of being "pithy and historical as the Roman Forum," and another ends "I eat men like air". In addition to "The Colossus" and "Lady Lazarus," she wrote about "the substanceless blue" in "Ariel" and about how "every woman adores a fascist" in "Daddy". Her only novel was published under the pseudonym Victoria Lucas and describes the mental breakdown of magazine intern Esther Greenwood. For 10 points, name this author of The Bell Jar, which was published in the same year that she killed herself with a gas oven.;;(Sylvia) Plath
Music;;One man with this last name was the maestro di capella of Novara Cathedral who composed L'uomo contento and Christus. The more famous man with this name composed 14 variations for violin with a repeated guitar accompaniment entitled Carmagnola, as well as a collaboration with Panny on variations entitled La Tempesta. One of his works inspired a series of variations that incorporate the Dies Irae melody, a rhapsody by Rachmaninoff. For 10 points, name this composer of 24 caprices, the most renowned Italian violin virtuoso of the 1800s.;;(Noccolo)  Paganini
Miscellaneous;;This man made a cameo appearance in the 1988 film Never On Tuesday as a man in a red sports car, and he played Johnny Collins in the 1991 thriller Zandalee. He was the first pick to star as The Green Goblin in Spider-Man, but a more recent role had him play John McLoughlin, a policeman pulled out from under the rubble in World Trade Center. Starring as Fu Manchu in the fake trailers to Grindhouse, and the title role in Ghost Rider, for 10 points, name this actor who played Ben Gates in two National Treasure films.;;(Nicholas) Cage
Computer Science;;Cheney's algorithm concerns an operation often performed on it. One kind of it has both NOR and NAND types, and wear-leveling preserves its lifespan, and the Von Neumann bottleneck concerns the limit on computer speed imposed by the ability for a CPU to perform computations faster than it can retrieve data from this. Garbage collection is a common form of automated management of, for 10 points, what form of data storage which comes in varieties like "random-access" and "flash"?;;memory
Literature;;In this novel, one character refuses to sell Lady Bareacres horses to escape from an invading army because the Lady had been rude to her in Brussels. Joseph mysteriously dies after getting an expensive life insurance policy, while Captain Dobbin marries the wife of George Osborne, who died at Waterloo. At the ball of the Duchess of Richmond, the protagonist's coquetry, despite the presence of her husband Rawdon Crawley, ruins her friendship with Amelia Sedley. For 10 points, name this novel about Becky Sharp, by William Makepeace Thackeray.;;Vanity Fair
Geography;;The Union of Krevo and the Union of Lublin formed a commonwealth between it and Lithuania, though that state was ended by a series of divisions, splitting it between Austria, Prussia, and Russia. Occasionally referred to as its "Fourth Partition" was its division by Molotov and Ribbentrop in 1939, and a shipyard strike here in 1980 was led by Lech Walesa and resulted in the Solidarity movement.. For 10 points, identify this nation, which, while occupied by the Nazis, saw a substantial uprising in 1944 in the capital, Warsaw.;;Poland
Economics;;Simon Newcomb helped to develop the "quantity theory" of this. Ludwig von Mises wrote a book about the theory of this and credit, and according to the Fisher Equation, the amount of it can be determined by dividing PT by V, which stands for its velocity. In the United States, its supply is divided into M1, M2, and M3 by the Federal Reserve. Inflation causes its purchasing power to decrease. For 10 points, name this keystone of the economy, whose examples include coins and dollar bills.;;money|currency
Biology;;The Frye-Edidin experiments can be rationalized by it as being the result of free diffusion, but one problem with it was discovered by Kusumi and concerned a "skeleton fence". First developed in 1972 by Singer and Nicolson, it states, among other things, that lipids and proteins can rotate. In addition, it describes a certain structure as a functionally asymmetric lipid bilayer studded with embedded proteins that aid in transport. For 10 points, name this model used to conceptualize cell membranes.;;fluid  mosaic (model)
World History;;Alfred Graf von Waldersee led punitive expeditions after the main fighting of this event, and it was quelled by the Eight Nation Alliance. Its spread was checked by the actions of Liu-K'un-i, and it led to the occupation of T'ang-shan by Russian troops. It was sparked in part by a severe drought in the Shangdong province, and it originated in the work of the Eight Trigrams Society and was championed by the Dowager Empress Cixi. For 10 points, name this anti-Western Chinese uprising of 1900 led by the Society of Righteous and Harmonious Fists.;;Boxer (Rebellion) (Revolt)
Mythology;;Before meeting the scorpion men at Mount Mashu, he tells Ninsun about his prophetic dreams. His subjects protest to Anu at the demanding labor that this king requires in order to build a wall. Aruru attempts to distract him by sending a figure who later joins this hero in a battle in the cedar forest against Khumbaba and in slaying the Bull of Heaven. Bearing the genetically implausible lineage of two-thirds god and one-third man, this king of Uruk and friend to Enkidu learns about eternal life from Utnapishtim. For 10 points, name this hero of a Sumerian epic.;;Gilgamesh
World History;;This event was chronicled by Guibert of Nogent and Fulcher of Chartres. During this conflict's  Battle of Dorylaeum, one side captured the treasury of Kilij Arslan, who had earlier defeated the forces of Walter the Penniless. Its leaders included Raymond of Toulouse and Peter the Hermit, and it was sparked by a speech at the Council of Clermont given by Pope Urban II. For 10 points, name this late eleventh century conflict which saw Godfrey de Boullion capture Jerusalem, which was followed by eight subsequent wars between Christians and Muslims.;;First Crusade;;Crusades
Astronomy;;Stars in this constellation form lines that can be used to locate Procyon, Sirius, and Aldebaran, and its iota star is a quadruple system known as Hatsya. It features a nebula that is the nearest area of massive star formation and is Messier Object 42. Its gamma star is Bellatrix, while the most notable feature of this constellation is made up of Alnitak, Alnilam, and Mintaka. Containing the stars Rigel and Betelgeuse, for 10 points, name this constellation known as "The Hunter" that has a namesake "belt".;;Orion
Literature;;This author suggested that Jack the Ripper belongs in a class by himself in the essay "Decline of the English Murder". He argued that cliches and ready-made phrases erode the capability for intelligent thought in "Politics and the English Language". In one of his novels, Julia works for the Anti-Sex League, and Emmanuel Goldstein is the target of the Two Minutes Hate, mandatory for all citizens of Oceania. He also wrote about a donkey named Benjamin and pigs named Napoleon and Snowball. For 10 points, name this author of 1984 and Animal Farm.;;(George) Orwell
Literature;;In one of his plays, the audience leaves for intermission to find the actors in the lobby having conversations. That play is dominated by the director Doctor Hinkfuss. In another of his plays, Doctor Dionysius attempts to scare the title character back into sanity after he fell off a horse and began to think he was a Holy Roman Emperor. In addition to Tonight We Improvise and Henry IV, another of his plays ends when the Child drowns in a fountain despite the instructions of the Manager. For 10 points, name this Italian playwright of Six Characters in Search of an Author.;;(Luigi) Pirandello
Chemistry;;The Franck-Hertz experiment used a tube filled with this element in a gaseous state, and various isotopes of this element were used to change in the critical temperature of superconductors due to the isotope effect. Found together with chlorine in calomel and sulfur in vermilion, it can be obtained from cinnabar, and forms alloys with other metals called amalgams. For 10 points, name this only element this is liquid at room temperatures, whose symbol is Hg.;;Mercury
Physics;;When used with resistors, they can be used to eliminate signals above or below desired frequencies in high-pass and low-pass filters. The quantity associated with these objects is equal to charge over voltage, and the function of one can be improved by placing an insulating material that conducts electric fields between its two metal plates. For 10 points, identify this circuit element which stores charge, and whose namesake property is measured in Farads.;;capacitor(s)
Music;;In the baroque era, this instrument was manufactured with a slide and may have been referred to as "da tirarsi". Michael Haydn and Leopold Mozart both wrote concerti for it with only two movements. This instrument poses "The Unanswered Question" in a Charles Ives work, and Jeremiah Clarke may have written a D major work called the "Prince of Denmark's March" which has become known as this instrument's "voluntary". Related to the cornet, for 10 points, name this instrument played by Winton Marsalis, a brass instrument with three valves.;;Trumpet
Literature;;The speaker of this poem tells its addressee that "The grave's a fine and private place, / But none I think do there embrace". He warns that worms "will try / That long preserv'd virginity," and resolves to "tear our pleasures with rough strife / Thorough the iron gates of life". The speaker concludes that though certiain others cannot make the sun stand still, "yet [they] will make him run," and argues that the addressee could refuse his advances "Till the Conversion of the Jews," "had [they] but World enough, and Time". For 10 points, name this poem by Andrew Marvell.;;To His Coy Mistress
Geography;;The volcanic Ankaratra Massif lies in its center, and this nation's Great Cliff of Angavo is bordered by the Betsimisaraka Escarpment. The Mandrare, Mananara, and Ivondro rivers are located in this nation, and its largest port is Toamasina. Lake Alaotra is its largest lake, its highest peak is Maromokotro, and the coelacanth (SEEL-uh-canth) lives off its shores. This country's largest ethnic group is the Merina, and this former colony of France is located on the east of the Mozambique Channel. For 10 points, name this African island nation, with its capital at Antananarivo.;;Madagascar
Chemistry;;Along with organo-aluminum compounds, this element is commonly used to catalyze alkene polymerization via Ziegler-Natta catalysts. An oxide of barium and this element is notable for exhibiting piezoelectricity. It is isolated from its oxide salt in the Kroll process, and that oxide is widely used as a pigment due to its white color. It lies between scandium and vanadium on the periodic table and is the second0lightest transition element. For 10 points, identify this element with atomic number 22 and symbol Ti.;;Titanium
Literature;;One novel written by a native of this country focuses on a retired public school teacher living in Vastmanland and is entitled Death of a Beekeeper. An author from this country wrote about the twenty- six inch tall strangler of Jehosaphat in The Dwarf, and penned a novel set after the crucifixion of Jesus, Barabbas. This country is home to the playwright of The Ghost Sonata and Miss Julie, as well as Lars Gustaffson, Selma Lagerlof, and Par Lagerkvist. For 10 points, name this home country of August Strindberg, where the Nobel Prize in Literature is awarded in Stockholm.;;Sweden
Philosophy;;This thinker collaborated with James Baldwin on A Rap on Race. In addition to work on Pacific Islanders collected in Male and Female, this anthropologist noted that females are the leaders in Chambri in Sex and Temperament in Three Primitive Societies. Derek Freeman criticized this anthropologist's fieldwork, especially a book that proposed that the happiness of the subjects was due to their carefree, unrepressed lifestyle. For 10 points, identify this anthropologist, who wrote Coming of Age in Samoa.;;(Margaret) Mead(e)
World History;;This entity signed the Peace of Wordingborg, and reached the height of its power after signing the Peace of Stralsund. It centered around the four kontors of Wisby, Bergen, London, and Bruges. Before being attacked by Waldemar IV, it achieved dominance through the use of cog ships, although its monopoly was eventually broken by the Dutch. Founded in the twelfth century by merchants in Hamburg and Lubeck, for 10 points, name this medieval federation of North German shipping towns.;; Hanseatic (League)|Hansa
Geology;;Early models for it used a constant velocity parametrization model. Those models only considered the regions of mafic and ultramafic rock that surrounded it. First hypothesized due to an event that occurred in the Kulpa valley, it is marked by a rapid increase in the velocity of compressional waves, and its depth ranges from five to fifty kilometers. Named for a Croatian seismologist, for 10 points, identify this region which forms the boundary between the crust and the mantle.;;Moho(rovicic) (discontinuity)
Noncomputational Math;;Matrices that are not square may have retractions and sections without having one of these, and a square matrix doesn't have one if its determinant is zero; in other words, if it is degenerate or singular. The trigonometric functions are made to have one by introducing domain restrictions, though notational difficulties arise due to the traditional use of superscripts. The identity function has one, since it easily passes the horizontal line test. For 10 points, give the term that indicates that a function's action undoes the action of another.;;Inverse(s)
Miscellaneous;;These two words are preceded by "Chapter 1" in an album which contains "Our Arrival" and "Gotcha Shakin'". This phrase names a song where the singer is lost in a "Roman wilderness of pain," addressed to a "beautiful friend". Another song with this name claims that "the love you take is equal to the love you make". In addition to those songs by The Doors and The Beatles, a more recent song places this time period after the singer "tried so hard, and got so far". For 10 points, name this time during which "it doesn't even matter" according to a Linkin Park song.;;(In) The End
Literature;;This character was introduced as a slow-witted astronomer. He opines that hungry men have trouble behaving morally, noting "it is hard for an empty sack to stand upright". A book whose title saw this figure "improved" was later reissued as The Way to Wealth, and his namesake publication came out each year from 1732 to 1757. His other sayings include "God helps those who help themselves" and "Early to bed and early to rise, makes a man healthy, wealthy, and wise". For 10 points, name this alias of Benjamin Franklin, the narrator of a certain "Almanac".;;(Poor) Richard
Literature;;This author wrote about a man who learns "Proot" is the magic word to control Modestine during his trip to St. Jean du Gard in "Travels with a Donkey". Ebenezer sells his nephew to the Covenant in a novel by this man about David Balfour. In addition to The Master of Ballantrae, another of his novels begins when Old Man Pew comes to the Admiral Benbow to look for Billy Bones, and focuses on Jim Hawkins and Long John Silver. For 10 points, name this author of Kidnapped and Treasure Island.;;(Robert) (Louis)  Stevenson
World History;;He was imprisoned in Ahmadnagar fort for twenty months during World War II, and he gave the noted "Tryst With Destiny" speech. He ordered the occupation of the Portuguese colony of Goa, and he was sometimes called Pandit. His adherence to the policy of Non-Alignment was tested with the 1962 Chinese invasion, and he spent nine years of his life in prison for his involvement with the Congress Party and the Quit India Movement. For 10 points, name this father of Indira Gandhi and first prime minister of India.;;(Jawaharlal) Nehru|Pandit
Mythology;;Two creatures from pre-Islamic Persian myth, the donkey god Khara and the demon Azi Dahaka, had six of these. The Greek monster Typhon issued venom from them, and Horus is said to lose these every time there is an eclipse. A guard killed by Hermes, Argus, had a hundred of these, and some of the creatures who had less than the usual number of these were Steropes, Brontes, Arges, and Polyphemus, who lost his to Odysseus. For 10 points, name these physical features, of which Shiva had three and each Cyclops had but one.;;eye(s)
Art;;The creator of this work made a similar "Golden" piece of art that sits on a base of mashed-together trapezoidal prisms. This work was inspired by its creator's previous Maiastra series. Seven works with this name were constructed in marble, while nine are in bronze. This work was taxed in customs for not being "art" upon entry into the United States, and its body is elongated while its head, beak, and feathers are streamlined. For 10 points, name this series of statues by Constantin Brancusi that depicts an avian in the cosmos.;;Bird in (Space) (Flight)
Geography;;Ibn Abbad led a failed rebellion designed to prevent Frederick II from purging this place of Muslims, and the Battle of Benevento led to Angevin rule until this island's namesake Vespers. Operation Husky, designed to liberate this island from Axis control, was the first Allied excursion back into Europe during World War II, and Archimedes's inventions temporarily defended this island's city of Syracuse from Roman attacks. For 10 points, name this island, an Italian possession southeast of Sardinia, which is still home to the Mafia.;;Sicily
Literature;;He wrote that visible signs or sacraments were the only means to provide religious unity in his Retractions. He also wrote a book which asserts that Scripture must be interpreted reflecting charity and love, advocates memorizing Scripture, and discusses the role of allegory in On Christian Doctrine. After Rome was sacked, he described the relationship between the title entity, the church, and potentially malevolent pagan forces in The City of God. A Manichaean convert influenced by Saint Ambrose, for 10 points, identify this author of Confessions.;;(St(.)) (Saint) Augustine (of Hippo)
Literature;;In one of his stories, a man ends up barking on all fours on the sidewalk to fool a policeman in "The Topaz Cufflinks Mystery". A fabricated plan to kill Mr. Fitweiler leads to Ulgine Barrows being fired after she accuses Erwin Martin in his story "The Catbird Seat". The title character of another of his stories is an expert with the "Webley-Vickers 50.80" and operates on Wellington McMillan before buying a puppy biscuit and picking up his wife. For 10 points, name this author of "The Secret Life of Walter Mitty".;;(James) Thurber
Art;;This artist depicted a yellow cat on a sill looking at the Eiffel Tower in his painting Paris Through the Window. He painted a series of Tales from the Arabian Nights, as well as a work where he gestures toward a painting of a red goat and displays an oddly-shaped left hand, Self-Portrait With Seven Fingers. Another of his paintings portrays upside-down houses, a crescent moon, and a sheep looking at a green peasant. For 10 points, name this Russian painter of I and the Village.;;(Marc) Chagall
United States History;;In this war, Admiral William Sampson ordered the sinking of the USS Merrimac in an unsuccessful attempt to bottleneck the enemy fleet in Santiago. It was ended by the Treaty of Paris, and the "yellow journalism" of William Randolph Hearst contributed to popular support for it. For 10 points, the Battle of Manila Bay occurred during what war between the United States and a European power that was prompted by the explosion of the U.S.S. Maine?;;Spanish(-)American (War)
Biology;;Earlier surgical treatments for this conditions involved pallidotomy and thalamotomy, while newer treatments for it can be supplemented by drugs which inhibit monoamine oxidase-B. It is caused by the degeneration of the neurons of the substantia nigra, which decreases the production of dopamine, and L-dopa is most commonly used to treat its symptoms. First described by its namesake British scientist in 1817, for 10 points, identify this disease characterized by tremors and slowness of movement, also called the "shaking palsy".;;Parkinson(')s (Disease)
Literature;;This author collaborated on the play Sponono with Krishna Shah. Prem Bodasingh refuses to give up her seat on a bus in this author's novel Ah, But Your Land Is Beautiful. Another novel by this author deals with Kappie, who talks Peter out of suicide brought on by the fact that he loves black women and is white, Too Late the Phalarope. This man's best known work deals with the muder of Arthur Jarvis, and the subsequent trial of Absalom, who is Steven Kumalo's son. For 10 points, identify this South African author of Cry, the Beloved Country.;;(Alan) Paton
Music;;He arranged Thou Tun'st this World as part of Orpheus Brittanicus, a reworking of Purcell's songs, and he wrote a duet for violin and flute with piano accompaniment entitled the Gemini Variations. He included "Wolcum Yole!" and "This Little Babe" in a work capped by a Procession and Recession, "A Ceremony of Carols," and he used poems by Wilfred Owen as the basis for his War Requiem. For 10 points, name this British composer of "The Young Person's Guide to the Orchestra" and an opera about a sailor who kills his apprentices, Peter Grimes.;;(Edward) (Benjamin) Britten
World History;;In this war, Spanish forces arrived too late to participate in the Battle of Casteldelfino, where French forces under the Prince of Conti defeated the state of Sardinia. It began when the Pragmatic Sanction's terms were rejected by King Frederick II of Prussia. The conflict between Britain and Spain in this war was called the War of Jenkins's Ear, while its North American phase was King George's War. Ended by the treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle in 1748, for 10 points, name this war begun when Prussia rejected Maria Theresa's claim to the throne in Vienna.;;(War of the) Austrian Succession
Biology;;Their dysfunction may cause Hurler syndrome, which arises from an iduronidase deficiency in these organelles. A severe form of mucolipidosis, also called i-cell disease, occurs due to improper phosphorylation of a mannose sugar tag applied to objects destined for them. Better known for failures that cause Tay-Sachs disease, they contain several acid hydrolases which work within their acidic environments. For 10 points, identify these organelles, named for their function of breaking down macromolecules acquired from phagocytosis.;;lysosomes
Miscellaneous;;The majority of consonants in this language are "paired," meaning that they can occur in either plain or palatalized forms. The literary form of this language combines the consonant system of its Northern dialect and the vowel system of its Southern dialect, and it uses such letters as "yah" and "shah". The most widely spoken of the eastern Slavic languages, it is written in the Cyrillic alphabet. For 10 points, name this language, which is closely related to Ukrainian and is the most common native tongue in Volgograd, St. Petersburg, and Moscow.;;Russian
World History;;This man destroyed Eshnunna by damming nearby waters, and this man's father was Sin-muballit. In 1764 BCE, this man resisted a coalition of Ashur, Eshnunna, and Elam. He turned on his ally Zimrilim of Mari in 1761 BCE, and this Amorite's chief rival was Rim-Sin of Larsa. He may have been responsible for building the tower of Etemenanki, and his most well known achievement was carved on a column in Susa, and was known for its retributive features. For 10 points identify this Babylonian ruler, known for his namesake code of laws.;;Hammurabi
Pop Culture;;In one song from this album, a "catcher hits for .318;" that Belle and Sebastian song from this album is titled "Piazza, New York Catcher". Another song describing a fish's "secret wish" to "be a cactus" is called "Tree Hugger," while a song wherein "Joey never met a bike that he didn't wanna ride," titled "Tire Swing," is performed by Kimya Dawson. Two versions of the Moldy Peaches' "Anyone Else But You" appear among the final tracks. For 10 points, identify this album, whose songs appeared in a 2007 movie starring Ellen Page as a pregnant teenager.;;(The) Juno (soundtrack)
Literature;;The pilot Todd crashes onto a farm in Alabama in this author's short story "Flying Home". He explained his role as a black novelist in Shadow and Act, and John Callahan finished his second novel, the story of the preacher Alonzo Hickman raising a child who grows up to be the racist Senator Adam Sunraider. In addition to Juneteenth, he wrote about Brother Jack's eye falling out and Ras the Destroyer forming the Brotherhood, after the main character is expelled for showing a white man the true nature of his college. For 10 points, name this author of Invisible Man.;;(Ralph) Ellison
Astronomy;;Its surface is characterized by regions of highly fractured crust called tesserae. The presence of circular structures called coronae developed as a heat releasing mechanism on this body which lacks tectonic activity, and the largest mountain on it is the Maxwell Montes. Its northern and southern hemispheres are divided into Ishtar terra and Aphrodite terra respectively, and its atmosphere has high concentrations of carbon dioxide and sulfuric acid. For 10 points, identify this sister planet of the Earth.;;Venus
Literature;;In "The Doctrine of Types," this man explained that he had discovered that the set of sets which are not members of themselves must both belong to and not belong to itself, his namesake "paradox". Two years after co-writing a manifesto with Albert Einstein against nuclear testing, this man organized the first Pugwash Conference. He had earlier collaborated with Alfred North Whitehead on Principia Mathematica. For 10 points, name this mathematician, philosopher, and pacifist activist, who wrote the one-volume History of Western Philosophy.;;(Bertrand) (Arthur) (William) Russell, (3rd Earl Russell of Kingston Russell) (,) (Viscount Amberley of Amberley) (and of Ardsalla)
Mythology;;One figure involved in this event has no weapons when it starts because Skirnir won his sword. Following this event, two people who hid in Hodmimir's Forest wake up. Setting the stage for the peopling of the Earth by Lif and Lifthrasir, it is preceded by three consecutive winters. It begins after the last sounding of Gjallarhorn, and it includes Surt setting Yggdrassil on fire, and the deaths of Tyr, the Midgard Serpent, Fenrir, Odin, and Thor. For 10 points, name this event, the apocalyptic battle of all the gods at the end of Norse mythology.;;Ragnarok
Literature;;In an essay titled after this play, the atmosphere of a great leader's funeral procession is compared to the isolation caused by the knocking at the gate in this play. That knocking is eventually answered by a jovial porter who admits Lennox, as well as the nobleman who eventually makes Birnam Wood move and was born by Caesarian section, defying the prophecy made by three witches at the beginning of this play. For 10 points, name this Shakespeare play in which Macduff kills the title Scottish nobleman.;;MacBeth
World History;;One king of this country won the Battle of Aljubarrota, and this country's prime minister Marcelo Caetano was overthrown by the Carnation Revolution after succeeding longtime dictator Antonio Salazar. This country's House of Braganza succeeded its Aviz dynasty, which patronized explorers like Pedro Cabral, Bartholomew Diaz, and Vaso da Gama. Once ruled by a family including Prince Henry the Navigator, for 10 points, name this country on the Iberian Peninsula, the colonizer of Brazil and site of a 1755 earthquake in Lisbon.;;Portugal
Music;;He played with Fletcher Henderson after quitting the band that he recorded "Chimes Blues" with, led by King Oliver. With his own bands he recorded "Struttin' with Some Barbecue". In addition to leading his Hot 5 and Hot 7, he created his All-Stars, a Dixieland band. His song "Heebie Jeebies" popularized scat singing. He scored a number one hit with his version of "Hello Dolly," and sang about seeing "trees of green, red roses too" in another song. For 10 points, name this jazz trumpeter, nicknamed Satchmo, who sang "What a Wonderful World".;;(Louis) Armstrong
Geography;;Oil was discovered at this geographic area in Manantiales, and its native peoples include the Ona and Alacaluf. The town of Porvenir is the capital of its namesake province, and its peaks include Monte Sarmiento. Its Isla Desolacion receives one hundred and eighty inches of rainfall a year. Its islands of Lennox, Picton, and Nueva are disputed between two countries, and its base lies on the Beagle Channel. For 10 points, name this archipelago that is separated from the mainland of South American by the Strait of Magellan and whose name means "Land of Fire".;;Tierra Del Fuego
Physics;;The Ives-Stilwell experiment explored the possibilities of its transverse variety, which requires the introduction of the Lorentz factor. Its cosmological variety results from the predictions of Hubble's Law, and its relativistic variety comes with a coefficient of the square root of the quantity one minus beta over one plus beta, but at non-relativistic speeds its effects are proportional to radial velocity. For 10 points, give this term referring to the distortion of the observed frequency of waves, particularly but not necessarily light, due to velocity.;;Doppler (Effect);;redshift
Literature;;This author wrote about the drowning of Hans Giebenrath in Beneath the Wheel, and about a friendship between the title monk and artist, Narcissus and Goldmund. Another novel by this author focuses on a Castalian academic who is friends with Fritz Tegularius, Joseph Knecht, and is titled The Glass Bead Game. A further novel by this author focuses on Harry Haller, who succumbs to his animalistic side, and yet another is named for a friend of Govinda who finds inner peace. For 10 points, identify this German author of Steppenwolf and Siddhartha.;;(Herman(n)) Hesse
Art;;This artist never completed his painting The Battle of Cascina. In another of his paintings, a bearded saint sits on a cloud holding his flayed skin, a self-portrait. Besides that depiction of Saint Bartholomew in The Last Judgment, this artist sculpted the tomb of Pope Julius II. Another of his works depicts the Libyan and Cumaean Sibyls, includes panels about the drunkenness of Noah and the temptation of Eve, and portrays a man with his arm outstretched, about to touch God's finger. For 10 points, name this Renaissaince painter of the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel.;; Michelangelo (Buonarroti)
United States History;;This battle included the participation of the First and Fifth West India Regiments, that included about a thousand black soldiers. Vice-Admiral Alexander Cochrane was in charge of the Royal Navy in the surrounding waters, and Thomas ap Catesby Jones delayed the British prior to it. It included participation from Baratarian pirates under Jean Laffite, and General Edward Pakenham died in this battle. For 10 points, name this 1815 battle that occurred after the signing of the Treaty of Ghent and made Andrew Jackson a national hero.;;(Battle of) New Orleans
Miscellaneous;;In computer science, a type of flip-flop named for this letter is often contrasted with the T type. In earth science, this letter followed by double prime refers to the layer located above the core-mantle boundary. In astronomy, the innermost of the rings of Saturn is named after this letter. In chemistry, transition metals often have their valence electrons located in these orbitals. For 10 points, identify this letter that also names a vitamin that is essential for calcium metabolism, a deficiency of which can lead to rickets.;;D
Literature;;The narrator of this poem yells "Stay where you are until our backs are turned!" after discussing a "spell to make them balance". After commenting "Spring is the mischief in me," the narrator contemplates asking if elves necessitate the title action because "there are no cows". The poem juxtaposes an area of "all pine" with an "apple orchard," and the narrator meets once a year to perform the title action in order to maintain the divide between the farms. For 10 points, name this poem which includes the line "Good fences make good neighbors," written by Robert Frost.;;Mending Wall
Chemistry;;This functional group is produced in a condensation reaction which sees the addition of an alcohol in the presence of a catalytic amount of a strong acid which is sometimes named for Speier. This type of compound is broken down by water in a reaction catalyzed by bases, the saponification reaction, and three of them are found on a glycerol backbone in fats. Consisting of a two R groups bonded to a carbon double bonded to an oxygen and single bonded to another oxygen, for 10 points, name this class of fruity smelling organic compounds.;;ester(s)
Pop Culture;;This band covered John Lennon's "Working Class Hero" for the compilation Instant Karma: Campaign to Save Darfur. One of its current members left The Lookouts to join this band after its original drummer, Joe Kriftmeyer, quit. Their first major-label album, Dookie, contains songs such as "Basket Case" and "Welcome to Paradise," and their most recent album describes St. Jimmy and Jesus of Suburbia. For 10 points, identify this band consisting of Mike Dirnt, Tre Cool, and Billie Joe Armstrong, whose songs include "Boulevard of Broken Dreams".;;Green Day
Physics;;One type of these is connected in reverse bias and conducts current above a certain breakdown point into the ground. In an ideal one of these, the current in terms of the voltage across them can be found using the Shockley equation. Besides the avalanche and Zener types, another kind can be used as capacitors whose capacitance depends on voltage, which are called varactors. For 10 points, name these two-electrode devices which traditionally only admit current in one direction, best known for a light- emitting variety.;;diode
World History;;The family curse of his mother Agariste was used against him by his enemies, and he unsuccessfully prosecuted Cimon for failing to conquer Macedonia. He led the campaign to expel barbarians from Gallipoli, and he was a pupil of Anaxagoras. He oversaw the moving of the Delian League to Athens, and his famous funeral oration may have been written by his mistress Aspasia. For 10 points, name this Athenian statesman of the fifth century BCE who oversaw the construction of the Acropolis.;;Pericles
Literature;;In this novel, Roth's fall to his death causes Red Valsen to refuse to continue climbing Mount Anoka. Another character is humiliated when he is forced to pick up a discarded cigarette from the floor by General Cummings. That character, Robert Hearn, is killed after unwittingly walking into an enemy trap when Sam Croft lies about Martinez' scouting report to regain command of the platoon on Anopopei. For 10 points, name this novel about an invasion of a fictional Pacific island, written by Norman Mailer.;;(The) Naked and the Dead
Chemistry;;One problem associated with this technique is known as tailing, but can be avoided by increasing the polarity of the solvent. The flash type of this technique uses air pressure, and the most common variety usually begins with spotting and is used to calculate the retardation factor, or the R-sub-f value. In general, this technique uses two phases, one of which is stationary and the other moving, in order to separate components of a mixture. For 10 points, name this laboratory technique, types of which include column and thin-layer.;;chromatography
Mythology;;Due to a tryst with the Oceanid Philyra, this figure was the father of the wise centaur Chiron, and he eventually became the ruler of the Islands of the Blest. In conspiracy with this god, Gaia commissioned the Telchines to make an adamantine sickle, which he used to castrate his father. He was made to vomit up Hestia, Demeter, and Hades, among others, after the substitution of a stone thwarted his plan to eat all of his children. For 10 points, name this husband of Rhea and leader of the Titans, whose rule was overthrown by the Olympian gods led by his son Zeus.;;Cronos|Kronos
United States History;;This man revolted against the mismanagement of Colonel George Crook, and he joined the Dutch Reformed Church in an attempt to "take the white man's road" but was expelled for gambling. Previously placed on a reservation known as "Hell's Forty Acres," and he surrendered at the Skeleton Canyon conference to General Nelson Miles under the condition that he be allowed to return to Arizona, but that promise was not kept. For 10 points, name this leader of the Chiricahua Apache whose name has become associated with parachuting.;;Geronimo
Music;;This man supplemented his income by teaching the piano, inventing a method that emphasized the freedom to flex the wrist and arm. His second piano sonata contains a passage known as his "Funeral March," and he created his Fantaisie-Impromptu three years after settling in Paris. He commented on the politics of his native country with the "Revolutionary Etude". For 10 points, name this composer of a piece designed to be "small" rather than performed in a short amount of time, the "Minute Waltz," whose mazurkas and polonaises honored his Polish homeland.;;(Frederic) (Francois) Chopin
Geography;;This city's suburbs include Southaven, Collierville, Olive Branch, and Horn Lake. It is the home of the Stax Records museum, and The Pyramid was once this city's premier sports venue. This city is located on the Chickasaw Bluffs and serves as the seat of Shelby County. Located along the Mississippi River, its metro area spans three states, including Arkansas and Mississippi. For 10 points, name this largest city of Tennessee, named for an ancient capital of Egypt.;;Memphis
Literature;;Hilda Wangel is the title character of an Ibsen play titled "The Lady from" this location, while Maurya and her children find out Michael has perished in a John Millington Synge work about "Riders to" this place. "The Alph" runs down to a "sunless" one in "Kubla Khan". Maud Brewster and Humphrey van Weyden are main characters in a novel about this type of "wolf". The favorite hangout of Manolin and a DiMaggio fan, Santiago, for 10 points, name this entity, paired with an "Old Man" in a book by Ernest Hemingway.;;Sea
Religion;;This religion's prayers are called "ardas", and its practitioners are required to have a positive attitude called "Chardi Kalah". A khanda is used to stir the amrit that is consumed during initiation into this religion and its members wear a kangha in their kesha and carry a ceremonial dagger called the kirpan, which are a part of the Five Ks. This religion's sacred text is called the Adi Granth, and is regarded as its current Guru after the death of Guru Gobind Singh. For 10 points, identify this religion, which was founded in the Punjab by Guru Nanak.;;Sikhism
Art;;One of his early paintings is a self-portrait depicting himself smoking a pipe. He became notorious for erotic works like Nude Reclining Woman and The Origin of the World. He sits in front of a nude woman in his painting of his studio, which depicts admirers like George Sand and Charles Baudelaire, and another of his paintings depicts four men carrying a coffin draped with a sheet while a priest officiates at a funeral. For 10 points, name this French realist painter of The Stone Breakers and Burial at Ornans.;;(Jean) (Desire) (Gustave) Courbet
World History;;Gnaeus Julius Agricola defeated the natives here at Mons Graupius in 84 CE, and the Beaker Folk migrated here around 1800 BCE. Somerled led a revolt against the Norse here, and the 1320 Declaration of Arbroath committed nobles to its independence. This region's King Aidan was supported by St. Columba, who converted its population, and its king was captured at the 1341 Battle of Neville's Cross. In 843, this region's King Kenneth I became the king of the Picts, and King David I united it in 1124. For 10 points, name this polity, the home to Robert the Bruce.;;Scotland
Chemistry;;A being able to perceive which particles are moving quickly and which are moving slowly would be able to open and close a gate in violation of this principle, but such a being would need to expend a great deal of energy to operate. The integral of dQ over T is set equal to the opposite of E in one formation of this principle. It cannot be violated by that demon, since the demon would eventually have to erase information, which irreversibly decreases information entropy. For 10 points, identify this basic thermodynamic principle, stating that entropy tends to increase.;;(2nd) (Second) Law of Thermodynamics
Literature;;He wrote about Colonel Burmin, who loves Marya, in "The Blizzard," while he wrote about the Cossack rebel Pougachev and Piotr Grineff 's love for Maria Ivanovna in his short story "The Captain's Daughter". He wrote about Parasha and her lover Evgeny, who is chased by a statue of Peter the Great, in "The Bronze Horseman". His title characters include the father of Feodor, who plans to kill Dmitri and becomes Tsar, and a man who duels with Vladimir Lensky and loves Tatyana. For 10 points, name this Russian poet of Boris Gudonov and Eugene Onegin.;;(Alexander) Pushkin
Geography;;The tallest building in this city has three chevrons in a hexagonal logo built on its roof and is called Tower 42. A seventy-two story building resembling a shard of glass is approved for construction in this city, which also contains the gherkin-shaped Swiss Re Building. This city has notable Georgian houses, and contains a column topped by a statue of Lord Nelson in Trafalgar Square. For 10 points, identify this city, which has many buildings designed by Christopher Wren, in addition to Big Ben and a notable Tower.;;London
Geography;;This country's president Hilla Limann was overthrown in a 1981 military coup by Jerry Rawlings. An empire centered in this country's city of Kumasi was founded by Osei Tutu and based on allegiance to the Golden Stool. It first gained independence with the support of the Convention People's Party in 1957, making it the first African country to become independent from England. For 10 points, name this country whose first president was Kwame Nkrumah, once known as the Gold Coast.;;Ghana|Gold Coast
Economics;;The demerit type of this concept produces a negative externality, while the private type has the characteristics of excludability and rivalry. The substitute type of this concept can decrease demand for other types of this, while the complement will increase demand. The ordinary type of this sees demand decrease with price, while the Veblen type of this is one for which price rises along with demand. Consumption of the public type of these does not decrease the supply. For 10 points, identify this economic concept, which refers to any item that producers produce.;;good(s)
Biology;;It was elucidated at Berkeley by exposing Chlorella pyrenoidosa to a radioactive substance and killing its cells with boiling methanol. Noted for using sedheptulose-1,7-bisphosphate phosphatase, this process uses five molecules of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate to regenerate the starting material. This process occurs in the stroma of chloroplasts, and is associated with the most abundant protein on Earth, rubisco. For 10 points, name this eponymous cycle that is part of the light independent reactions of photosynthesis.;;Calvin(-)(Benson) (Cycle)
Literature;;This man wrote about an event that happened "while birds of calm sit brooding on the charmed wave" in his poem "On the Morning of Christ's Nativity". He wrote a masque where the Lady is assaulted by the offspring of Bacchus and Circe, Comus, and the companion poems "L'Allegro" and "Il Penseroso". The drowning death of Edward King is remembered in this man's elegy "Lycidas," and he concluded "they also serve who only stand and wait" in his sonnet "When I Consider How My Light is Spent," which refers to his own blindness. For 10 points, name this Briton, whose longest poem was Paradise Lost.;;(John) Milton
Noncomputational Math;;For a symmetric group of degree n, this function gives the order of the permutation group, and the Pochammer symbol is a rising type of this function. The Taylor approximation for e to the x contains this function in the denominator of each term. One approximation of it often used to calculate entropy is named after Stirling, while it can be generalized to complex numbers using the gamma function. For 10 points, identify this function which for a natural number n gives the product of all natural numbers from 1 to n and is represented by an exclamation mark.;;factorial
Literature;;Two of the intended victims of this novel's title character, Mrs. Maylie and Mr. Brownlow, end up taking him in. He briefly finds work at the same workhouse that killed his mother, but he soon is employed by the undertaker Mr. Sowerbury. In this novel, Nancy is abused by the criminal Bill Sikes, and the title character joins a gang of pickpockets led by Fagin and the Artful Dodger. For 10 points, name this Charles Dickens novel about an orphan who leaves Mr. Bumble's orphanage after impertinently asking, "please, sir, I want some more".;;Oliver Twist
Physics;;Gouldsmit and Uhlenbeck explained the mathematical theory of this property, which was proposed to account for the doublet spectrum of alkali metals in the Zeeman effect. This property is described by symmetric matrices named for Pauli, and splitting of a beam of silver atoms in the presence of a magnetic field confirmed the quantization of it in the Stern-Gerlach experiment. Also known as intrinsic angular momentum, for 10 points, identify this fourth quantum number, which comes in multiples of one-half and is caused by the rotation of particles about their axes.;;spin
World History;;During this event, a group led by William Smith O'Brien attempted to overthrow the government, but disbanded after a skirmish at Widow McCormack's house. The lowest point during this event occurred during "Black '47," when the Soup Kitchens Act was withdrawn. Those affected by this event often attempted to flee via "coffin boats," and it was exacerbated by absentee landlords. For 10 points, name this 1845 to 1849 event caused by an infestation of the Phytophthora infestans blight, a mass starvation on the Emerald Isle.;;(Great) (Irish) (Potato) Famine
Literature;;In one of his stories, Sukey is given the last spot on an escape boat by the slave Cue. In another, John crosses the Ou-di-son River to investigate "The Place of the Gods," and discovers that the ancient gods are actually humans. In addition to "Freedom's a Hard Bought Thing" and "By the Waters of Babylon," this author included Simon Girty, Thomas Dale, and Edward Teach on a jury another character convinces to rule in favor of Jabez Stone in his case against Mr. Scratch. For 10 points, name this author of John Brown's Body and "The Devil and Daniel Webster".;;(Stephen) (Vincent) Benet
Sports;;This team's top prospects include Will Inman, who was traded from the Brewers. Former Dodgers GM Paul DePodesta blogs about his current involvement with this team. This team received two of its best players in a trade that saw Akinori Otsuka and Adam Eaton swapped to the Rangers for pitcher Chris Young and first baseman Adrian Gonzalez. Playing in pitcher-friendly Petco Park and featuring reigning NL Cy Young winner Jake Peavy, for 10 points, name this baseball franchise whose stars have included Trevor Hoffman and Tony Gwynn.;;(San Diego) Padres|San Diego
Biology;;In the 1970s, the Bilger report contradicted the NIH's wishes to disband all research related to this technology, and in the 1980s the NIH gave a grant to Australia's Graham Clark to further develop the multi-channel version of this device. It can be traced back to Volta's description of sensations evoked by electrically stimulating his ears, and current manufacturers include Med-El and Advanced Bionics. Sometimes called the "bionic ear", for 10 points, name this device that restores hearing to deaf people, an implant in the part of the ear containing hair cells.;;cochlear implant
Mythology;;These creatures frequently appear in the poems of an author named "He Who Has Put Evil in His Armpit". One kind of these beings could be brought back to life if it was struck again after a fatal blow. A particularly strong kind of them is made of smoke, while another kind have donkey's hooves and comprise the offspring of Iblis. Classes of these mortal but shape-shifting beings include the marid, the si'la, the ifrit, and the man-eating gul. For 10 points, name these demons of Arabian folklore, which might be found in magic lamps.;;Genie(s)|(D)jinn
Literature;;The first date that the protagonist of this novel remembers is the date of Charles Parnell's death. At the end of the novel, the protagonist asserts "old father, old artificer, stand me now and ever in good stead," and leaves Ireland because Emma calls him a heretic instead of a monk. The title character's life includes many epiphanies, which include Father Arnall's sermon about Hell, and the sight of a woman wading in the ocean, which causes him to devote himself to art. For 10 points, identify this novel about Stephen Daedalus, a work by James Joyce.;;(A) Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man
Geography;;This country controls the exclave of Bashkend in its eastern neighbor, while four spots within this country's borders, including Barkudarly, are controlled by that same neighbor. The east-central of this country includes the city of Zod but is dominated by Lake Sevan. Its southeast borders the noncontiguous Nakchivan area, while this country vies for influence in the secessionist Nagorno- Karabakh area of Azerbaijan. Also bordering Georgia, Iran, and Turkey, for 10 points, name this Caucasian republic whose capital is Yerevan.;;Armenia
Psychology;;A priest interviewed the subjects of this experiment, which ended after Gordon Bower asked the head researcher what its independent variable was. Half of its subjects were repeatedly made to perform pushups and jumping jacks, and wore a stocking cap over their hair, while the other half wore sunglasses and uniforms. It took place in 1971 in the basement of Jordan Hall, and assigned undergraduates the roles of guards or inmates. For 10 points, name this psychological experiment performed by Philip Zimbardo, which simulated a jail at a university in Palo Alto.;;Stanford Prison (experiment)
World History;;He oversaw the issuing of the Statute of Rhuddlan and tried to marry his son off to a Norwegian princess named Margaret for political reasons. Though he successfully occupied Snowdonia, his military accomplishments abroad were less glorious, with the failures that were the Eighth and Ninth Crusades, and he was not numbered the fourth, though he was the fourth English king of his name. Creating for his son the now-traditional title of Prince of Wales, for 10 points, identify this man whose military victories include the Battle of Falkirk against William Wallace.;;Edward I|Edward Longshanks;;Edward
Literature;;This author of the novels Lamiel and Lucien Leuwen wrote about Clelia Conti, who helps Gina Pietranera plan the escape of her nephew from the Farnese Tower, in a novel about Fabrizio del Dongo. The protagonist of another of his novels studies under Abbe Pirard at the Bescanon seminary before a letter by Madame de Renal ruins his chance to marry Mathilde de la Mole. For 10 points, name this author of The Charterhouse of Parma who wrote about Julien Sorel in The Red and the Black.;;Stendhal
Biology;;Diabetic patients taking metformin may see a buildup of this substance, and that buildup can inhibit phosphofructokinase. Cardiac muscle is highly permeable to this compound, where it is burned as a source of fuel. It can be converted to glucose in the liver by the Cori cycle. It is typically produced from pyruvate in the absence of sufficient oxygen. Common in sour or fermented dairy products like yogurt, for 10 points, identify this metabolic product, mirrored by ethanol in plants, the result of a fermentation pathway.;;Lactic Acid|Lactate
Literature;;He developed his ideas while working for the magistrate Piero Soderini; for example, he prevailed on Soderini to use a local militia instead of mercenaries for defense. One of his theoretical works shares a title with a similar book by Sun Tzu, The Art of War, and he also advocated the harsh defense of republican government in his Discourses in Livy. His magnum opus ends with a directive to free Italy from foreign troops, advises reliance on "virtù," and suggests that it is better to be feared than loved. For 10 points, name this author of The Prince.;;(Niccolo)  Machiavelli
Art;;This artist's early works include a realistic depiction of a hat-wearing woman named Rose Beuret. This artist partially defaced his mold for Saint John the Baptist Preaching to create his headless statue The Walking Man. He was accused of casting from a real body for his lifelike The Age of Bronze, while he depicted six dejected nobles with nooses around their necks in The Burghers of Calais. For 10 points, name this sculptor whose work The Gates of Hell includes his smaller sculptures The Kiss and The Thinker.;;(Auguste) Rodin
Literature;;In one of this author's novels, Rick Tucker tries to write a biography of an author with stigmata named Wilfred Barclay. In addition to The Paper Men, he described Marlan, the leader of a group of homo sapiens who displace Neanderthals in The Inheritors, and a sailor who dreams of surviving a shipwreck in Pincher Martin. In another of his books, a reprisal for leaving the fire untended leads to the breaking of glasses, and a "snake thing" is feared by Simon, Sam, and Eric. For 10 points, name this author who wrote of Roger and Jack killing Piggy in Lord of the Flies.;;(William) Golding
Chemistry;;The first step of the Leblanc process uses sodium chloride and this substance, a bath of which is used to make rayon filaments. A device known as a Glover tower is used in the lead chamber process to produce this compound, which can also be made in the contact process. Once known as oil of vitriol, it can be described as "fuming" and serve as the electrolyte in lead-acid storage batteries. For 10 points, name this very strong acid with formula H2SO4.;;Sulfuric (Acid)
World History;;One cause of this conflict was the deposition of Isabella II of Spain, which led to the candidacy of Leopold of Hohenzollern for the Spanish crown. One side was led by Helmuth von Moltke, who quickly won the battles of Mars-la-Tour and Gravelotte. After an armistice led to the establishment of the Third Republic, the Paris Commune threatened the negotiation of the Treaty of Frankfurt, which granted the victors Alsace and Lorraine. For 10 points, name this conflict, decided by the Battle of Sedan, in which Bismarck antagonized Napoleon III into war.;;Franco(-)Prussian (War)
Music;;This composer was the first to write a separate line for the contrabass in an orchestral piece, and his "Wellington's Victory" is also called the "Battle Symphony". He composed the Grosse Fuge as the original finale to his string quartet 13, and his symphony in F major includes a fifth movement depicting farmers rejoicing after a thunderstorm. His other symphonies include one whose fourth movement includes a setting of a Schiller poem, as well as one that begins with the notes G-G-G-E flat. For 10 points, name this composer of the Pastoral and Choral Symphonies.;;(Ludwig) (van) Beethoven
United States History;;In this case, the Court found that a power to create implies a power to preserve, and it noted that Congress might create a corporation if necessary to execute its powers. The court found that, "The Constitution, when thus adopted, was of complete obligation, and bound the state sovereignties,", and William Pinckney and Daniel Webster successfully argued this case. Including the finding that the power to tax implied the power to destroy, for 10 points, name this 1819 Supreme Court decision which held that a state could not tax the Bank of the United States.;;McCulloch (V(.)) (Maryland)
Art;;The background of this painting features rolling blue hills which are broken by a lone church spire. The companion to The Olive Trees, its left foreground depicts a writhing, flamelike cypress tree. It was created a year after a similar painting of the title location "over the Rhone". Painted in a hospital room overlooking the village of Saint-Remy, its upper right corner features a yellow crescent moon. It also features an undulating dark blue sky, which contains eleven of the title objects. For 10 points, name this 1889 painting of the evening sky by Vincent Van Gogh.;;Starry Night
Astronomy;;A dynamical one may be taken by first applying Kepler's third law and the mass-luminosity relation for a binary system. Spectral and luminosity class data are employed with a Hertzsprung-Russell diagram and the distance modulus in the spectroscopic type. Generally, it relies on taking two measurements separated by six months of a star's position, finding the angle that separates them, and relying on the small angle approximation. For 10 points, identify this method of distance determination, whose namesake unit is around three point two six lightyears.;;parallax
World History;;Geoffrey of Monmouth claimed that this man was the grandson of King Cole through his mother Helena, and Lorenzo Valla proved that this man's supposed grant to Pope Sylvester of the lands of Rome, this man's namesake donation, was a fraud. He ended the Tetrarchy at the battle of Milvean Bridge and issued the 313 AD edict of Milan. For 10 points, name this Roman Emperor, the first to convert to Christianity.;;Constantine (the Great|I|the First)