Literature;;One section of this work focuses on Judy Hathaway, who murdered her abusive husband but still buried him because she believed that every member of the titular group "deserves a place in the ground".  In another section of this work, Percival is stricken with male breast cancer, Anita finds that the candy of her childhood tastes wrong, and their child Bethany has a teacher named Mr. Methuselah who is convinced that pious people can live forever.  In the first story of this collection, Ruth finds an abandoned baby that she names after Aubrey's father Miles, but their marriage disintegrates.  In the last story of this collection, Anne Perry stays with railroad porter George Carter and weaves a wintertime scene wall-hanging.  In addition to those stories, "In the Blink of God's Eye" and "Tapestry," the title story tells of an investigator who longs to go to Alaska and discovers that Alona, and not a heroin dealer, killed her husband Ike.  Focusing on blacks in Washington D.C., for 10 points, name this short story collection, which like Lost in the City and The Known World, was written by Edward P. Jones.;;All Aunt Hagar's Children;;
Literature;;The speaker "longs to turn like the Eleusinian hierophant holding up a single ear of grain," in this author's poem "Cartographies of Silence". Implementing poetically New Wave film techniques  in such works as "Images for Godard," and "Shooting Script," this author won the Yale Series of Younger Poets award for her first poetry collection A Change of World. She suggests the need for a moratorium on using the phrase "the body" in Notes Towards a Politics of Location and argues in Blood, Bread and Poetry that compulsory heterosexuality produces myths like the vaginal orgasm. She describes "a man in terror of impotence or infertility, not knowing the difference," in "The Ninth Symphony of Beethoven Understood At Last As a Sexual Message," and along with collections like The Diamond Cutters and Snapshots of a Daughter-in-Law, for 10 points, name this poet and essayist of Diving into the Wreck.;;(Adrienne) Rich;;
Literature;;One of them has tears of wax flowing down to her neck as a representation of the mater dolorosa. One of them is  permanently scarred from seeing a pale blue envelope with money sticking out of it and also sings "Prenez Garde a Tchou Thin Tchou" before reminiscing about a man who followed her home from school. That man fires his secretary, with whom his wife runs away, and it is only after that secretary's death that trouble befalls them. One of them commits suicide using a revolver as he hides behind a tree, which is preceded by the death of another who drowns in a fountain. For 10 points, identify this motley crew, who try to describe their reality to the stage manager, and who interrupt a performance of Mixing it Up as described by Luigi Pirandello.;;Six Characters (in) (Search) (of) (an) (Author)|Sei Personaggi (in) (cerca) (d'autore);;
Literature;;At one point in this novel, Freddy Durkee, the old Mr. Mouse Man, tells you how he started earning $6500 a year by learning from Dr. Waldo F. Peet "how to entertain banquets" and "how to become a rational, powerful, and original thinker" in an ad for Shortcut Education Publications Company. Other commercials like "can you play a man's part"? and "finger print detectives wanted" entice Ted to take correspondence courses, which the title character rejects, though he had no idea they "rank right up with groceries and movies". To lawyer P. J. Maxwell, he offers to perjure himself to save his friend, who had shot his wife Zilla in the shoulder, and without this friend of his, whom he called Paulibus, his life was meaningless. After flirting with the Polish hairdresser Ida Putiak, he has an affair with Tanis Judique, but ends up reconciled with his wife Myra. For 10 points, name this titular friend of Paul Reisling, a real estate broker of Zenith in a novel by Sinclair Lewis.;;Babbitt;;
Literature;;In one work, this author describes a river which "scrambled like a goat / Dislodging stones" and writes of being "shut / With wads of sound into a sudden quiet".  Another of this author's works concludes that "Earth has rolled beneath her weight / The bones that cannot bear the light," and begins "Against the burly air I strode / Crying the miracles of God".  In addition to "God's Little Mountain" and "Genesis," this author wrote that "God is distant, difficult" in "Ovid in the Third Reich," and famously wrote of how "Dead cones upon the alder shook" in his poem "In Memory of Jane Fraser".  Harold Bloom has written that this author of the collections King Log and For the Unfallen is the foremost contemporary British poet.  For 10 points, name this author who wrote about Offa in The Mercian Hymns.;;(Geoffrey) Hill;;
Literature;;This novel's narrator was initially smitten with the daughter of a parson who extols the stomach-curing virtues of ale.  The title character's first lover found out her affections when she didn't wholly erase numerous sketches of him she had done on the backs of her canvasses.  The narrator of this work gives a young boy a puppy sired by his playful dog Sancho, and a particularly ostentatious gift given in this work is an illustrated copy of Walter Scott's Marmion.  Near the end of this novel, the narrator rushes to a nearby town in an attempt to stop a marriage, but he soon realizes that his friend and a blonde named Esther are the ones tying the knot.  The miscreant Grimsby and the reformed Hattersley are two of the men in this novel, which also features the adulterous Lady Lowbrough and the meek Millicent Hargrave.  The title character is sheltered by her brother Mr. Lawrence after she marries the ne'er-do-well Arthur Huntingdon.  Framed as a series of letters from Gilbert Markham, for 10 points, name this novel whose title boarder is Heather Graham, by Anne Bronte.;;(The) Tenant of Wildfell Hall;;
Literature;;One character in this work signs away his canaries, cockatoo, and mice to the Zoological Gardens before leaving London and introducing the protagonist to the agent Monsieur Rubelle. That character goes by the titles of "Perpetual Arch-Master of the Rosicrucian Masons of Mesopotamia" as well as "Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Brazen Crown," and is found in a morgue in Paris at the end of this novel. Count Fosco conspires with Percival Glyde to substitute Laura Fairlie for his hysterical wife in the asylum in Limmeridge, but this plot is discovered by her sister Marian Halcombe and her art tutor Walter Hartright. For 10 points, name this novel about the missing titular female Anne Catherick, by Wilkie Collins.;;(The) Woman in White;;
Literature;;One character in this work exclaims that "the worst sin towards our fellow creatures is not to hate them, but to be indifferent to them," calling it "the essence of inhumanity". That character is called away by Christy, because his mom Annie is ill after leaving her home for Uncle Titus's. On conditions that the old horse Jim lives in clover and Christy be given a china peacock for his marriage to Sarah Wilkins, the protagonist is given control of the estate, and he soon bars anyone from insulting the illegitimate Essie. Noting that "I should never dream of hanging any gentleman by an American clock," Gentleman Johnny releases the protagonist, who is being hanged in place of Pastor Anderson. For 10 points, name this play about the return to Westerbridge upon the death of Timothy of Dick Dudgeon, an American anti-religious follower created by George Bernard Shaw.;;(The) Devil's Disciple;;
Literature;;In the third part of this work, the author is inducted into the Arcadian Society and offers a discussion of Philip Neri, the "humorous saint".  That section also includes letters from Wilhelm Tischbein to the author, while the book incorporates a portion of the essay "On the Creative Imitation of Beauty" by Karl Moritz.  The first volume of this work, which concludes with the author's departure in 1787, was published in 1816, while later volumes were originally published under the title "From My Life," as was the author's autobiography, which is better known as Poetry and Truth.  The author used the pseudonym Filippo Miller while living in Rome, where he stayed after hastily departing his lover Charlotte von Stein and his employer, Duke Carl August of Weimar.  For 10 points, name this account of a sojourn to such places as Naples and Venice, a work by Goethe.;;Italian Journey|Italienische Reise;;
Literature;;The protagonist of this work crosses a mountain pass on a narrow bridge which deters soldiers from pursuing her, and towards this play's end, the protagonist is fortuitously divorced from her husband, Jussup. The protagonist is married off to Jussup by her brother Lavrenti, and on her wedding day, she is shown a Persian rug that returning soldiers brought with them, which reminds her of her beloved Simon Shashava. Act three of this play describes how a character who let the Grand Duke of Grusinia escape becomes a judge, and in it's final act settles a dispute between Natella Abashwili over the identity of Michael's mother. For 10 points, identify this play in which Azdak awards Michael to Grusha after she refuses to pull Michael out of the title region, a play by Bertold Brecht.;;(The) Caucasian Chalk Circle;;
Literature;;One character in this work describes how his boss arranges his work schedule to "keep two stenographers busy," and the protagonist's father intends that character to be a role model. The protagonist is disgusted by pictures of George Washington and John Calvin in his bedroom, and while entering his house through a basement window he wonders what would happen if his father mistook him for a robber. The title character works as an usher in the Carnegie Hall from which he's fired after his father learns of his poor performance in school. The title character defrauds Denny & Carson's firm of $2000, and spends it all in New York, and when the scandal is exposed, resolves to kill himself. For 10 points, identify this short story whose title character commits suicide by jumping before a train, written by Willa Cather.;;(")Paul's Case(");;
Literature;;Act one of this work is set exactly 10 years after the "introductory scene", where the protagonist is given a set of pearls and Greek Cameos as a gift. Earlier, a character is taken to a dissection room by Marius, and a central character remarks that Sulla was a Roman general and not Marius' lover. The activity of the warship Ultimus surprises the protagonist, who then reads of a revolution started by the title characters. Towards the end of this work, a character made to resemble the protagonist is renamed Eve, and Primus is renamed Adam by Alquist, who laments the loss of Dr. Gall, Hallemeier, Fabry, and Busman. The title characters declare their goal to exterminate mankind before they realize the recipe for their creation is lost. For 10 points, identify this play about an enterprise managed by Harry Domin where Helena Glory tries to impart emotions to some cheap, mechanized workers, written by Karel Capek.;;R. U. R.|Rossum's Universal Robots;;
Literature;;This man is not aroused by a thought like a twenty-year-old, and not by the touch of his skin like a forty-year-old, but is most susceptible to a silhouette-like woman.  This failed author of the proposed work "Terrors of an Ant Hell" has a dream in which he rides a giant chopstick into a barracks where a group is playing cards, only to find that the card he is dealt is actually a letter that causes his fingers to bleed.  He recalls a conversation about education with a man who resembles a Mobius strip and regrets leaving a stamped and addressed breakup letter in his trash can.  He feigns a dislocated spine early on in the novel in which he appears, and later becomes obsessed with designing a device to trap fresh water. Early on, he is mistaken for an artist when he is seen walking from a train station with his entomologist's kit.  For 10 points, name this father of an extra-uterine child who is stuck with the titleWoman in the Dunes in a Kobo Abe work.;;Niki|Junpei;;
Literature;;The protagonist of one section of this work first realizes that he is handsome when he looks in a hotel-room mirror, which leads to the realization that his $3.75 per week salary is alienating him in Washington DC.  That section of this work ends with the protagonist Santosh fretting over Priya's suggest that he marry a black woman to gain citizenship.  In the second section of this work, the narrator loses his money on a curry shop after he pays for Dayo's education in London.  The title story of this work ends with Luke laughing mercilessly after the protagonist is beaten by the government he serves.  In addition to the stories "One Out of Many" and "Tell Me Who to Kill," the title story of this work sees a gay man named Bobby take a long car trip with Linda through the fictional nation of the Southern Collectorate.  For 10 points, name this work consisting of three short stories, a Booker-winner by V.S. Naipaul.;;In a Free State;;
Literature;;A fictional review of this person's work claims that "One feels that one is listening to a thought-tormented music," and is praised by Miss Ivors.  A. S. Byatt's Possession fictionalizes this person as Randolph Ash.  Andrew Crocker-Harris receives this author's translation of an Aeschylus play as a gift from Taplow in Terence Rattigan's play about this author's namesake "Version".  This man is told to "Hang it all" at the beginning of Canto II by Ezra Pound, and Gabriel Conroy debates whether or not quoting this man's poetry would be over his listeners' heads in Joyce's "The Dead".  The central male character in Virginia Woolf's Flush, for 10 points, name this poet whose wife counted the ways that she loved him in poem 43 of Sonnets from the Portuguese.;;R(obert) Browning;;
Literature;;A speaker in this poem is scornfully laughed at when he warns, "Last night the moon had a golden ring, And to-night no moon we see!" The young daughter initially hears the sounds of church-bells but that image is contrasted sharply in the next stanza by the sounds of guns. Though her father "answered never a word," as he was a frozen corpse, she "clasped her hands" and thought of Christ "who stilled the wave, on the Lake of Galilee".  The waves during the title event are described as "white and fleecy" and "looked like soft carded wool;" however, the "cruel rocks gored her side like the horns of an angry bull". Though it actually took place near Gloucester instead of on "the reef of Norman's Woe," for 10 points, name this poem by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow about the destruction of the titular schooner, named after the Greek personification of the evening star.;;(")Wreck of the Hesperus(");;
Literature;;The murdered man at the center of Maryse Conde's Crossing the Mangrove Swamp is first encountered in this condition.  One character in this state is sought by a being who remembers a pudding-faced, red-haired fatty under an April or May sky, and is finally found by the sack-toting Bom.  In addition to Pim in Beckett's Comment c'est, or How It Is, a character in this state is encountered by Peyalo, and is struggling to free himself but is impeded by his gigantic appendages at the beginning of Garcia Marquez's "A Very Old Man With Enormous Wings".  Yet another character in this condition calls out to a being who "dwelleth i' the cold o' the moon" while "Prosper and Miranda sleep".  For 10 points, name this dismal state of the narrator in Browning's Caliban Upon Setebos.;;(lying) face-down in the mud;;
Literature;;One character gets interrupted as he is speaking of an old man who falls down stairs with a bureau, and that interruption causes two Mexicans to leave the building. One character in this work wears a "maroon colored flannel shirt," and a dog walks "diagonally away" at that character's sight. The titular character contemplates wood that gleams like the "surface of a pool of oil". Two characters in this work are oppressed by a black porter while on the "great Pullman," but hardly notice. A drummer from out of town occupies the bar of the "Weary Gentleman" along with the bartender and three Texans who supposedly don't talk. Jack Potter is the sheriff of the titular town and surprises Scratchy Wilson with his wife after he returns from San Antonio in, for 10 points, which short story by Stephen Crane?;;(The) Bride Comes to Yellow Sky;;
Literature;;This work opens with the protagonist downing eleven pints of beer to win a competition at the White Horse Club.  After the protagonist's married lover induces a miscarriage by taking a scorching hot bath and drinking lots of gin, the protagonist ventures to the Peach Tree, where he begins a new affair.  At the end of this novel, the protagonist resolves to marry the teen-aged Doreen Greatton after suffering a beat-down from Bill, who returns from Germany to find that his wife Winnie has cuckholded him.  The bicycle-factory-worker protagonist also carries on an affair with Winnie's sister, Brenda.  For 10 points, name this novel, whose title time periods comprise Arthur Seaton's "52 holidays of the year," an Alan Sillitoe tome whose title probably doesn't refer to Jonathan Magin's ideal time to run a literature tournament.;;Saturday Night and Sunday Morning;;
Literature;;The protagonist of this novel sees again Fred Paramore, who always sat close to him in school on account of their alphabetically close last names. When Muriel Kane complains that she couldn't put ideas down on paper, Dick likens it to Goliath knowing how David felt, but not being able to express himself. A feigned suicide brings the protagonist back to Dorothy Raycroft, whom he had met while in the army at Camp Hooker, and who as Dot, later shows up to the protagonist's doorsteps, only to be beaten back by a chair. The winning of a case against Edward Shuttleworth allows the couple to travel with old Adam's money, but Anthony has regressed to be a child. For 10 points, name this novel about Gloria Gilbert and Anthony Patch, by F. Scott Fitzgerald.;;(The) Beautiful and Damned;;
Literature;;At the end of this work, the central locale is much the same, except for a picture of Nebuchadnezzar and a sign that says "Christ is in the head".  One character is saved from signing a restitution contract when his wife Jezebel enters with a pistol.  The central family proudly displays their deed of land ownership on the wall, and is caught up in a ploy to turn their property into an insecticide factory.  Gicaamba vows to reclaim land from foreign ownership at the end of this play, which sees Kiguunda and Wangeci's daughter Gathoni impregnated by John, whose father Ahab is trying to get 1.5 acres of land.  This play got its principal author in so much trouble that he was sent to prison, where he wrote Devil on the Cross on toilet paper.  For 10 points, name this play by the two Ngugis, wa Thirii and Wa Thiongo, about failed nuptials.;;I Will Marry When I Want;;
Literature;;The speaker of this poem promises to "remember friends" "Who shared the work with God" and its penultimate lines suggests the readers to "Be you the men you've been". Charles Walcutt described this poem as a "satire on the hypocrisy of empire" as it describes "Nile spilling his overflow beside the Severn's dead". Its author's sister noted that the author loved watching bonfires, which are described in it's opening line, "From Clee to Heaven the beacon burns". Throughout this poem, the speaker praises the dead soldiers of the Fifty third Regiment, and in its final stanzas, assures that "God will save the queen". For 10 points, identify this poem whose title year marks the 50th year of Queen Victoria's reign, the first poem from Housman's A Shropshire Lad.;;(")1887(");;
Literature;;The narrator of this novel learns from Alec Carmichael that he became a knight mostly because the young Jew Abraham, his superior, decided to leave for Alexandria, making a "hash of life". Captain Rene Brunot made a garden out of Paumotus, and Captain Nichols survived with the protagonist by staying at Chick's Head at Marseilles. When the narrator returns from the continent with bad news, Colonel MacAndrew claims that the hero is still with some woman living an extravagant life in Paris. After the death of Blanche Stroeve, the protagonist wanders until at Papeete, Tiare Johnson hooks him up with Ata. For 10 points, name this novel about the stock-broker turned painter Charles Strickland, a pseudo-biography of Paul Gauguin by Somerset Maugham.;;(The) Moon and Sixpence;;
Literature;;The narrator of this work describes strained relations between the protagonists parents, and questions the viewpoint of a young maid who claims that she would have made a better wife. Another character sends home three letters which quotes a manual for soldiers' conduct before facing a firing squad for attempting to sell anti-aircraft guns to Danes. The protagonist rents out her apartment for cheap, and gets pregnant with the baby of a Turkish tenant, though earlier she had a child with a Soviet worker named Boris. The narrator interviews people such as Marja van Doorn and Lotte Hoyser while characterizing the protagonist who befriends Sister Rahel at boarding school, and has mystical affinity for her excretory functions. For 10 points, identify this novel about Leni Pfeiffer by Heinrich Boll.;;Group Portrait With Lady|Gruppenbild mit Dame;;
Literature;;At one point in this story, the protagonist is annoyed by his friend's nonsensical response of "the sturgeon was just a leetel off". The protagonist is unable to remember the name of the second of the title figures after commenting that the nails on the fence of his lover's house must make the house unbearable for its residents. The protagonist frequently visits Oreanda with his lover, but meets the lover again at a performance of The Geisha. That lover, who is married to von Dideritz, continually questions the protagonist about his respect for her and considers herself "fallen" after their meeting Yalta, and at this story's very end both lament the miserable double lives they have been leading. For 10 points, identify this short story about Gurov's love Anna Sergeyevna, the owner of a Pomeranian, written by Anton Chekhov.;;("The) Lady With the Lapdog(")|("The) Lady with the Dog(")|(")Dama s Sobachkoy(");;
Literature;;The narrator of this story describes how people who watch plays on second nights want "rather to see plays than to be seen themselves", and also mentions how the second title character was ridiculed for having the first name "Ladbroke". The first title character, though not Dan Passner, remarks that his "hawk-like profile" gives him "sterner stuff" when he is captured by Pope Julius II's guards. That section is a play appearing in this work, and sees the first title character speak to Florentine cobblers about the ill will of Lorenzo di Medici and his attempted murder by Lucrezia Borgia. This work is so named because the second title character sought to write a play about Sardanapalus but instead came across the first title character in an encyclopedia. For 10 points, identify this short story, the last one appearing in Seven Men by Max Beerbohm.;;'Savonarola' Brown;;
Literature;;In one of this man's works, Therese pricks herself with the title object given to her by her Florentine lover Dechartre, and another of his works featuring conversations on contemporary life between the title character and Jacque Tournebroche, who also appear in his earlier novel The Queen Pedauque. Another of his novels sees Julein Sariette go crazy after the books in d'Esparvieu's library are ransacked, while Maurice Brotteaux is senteced to death by the Evariste Gamelin who is a fervent Jacobin in another novel. In addition to Revolt of the Angels and The Gods are Athirst, he also wrote about a character who arranges a marriage between Henri Gelis and Jeanne Alexandre after helping Jeanne escape from Maitre Mouche's institute, and also described a land inhabited by Oberosia and Kraken visited by Mael who baptizes the titular birds. For 10 points, identify this author of The Crime of Sylvester Bonnard and Penguin Island.;;(Anatole) France;;
Literature;;John Cage's "Cello with Melody-driven electronics" made the title objects "shed black light" in his poem "Monet's Lilies Shuddering" and poem describing "a Pacific tidal wave a mile high" which sweeps over Los Angeles as "a washed land awakens to wilderness" names his collection Wild Dreams of a New Beginning. He also wrote a novel whose protagonist meets La Bella Muchacha before a train ride to Rome, but whose travels end in Paris where he sees his obituary in a newspaper in the novel Her. His poetry notes that at the "pennycandystore" he first fell in love with "unreality," and another poem of his mentions a woman who quotes Cocteau and has a "face that darkness could kill".  His novels include The Mexican Night and the Richard-Nixon-bashing Tyrannus Nix, while a character based on him invites Jack Duluoz to his cabin in Big Sur, and is named Lorenzo Monsanto. The author of the collection Pictures of a Gone World, for 10 points, name this poet who saw "suffering humanity" in "Goya's greatest scenes" in his A Coney Island of the Mind.;;(Lawrence) Ferlinghetti;;
Literature;;At the end of this novel, the protagonist notes that a white rainbow is no good, and wishes that a multi-colored rainbow will come to save the central female.  The protagonist recalls that in his youth, people used call skulls "the unsheltered ones" after he is repeatedly forced to serve as an administer of last rites and the "Sermon on Mortality".  The protagonist and his two friends Shokichi and Asijiro are tired of being called lazy for enjoying fishing, so they order carp fry and dig a koi pond to occupy their time.  This novel purports to be the protagonist's transcribed diary for his hometown library.  Shigeku and Shigematsu are the guardians of Yasuko, who eventually contracts radiation sickness.  For 10 points, name this novel about the titular precipitation which is fallout from the Hiroshima atomic bomb, written by Matsuji Ibuse.;;Black Rain|Kuroi Ame;;
Literature;;One of this author's poems wonders "Did your eyes realize that you yourself are the earth"? He experimented with new forms in the 1977 collection Singular in Plural Form, and the title character of another poem is compared to "Sadness around which the branches burgeon," in "A Mirror to Khalida". His doctoral dissertation was on The Static and Dynamic in Arabic Culture, and he founded the avant-garde magazine Mawaqif in 1968 and the poetry journal Shir with Yusuf Al-Khal. After visiting the United States, he wrote a poem describing "A woman, a statue of a woman lifting in one hand a rag called liberty by a document called history," in "A Grave for New York". He describes Arabic poetry as pluralistic, to the point of self-contradiction in his critical work Introduction to Arab Poetics. Winner of the Bjornson Prize in 2007 and perennial Nobel contender, for 10 points, name this Syrian poet and essayist author of Songs of Mihyar the Damascene whose pen name is reminiscent of a Greek deity.;;Adonis|Adunis|(Ali) (Ahmad) (Said) Asbar;;
Literature;;One work in this language claims that saying a phrase beginning "Victory-wives! sit" will quell a swarm of bees.  Another work in this language offers "Woe to the one / who must wait with longing for a loved one" and is called "The Wife's Lament".  One work in this language uses the ambiguous word "overmod" to describe the decision to allow an enemy to cross an isthmus.  Another poem in this language notes that the "Holy Creator / first made heaven as a roof," and its composer was discovered by St. Hilda.  Another poem composed in this language tells of a character who won a swimming contest against Breca.  The texts of this language are primarily found in the Vercelli Book, the Cotton Vitellius, and the Book of Exeter.  Used to write The Battle of Maldon and Caedmon's Hymn, for 10 points, name this language that was used to compose a poem about killing Grendel, Beowulf.;;Old English|Anglo-Saxon;;English
Literature;;The narrator of this poem asks if "barbers have lived in vain/That not one curl in nature has survived"? while in a later section, he declares that he is a yeoman that knows "no magic trees, not balmy boughs". The narrator asks "Where shall I find Bravura adequate to this great hymn"? and earlier states that "The honey of heaven may or may not come, But that of earth both comes and goes at once". The fifth part of this poem begins by describing a "furious star" that was set for the "fiery boys" and the "sweet smelling virgins close to them," while the second section of this poem describes a "Red bird that flies across the golden floor. The first section of this poem describes what the narrator said to "Mother of Heaven, regina of the clouds," and the narrator declares that he wishes that me might be a "thinking stone". For 10 points, name this poem by Wallace Stevens.;;(Le) Monocle de Mon Oncle;;
Literature;;E.T. Aylward and James Iffland have recently tried to resurrect this work's reputation.  Late in it, its hero models his tactics on Belianis of Greece, having earlier encountered the Arch-Banterer of the Indies.  After fighting the Giant Bramarbas Ironsides in Cyprus, that protagonist disenchants and courts the Infanta Barberina. Another work, though, compares its author to a man who anally inflates dogs and refutes the claim that he had referenced Lope de Vega.  Also in that other work, it is read at a tavern by Jeronimo and Juan, who learn it inaccurately calls Teresa "Mari Gutierrez" from its hero, who also refutes its claim that he has become disenamored with the beloved identified by Cide Hamete Benengeli.  For 10 points, name this work by Alonso Fernandez de Avellaneda, an illegitimate continuation of the adventures of several La Manchans created by Miguel de Cervantes.;;(The) false (Second) (Volume) (of) (the) (Ingenious) (Gentleman) (Don) Quixote (of) (La) (Mancha);;
Literature;;One of the central families of this novel reappeared in Their Silver Wedding Journey.  At the end of this novel, we learn that the illustrator Alma does not return the interest of Kendrick, and that Margaret Vance, who had talked to the victim of a shooting, became a nun. A man who had lost a hand in the Civil War gets into a political clash with his employer, who then fires that German socialist, Henry Lindau. That employer also forbids his daughter Christine to see the art editor Angus Beaton, but later scratches his face and goes off to Europe after the death of her brother Conrad, who was shot by a stray bullet while trying to keep peace at a New York streetcar strike. Fulkerson convinces Basil March to become editor of the magazine Every Other Week, which is published by a nouveau riche who gained a pile of cash from natural gas, Mr. Dryfoos. For 10 points, name this novel by William Dean Howells about the risks that often come with change.;;(A) Hazard of New Fortunes;;
Literature;;In one revelation in this work, law is equated to "the very conscience of humanity" in a letter written by a character who has moved from Ohio with Miriam. Osgood preaches to the old feeble-minded Harwick in this novel, and was one of the seven pointed out by Davies when asked by Risley after the climactic event. After bungling the operation, Gerald returns home to blame his dad for his desire for "power and cruelty," and both him and an ex-Confederate general commit suicide. Ma Grier and Farnley volunteered to undertake the operation, which left the gambling Mexican and Donald Martin dead. The latter had come near to Pike's Hole possessing cattle believed to be those of Larry Kinkaid, and as a result is hanged by a group led by deputy sheriff Mapes. For 10 points, name this novel about a wrongful lynching in Nevada by Walter van Tilburg Clark.;;(The) Ox-Bow Incident;;
Literature;;John Tranter rewrote this work by changing the last word in the title and keeping all of the line-ending words. The speaker chides those who admire authors for "calling / The sun the sun" when those poets are wary of statues who don't believe their "antimythological myths," before describing urchins who pursue a scientist down a tiled colonnade. The speaker claims that the best and the worst don't stay where he is, alluding to Goebbels in the line about "Intendant Caesars" leaving, "slamming the door," while noting that the "really reckless" hear the "older colder...oceanic whisper" that promises that there is no love, only "various envies". This poem describes the title substance's "rounded slopes" and its ability to create "A secret system of caves and conduits" in the first stanza, while the last line notes that the speaker's imagination of "faultless love / Or the life to come" causes him to hear underground streams and think of a landscape made of the titular material. For 10 points, name this poem that describes a substance that "dissolves in water," a work about a type of rock by W.H. Auden.;;In Praise of Limestone;;
Literature;;The narrator of this novel learns that he will "speak clear" to posterity from a sibyl in Cumae, and is later forbidden from leaving his residence because he fainted at a sword fight.  The title character 's grandmother forces him to marry Urgulalnilla, and later urges a divorce and new marriage with Aelia.  This work was continued in a 1934 novel about the title character "The God," and it documents various political assassinations ordered by the title character's grandmother Livia.  Near the end of this novel, the title character marries Messalina, and his friend Calpurnia is exiled.  Ending with the murder of Caligula and the title character's ascent to power, for 10 points, name this novel about a Roman emperor, by Robert Graves.;;I, Claudius;;
Literature;;One character in this play calls another "as mysterious as The Man in the Iron Mask," and earlier imagines people standing over his tomb exclaiming that he's not as good as Ivan Turgenev. Reenacting a low octave "Bravo Silva," Shamrayev tries to ingratiate himself with the aforementioned character, who later decides to write a story about a girl who is destroyed by a man out of idleness. The object of Masha's affections meets his own love interest at the end, when that woman recites the line "all humans, beasts, lions, and eagles," from an earlier staged dream play. Irina Arkadina takes her lover, the writer Trigorin away, but the wanna-be actress Nina Zarachnaya becomes his mistress in Moscow before he abandons her after the birth of a baby. Ending with the suicide of Konstantin Treplev, for 10 points, name this Anton Chekhov play where Kostya brings the titular bird to Nina.;;Chayka(;)|(The) Seagull;;
Literature;;The second section of this work ends with the protagonist being taken to a cave where bears were once worshiped.  The hero of one of the central characters was Edward VIII, and that character is later found dead in Lake Huron with a rock in his mouth, a death caused by "everyone," according to the "brazen head of Francis Bacon".  One character was abducted by Willard, and takes the pseudonyms of Cass Fletcher, Jules Le Grande, and Mungo Fetch before settling on a moniker that means "Great Hard Iron One".  The lives of two characters become intertwined when one ducks away from a rock-laden snowball, which causes Mary Dempster to give birth prematurely. Featuring characters like Boy and David Stauton, the magician Magnus Eisengrim, and Dunstan Ramsay, for 10 points, name this novel sequence which encompasses Fifth Business, The Manticore, and The World of Wonders, the magnum opus of Robertson Davies.;;(the) Deptford (Trilogy);;
Literature;;One character in this work comments on Kirila Selifanitch's ill advised plans to perform eye surgery on his peasants, and the narrator describes another character's inability to answer any questions on his undergraduate exams. In addition to Lupihin and Vointsin, this work's title character quotes a Schiller verse and criticizes intellectual circles for destroying "all intellectual development". The title character describes his travels through Germany and his study of Hegel's philosophy, and also marries the country girl Sofya, but does not know if he loved her even though she is dead. Much of this short story takes place as a monologue by the title character who is unable to sleep after at a bachelor party organized by Alexander Mihalitch. A police officer jeers at the title character for comparing himself to a political candidate at the end of this work, in which Vassily Vassilievitch describe his lack of originality to the narrator. For 10 points, identify this short story found in Sportsmans Sketches, whose title refers to a Shakespearean character by Turgenev.;;Hamlet (of) (the) Shchigrovsky District|Hamlet (of) (the) Shchigrovsky Province|Hamlet (of) (the) Shchigrovsky County|Hamlet (of) Shtchigri Province|Hamlet (of) Shtchigri District|Hamlet (of) Shtchigri County;;
Literature;;This work's central character attempts to view things dispassionately until a rainstorm makes him feel vulgar, and he ventures soaked to a teahouse.  A landscape painting by the protagonist is rejected as "cramped" by a woman who had earlier hilariously revised some haikus that were written about her.  The protagonist is bathing and dreaming of painting Ophelia drowning when the central female appears in a flash, naked, and he only assents to paint that character drowning when she makes a "compassionate" face after seeing her ex-husband on a Manchuria-bound train.  Kyuichi and the central female's ex-husband go off to fight in the Russo-Japanese war in, for 10 points, this novel about the unnamed narrator's relationship with O-Nami Shioda, a work by Natsume Soseki.;;(The) Three-Cornered World|Kusamakura(;)|Unhuman Tour;;
Literature;;This author wrote an early play in which two war veterans plan their own funeral, then die when forced to sleep on park benches and come back as ghosts to praise themselves.  His early poetry is collected in Bits of Debris, and his critically acclaimed works include the previously described We Shall Sing for the Fatherland and The Hill.  He wrote about Niki, who takes her daughter Popi with her when she poses for Christian-inspired religious paintings done by Father Frans Claerhout, in his novel The Madonna of Excelsior.  This author wrote about the town of Qolorha-by-Sea, which is rife with conflict between Believers and Unbelievers of the Xhosa prophetess Nongqawuse, in his novel The Heart of Redness.  For 10 points, name this author who wrote about Toloki, a professional mourner, in Ways of Dying, a noted South African author.;;(Zakes) Mda|(Zanemvula) (Kizito) (Gatyena) Mda;;
Literature;;The second-to-last of these claims that the novel is "the most independent, most elastic, most prodigious of literary forms". In one of them, the author admits his "predilection for poor sensitive gentlemen," and another describes a Christmas meeting at Edward Benson's mansion where it is agreed that stories of the supernatural have been "washed by a laboratory tap".  Collected into The Art of the Novel with the author's other essay "The Art of Fiction," they claim that an author must seek characters who are the best "reflectors" for the subject, while secondary characters are, like party attendants, are only part of the "treatment," such as Henrietta Stackpole.  For 10 points, name these landmark essays in novel theory, appended to the New York Edition of their author's complete works, which include In the Cage, The Spoils of Poynton, and The Ambassadors.;;(The) Prefaces (to) (the) (New) (York) (Edition) (of) (the) (Complete) (Works) (of) H(enry) James;;
Literature;;John Lahr's Coward the Playwright discusses Blithe Spirit in a chapter about "Ghosts" in a "Fun" type of this entity.  A Jean Rhys short story about the hospitalized Inez and her ward-mates Madame Tavernier and Mrs. Murphy is titled "Outside" one of these entities.  In Butler's Erewhon, a chapter titled the "Book of" these entities tells how they have been outlawed because a scientist 200 years before claimed that they would become the dominant beings on earth.  Kuno and Vashti live below the earth's surface in a work about one of these that "Stops" by E.M. Forster, while Cocteau's modernization of the Oedipus story is titled after an "Infernal" one.  It is Frankie's nickname in Algren's The Man with the Golden Arm, and Shelly Levene's nickname in Glengarry, Glen Ross.  For 10 points, name this type of device, an "Adding" type of which replaces Mr. Zero in an Edgar Rice play.;;machine(s);;
Literature;;One character in one of his plays tries to see liaisons behind the Hotel Algiers, and later talks to Cleo about his "second-hand life, dedicated to trifles and troubles". In addition to writing Rocket to the Moon, this author also wrote a play which begins with Jerry Wilenski and his wife listening to an old Polish song, Clash by Night. This playwright of The Country Girl and The Big Knife wrote a work that centers around a conflict between Japeth and Noah, while in another of his plays, Gus find out that Sam Katz has embezzled much of Leo Gordon's money. That play, Paradise Lost, was written by this American who also wrote of Joe Bonaparte's transformation into a boxer in Golden Boy. For 10 points, name this playwright who wrote of a taxi company strike in Waiting for Lefty.;;(Clifford) Odets;;
Literature;;At one point in this novel, a corpulent duchess who reminds the protagonist of a fat lady at a fair tells him that she has heard a legend that he has founded a city ten years ago, and granted land for free to all newcomers who pledged to never smoke cigars. After Henri-Urbain tells one character about the state of affairs, she tells the protagonist to cherish her memory in his dreams and stays at the convent. Armand Nioche needs money to pay his daughter's dowry, but that daughter, a painter named Noemie, is interested in love, and causes a duel to occur in which Valentin dies. Mrs. Bread reveals to the titular character the existence of a letter that implicates Madame de Bellegarde in the death of her husband, but nevertheless, Claire de Cintre refuses to go with her love across the Atlantic. For 10 points, name this work about the search of the rich Christopher Newman for a continental wife, by Henry James.;;(The) American;;
Literature;;One section of this work features several riffs on the phrase "I'm sorry," while another section focuses on a character who had "steel rods" inside her, a euphemism for abortion.  In another section of this work, Beau Willie Brown holds Crystal's children out of a window in an attempt to force her to marry him.  During the first section of this work, the primary characters dance "let your backbone slip" and play freeze tag.  One character runs away with Toussaint Jones in this work, and she chants "I found God in myself/...and I loved her fiercely" during the last section, "A laying on of hands".  Featuring the ladies in red, orange, yellow, green, blue, purple, and brown, for 10 points, name this play that consists of twenty "choreopoems," a work by Ntozake Shange.;;For Colored Girls (Who) (Have) (Considered) (Suicide/When) (the) (Rainbow) (is) (Enuf);;
Literature;;This work's protagonist is told an eccentric story with the moral "to the victor, the potatoes," and later misinterprets a gift of strawberries as a love token.  The protagonist of this work gets a big head after his friend publishes a flattering account of how he saved a child from being trampled, after which he invests in the newspaper Atalaia.  Maria Benedicta and Carlos Maria get married in this work, which also sees Freitas's funeral.  The protagonist is eventually institutionalized for his delusions of being Napoleon III, though his infatuation with Christiano Palha's wife Sophia has waned.  The protagonist inherits a lot of money from his friend Quincas Borba, with the condition that he treat another Quincas Borba like a human.  For 10 points, name this novel in which Rubiao sometimes confuses a dead thinker for a canine, written by Machado de Assis.;;Philosopher or Dog;;
Literature;;This work begins with a dedication poem about Youth "singing and singing...out of the earthy dusk".  One relationship in this novel begins when a fur-clad little girl gives some of the candy from her uncle Joe to a little boy whose cat had run up a telephone pole.  One of the protagonist's brothers has a chubby daughter named Milly, whom the protagonist buys a piano.  One character in this novel has a special bond with animals and lives in an isolated cottage where he reads the Bible in Norwegian; his name is "Crazy Ivar".  The protagonist's brothers, Oscar and Lou, disapprove of her marriage.  Another character in this novel marries Angelique and dies of appendicitis while working the fields.  In addition to French immigrant Amedee, another character in this novel named Emil falls in love with Frank Shabata's wife Maria.  For 10 points, name this novel in which Carl Linstrum and Alexandra Bergson eventually marry in Nebraska, by Willa Cather.;;O Pioneers(!);;
Literature;;In this work, hunters and their Berkshire hounds cause the speaker to flee and notice an omen backed by the sunset that calls up memories from the Arno-vale. Its speaker strays to the hills, where he notices "twisted chimney-stacks" and sees the "tender purple spray" on the copse and briers. The speaker laments the loss of his shepherd's pipes and remembers his companion's "rustic flute," which too quickly gained a "stormy note". The end of this poem sees the title character whisper to the speaker that "The light we sought is shining still," despite the fact that he "wander'd til he died". Exalting Oxford as "that sweet city with her dreaming spires," this poem uses the image of a "signal-elm" tree to represent the friendship between the title character and the speaker, Corydon. Styled after Virgil's Seventh Eclogue, for 10 points, name this Matthew Arnold elegy to Arthur Hugh Clough.;;Thyrsis;;
Literature;;When it falls "sudden from heaven like a weeping cloud, that fosters the droop-headed flowers all, and hides the green hill in an April shroud," the poet notes that you should imprison your mistress's "soft hand, and let her rave". It has its "sov'reign shrine" "in the very temple of Delight," and its "strenuous tongue can burst Joy's grape against its palate fine". The titular subject of a poem that observes "she dwells with Beauty-Beauty that must die, and Joy, whose hand is ever at its lips," it is "a partner in your sorrow's mysteries," and "the wakeful anguish of the soul". FTP name this subject of an ode that begins "no, no, go not to Lethe," by John Keats.;;(Ode) (on) Melancholy;;
Literature;;Discussion over this phrase leads to the query "When did you last see your mother"? after one character claims that his mother used to say it, prompting a staredown that ends with one character's hands around another's neck while he yells "YOU FOOL!" After this phrase is invoked five times, one character "menancingly" states "What do you mean"? after its originator claims that it is "common usage," causing those two characters to "stare at each other, breathing hard". This action is first proposed after two characters receive twelve matches in an envelope sent via the play's titular conveyance.  Contrasted with a similar action undertaken with "the gas," for 10 points, name this phrase that causes tension between Ben and Gus in Harold Pinter's The Dumbwaiter.;;light(ing) the kettle;;
Literature;;A doctor instructs a landlady to make a pine coffin because oak coffins are too expensive after declaring that the protagonist will die in 36 hours. An obscured picture of a General is found on the snuffbox of another character, who is visited by the protagonist when his German wife is cooking fish. The protagonist does not avoid garbage being dumped out of windows, and remarks that secretaries "are an untrustworthy race," to a character whom he later meets on his way to Karolina Ivanovna. The protagonist is accosted by thieves while returning from a tea party in honor of the title object, and goes to a "prominent personage" to seek it. For 10 points, identify this work wherein Petrovitch prepares the title object which is stolen from Akaki Akakievitch, a short story by Nikolai Gogol.;;("The) Overcoat(");;
Literature;;The influence of Dala paintings can be seen in this man's poems "The Assumption of Elijah" and "Jonah and the Whale", while a poem addressed to "Forefathers" who lived in "humbleness and peace" opens his first poetry collection Songs of Wilderness and Love. Another of his collections is divided into parts such as "From a Bachelor's Songbook" and "From Folkare Paths" and is a semi-autobiographical depiction of an educated man who returns to his home town, and that character's "Pleasure Garden" is the title of a subsequent poetry collection. His other collections include one addressed to the Roman gods of flowers and fruits, titled Flora and Pomona, and he also claimed that "Babbitt approaches the ideal of an American popular hero of the middle class," in a speech titled Why Sinclair Lewis Got the Nobel Prize, in addition to writing the poetry collections Fridolin's Songs, and Hösthorn. For 10 points, identify this Swedish poet who was posthumously awarded the Nobel Prize in 1931.;;(Erik) (Axel) Karlfeldt;;
Literature;;Thomas Gray wrote two of the most famous works in this form in English, "The Bard" and "The Progress of Poesy".  One of these begins "Water is the finest of all" and calls gold "a lambent fire," while another claims "The first of prizes is good fortune, the second is to be well spoken of".  Many of the most famous are dedicated to Hieron, and deal with the lives of Ortygia, Chiron, and Perseus; these are grouped into the Pythian, Nemean, Isthmian, and Olympian groups.  Featuring alternations of strophe, antistrophe, and epode, this form was taken up by Bacchylides after its inventor, though adapted to a more somber mood by the Romans. For 10 points, name this form, later complemented by the Horatian kind, associated with a Greek poet.;;Pindaric ode;;
Literature;;A political standoff in this work occurs when the Moscow II predicts the end of capitalism in 2080.  The protagonist follows an accounting superintendant who is stood up on a date, only to find that he has been strangled by his mistress.  The protagonist is told over the phone to stop asking questions by a "strangely familiar" voice that he later realizes is his own, reproduced by a computer.  The protagonist finds out in a chapter entitled "Program Card Number Two" that his colleagues Wada and Tanomogi have been working on a project that requires lots of aborted fetuses, including his own son.  For 10 points, name this novel starring Professor Katsumi, in which the Society for the Development of Submarine Colonies breeds aquans in order to allow humanity to survive a cold spell that will flood the earth, written by Kobo Abe.;;Inter Ice Age 4|Daiyon kampyoki;;
Literature;;The protagonist of this novel gets in with a Bohemian crowd including Comrade Bobbe, Upjohn, and Waldo Tubbe, thinly veiled parodies of Lawrence, Pound, and Eliot.  The protagonist's mother took twenty-two lovers, and married the final one and moved to Australia when her husband died.  The protagonist's wife Elizabeth insisted that she marry him after she supposedly became pregnant, but when she turned out not to be, the protagonist decides to get with her best friend Fanny Welford.  The central character is stationed in M--, France, where he is badgered by a colonel and finally stands up in a trench and dies during a German barrage.  For 10 points, name this novel about George Winterbourne's experiences in World War I, by Richard Aldington.;;Death of a Hero;;
Literature;;This work claims that there are "too many Cinderellas among the poets," and in a discussion of spoudaios and phaulos accounts for why Thackeray calls Vanity Fair a novel without a hero.  This work attributes the misguided belief that "natural taste" is superior to scholarly conviction to Tolstoy and the Romantics, and that it belabors the point to justify why Milton is more rewarding that Blackmore. Originating out of his introduction to Spencer's The Faerie Queen, it details four modes of the title concept: Historical, Ethical, Archetypal and Rhetorical.  Beginning with a "Polemical Introduction" and ending with "A Tentative Conclusion," and written by the author, whose analysis of William Blake is contained in Fearful Symmetry, for 10 points, name this collection of four essays by Northrop Frye.;;Anatomy of Criticism;;
Literature;;The works Sweet and Sour Milk, Sardines, and Close Sesame make up his trilogy Variations on a Theme of an African Dictatorship.  He wrote about Ebla fleeing her home village when she becomes engaged to a man forty years her senior in From a Crooked Rib, and he told of a teacher name Koschin who promises to marry an English girl in his A Naked Needle.  Another of his novels tells how Scholoongo is rejected by Kalaman but sleeps with his grandfather, Nonno, killing him.  That work, Secrets, along with Gifts, rounds out his trilogy Blood in the Sun, which begins with a novel that starts in second person and tells how Misra becomes the adoptive mother of Askar during the Ogaden War.  For 10 points, name this author of Maps, probably the best-known writer from Somalia.;;(Nuruddin) Farah;;
Literature;;Nabil Matar wrote a critical essay about George Herbert, Henry Vaughan, and this action, which extensively quotes a poem from The Temple about this action that is is addressed to a "poore nation" and concludes with the speaker's wish that "your sweet sap may come again!" A work named for this action sees the protagonist repeatedly question "is it ME"? after calling a holy man a bastard, and that protagonist had earlier wished that all fifty-eight victims of a plane crash were members of his religion.  That short story sees a bunch of onlookers, including Marvin Binder and Yakov Blotnik, kneel before the synagogue-scaling Oscar Freedman and acknowledge that God can make a child without intercourse.  A refusal until this action occurs would cause the speaker's "vegetable love" to grow in Marvell's "To His Coy Mistress".  Titling a story in Philip Roth's Goodbye Columbus, for 10 points, name this action that would require about half of quizbowl to stop making latkes for Hanukkah.;;(the) Conversion of the Jews;;
Literature;;Much to Chris Ray's delight, this work explains that "in between a place and candy is a narrow foot-path".  A notable section of this work repeats the phrase "little sales ladies" and ends with the word "beautiful" repeated four times.  William Gass claimed that the major divisions of this work represented the external, the nourishing, and the enclosing, in his essay about this work's author "and the Geography of the Sentence".  This work that contains the poems "Suppose an Eyes" and "Orange In" opens with a section that announces "a spectacle and nothing strange" and "The difference is spreading," and it begins by describing "A Carafe, that is a blind glass".  Consisting of sections marked "Objects," "Food," and "Rooms," for 10 points, name this collection of automatically written Cubist poetry by Gertrude Stein.;;Tender Buttons(:) (Objects,) (Food,) (and) (Rooms);;
Literature;;This work's opening monologue praises tobacco, "whatever Aristotle, or Philosophy" may say".  At one point, a beggar is offered a gold coin to take the Lord's name in vain, while later, its title character's exaggerated hospitality to Dimanche keeps him from having to pay a debt.  Pierrot saves that title character from his capsized boat, only to see him charm the peasants Mathurine and Charlotte.  At the start of Act V, Louis appears and is falsely told his son has reformed, but after that son does not heed the warning of the Specter of Time, the valet Sganarelle mourns his lost wages, because his master gets swallowed by the earth at a statue's command.  For 10 points, name this Moliere play, which shares its subject with a work of Tirso de Molina.;;Don Juan, (the) (Stone) (Guest)|Dom Juan(,) (ou) (le) (festin) (de) (pierre);;
Literature;;She reminisces on the "life of an outcast listening to the laughter of world" and rationalizes that "one pays for one's sins". She is invited to lunch with the bishop and Lord Merton by Caroline Jedburgh, and later demands up to 2500 pounds a year, remarking to another character that "when men give up thinking what is charming they give up saying what is charming". She doesn't want to end up a nurse at a convent "like in a novel," because "repentence is quite out of date", and gets Arthur to promise never to reveal her relationship to his wife, whose letter to him she reads and burns. She notes she'd gladly "dance through life with" Augustus, who holds her bouquet for her and later marries her despite her stepping out of hiding at Lord Darlington's house to claim a misplaced object. For 10 points, name this "very good woman" who shielded her actual daughter from the marital conflict that beset her in an Oscar Wilde play which ends with her taking with her Lady Windermere's Fan.;;(Mrs.) Erlynne|Margaret Erlynne;;
Literature;;The title character kills a snake as his lover alights a carriage at the Frascati, and is delighted by the weakness expressed by that lover when the fizz escapes from a bottle of champagne. The title figure of this work got expelled on Good Friday when he placed a lewd depiction of Christ on the tabernacle. This work's narrator compares a central family's history to the curiousness of an Anne Radcliffe novel, and describes the story behind a portrait of Adonis to Madame de Rochefide. Minor characters in this work include Filippo and Marianina, who take care of a secretive old man along with their mother, Comtesse de Lanty. The title character is a protégé of Bouchardon who wins the Prix de Rome, and is stabbed after he expresses his desire to kill his lover after attempting to destroy a likeness of La Zambinella. More famously, several "lexia" of this work are delineated in S/Z by Roland Barthes. For 10 points, identify this short story in which the title sculptor falls in love with an Italian castrato, a work by Honore de Balzac.;;Sarrasine;;
Literature;;One of the title figures of this poem was judged perfect in the five senses, dexterous in his five fingers, faithful to Christ's five wounds, and contemplative in the five joys, so his symbol was Solomon's pure gold pentangle.  The stanzas in this poem end with a "bob and wheel" rhyming section, and the central character denounces Delilah and Bathsheba before claiming that it would be a "great gain" to love but not trust women, if one could.  The compatriots of this poem's central figure agree to ease his shame by wearing a brightly colored crosswise baldric at the end of this poem.  The protagonist breaks a promise on the day that his host hunts the fox Reynaud, and embarked on his quest after winning an axe in during a contest at a Christmas celebration.  The title character rides the horse Gringolet, and has his chastity thrice tested while he lays in bed at the hall of Lord Bertolak.  For 10 points, name this poem in which the title character gets into a beheading contest with a verdant warrior, a poem about a Round Table knight written by the Pearl Poet.;;(Sir) Gawain and the Green Knight;;
Literature;;This author financially supported a relative while that cousin wrote his early play Love in Several Masques.  Suspected of writing a satire in which those parodied by the Dunciad whipped Alexander Pope in "A Pop Upon Pope," one poem by this author sees Patch and Silliander talk in St. James's coffee-shop about several ladies that they've seen in various states of undress, which is one of this author's "Six Town Eclogues".  Pope claimed that this poet "pox'd" lovers with venereal diseases in his Imitations of Horace, which drew ire from this poet and a collaborator, Lord Hervey; in Epistle to Dr. Arbuthnot, Pope condemned Hervey as Nero's boytoy Sporus and this poet as Sappho.  In another work, this author claimed that wearing a burqa afforded her freedom, and extolled the virtues of the Turkish baths.  For 10 points, name this female poet whose Turkish Embassy Letters introduced Western Europe to smallpox inoculation.;;(Lady) (Mary) (Wortley) Montagu;;
Literature;;One of them happens upon a man drenching a woman with a hose, and instead of turning off the hose, proceeds to wrestle with it, soaking everyone in a fifty-foot radius.  Confusion between the words "sit tight" and "jump off" causes one of them to abandon his wife for a few hours in a Dutch town.  These characters bribe a waiting train conductor who doesn't know where he's supposed to go to take them to Kingston, screwing up all the timetables.  Earlier, one of them shares a car on extremely busy train with a single black man while he transported a wheel of disgustingly stinky cheese.  One of these characters is compared to a man who takes all day to hang a picture frame named Uncle Podger, and their curiosity about a several Wallingford residents who all claim to have caught the same enormous trout leads them to accidentally shatter the trout and discover that it is fake.  One of these characters is prescribed a hearty daily meal of steak and ale after he reads a medical book and discovers he has every disease described except Housemaid's Knee.  They often hold parliamentary sessions in which their votes carry the day over that of Montmorency.  For 10 points, name these characters, including George, Harris, and J., who are "on the bummel" and "in a boat" in two novels by Jerome K. Jerome.;;(the) Three Men|Three Men in a Boat (To) (Say) (Nothing) (of) (the) (Dog)|Three Men on the Bummel;;
Literature;;The protagonist of this novel vows to renew a "course of improving studies" after cracking open Emerson after dinner one night.  A party in this novel sees Miss Mayblunt quote Swinburne's "A Cameo" and also sees Victor "pose," enamored with the central character.  The protagonist imagines a naked man next to her on the seashore while the piece "Solitude" is played by a musician who wears tacky artificial violets in her hair.  The protagonist's children are Etienne and Raoul, and she delights in the piano playing of Mms. Reisz.  The protagonist of this novel is courted by Alcee Arobin after her husband Leonce leaves on a trip.  For 10 points, name this novel about a woman who probably drowns herself and loves Robert Lebrun, a novel about Edna Pointellier by Kate Chopin.;;(The) Awakening;;
Literature;;A recent Gordon Campbell book claims that this work anticipates Darwin's theories of creation and evolution, as in the lines that "the seeds of life/ should mix symphonius, that the gross/ Condense the rare, the rare the gross dilute," in its fourth part's treatment of sex, while its third part claims we should not fear death because "Who dies to-day, and will as long be so/ As he who died a thousand years ago".  It claims that no man may "in words alone/ pour forth praises worthy of his desert" in its fifth part's argument against teleology, though it describes how, via the clinamen, free will is possible. It attempts to convert the author's friend Memmius away from superstition, called the "conqueror of us all," by showing how the author's Greek predecssor stood against and defeated it by defining an atomistic conception of eternal substance.  For 10 points, name this six-book work of Epicurean philosophy by Lucretius.;;(On) (the) Nature of Things|(De) rerum natura;;
Literature;;The protagonist of this work thinks that Madame Brent strikes too many poses for a woman in mourning.  This novel's second section opens with an extensive gift-giving sequence in which a young boy receives a greyhound named Lindy, the protagonist's wife receives scarves, and the protagonist gets The Arabian Nights.  The protagonist is seeing a Korean-Russian prostitute named Louise, and his wife uses the euphemism of going "to Suma" to describe her affair with Mr. Aso.  This novel opens in the Benten Theater, where the central married couple joins O-Hisa and her lover to see The Love Suicides at Amijima.  The protagonist has a sensitive child named Hiroshi and is in a loveless marriage with Misako.  For 10 points, name this novel about Kaname's struggle to choose between old and new values, by Junichiro Tanizaki.;;Some Prefer Nettles|Tade kuu mushi;;
Literature;;This author directed a film in which Itayi and Tamari are orphaned, which Andrew Hart's professor Charlie Sugnet called a cinematic travesty brought on by government intervention.  This script-writer for the smash box-office success Neria directed that film, Everyone's Child, and wrote a short story in which a woman receives a communiqué for the first time in twelve years from her fugitive husband, but neglects to destroy it and is arrested for having it.  Doris finances the protagonist's education after seeing her selling "mealies" in one work by this author, who also described that protagonist wielding a rolling pin against her brother after he steals her corn.  She has written The Book of Loss as a sequel to her best-known work, in which Babamukuru runs a school, and which begins "I was not sorry when my brother died".  For 10 points, name this author who wrote about Tambu in Nervous Conditions.;;(Tsitsi) Dangarembga;;
Literature;;One work about this claims that the speaker has never owned a decent radio, and that he covets an enamel stove.  In a work that parenthetically claims "Some folk blame too much on Jews," the speaker sometimes thinks that Jews have listened to the "music" of this thing.  It is the subject of a poem about a grandma who has no dime, and there is a certain amount of traveling, nothing, impotence, and confusion in this thing, according to the poem "Same in Blues".  One poem claims that this has a "boogie-woogie rumble," while this thing might sag like a heavy load, fester like a sore, stink like rotten meat, or explode.  For 10 points, name this entity that quite possibly dries up like a raisin in the sun, the subject of the poem "Harlem" and a "Montage" by Langston Hughes.;;(a) dream deferred|Montage of a Dream Deferred;;dream
Literature;;Two sinister widows named Mrs. Jolley and Mrs. Flack appear in this work, in which one character miraculously survives the Holocaust, but has no idea how because he lost his glasses.  Another character is dubbed the "rock of love," while another character's house is bulldozed so that brick bungalows can be built at this work's end.  Blue leads a mock crucifixion in this work, after which Mr. Rosetree commits suicide when he learns that the crucified man has died and was given a Christian funeral.  Another character owns the grandiosely named mansion Xanadu and coins the title phrase, which becomes the title of a painting by aborigine artist Alf Dubbo, who dies just after Good Friday, when Miss Hare and Himmelfarb succumb.  For 10 points, name this novel set in Sarsaparilla and featuring Mrs. Godbold, which follows the lives of three elderly people right before they die, written by Patrick White.;;Riders in the Chariot;;
Literature;;In Joyce's "After the Race," Jimmy's "confused murmer of compliment" causes a French race-car driver to disclose a shining line of these objects.  In Flaubert's "Boul de Suif," the title character is "furnished" with the "tiniest" examples of these.  A figure "Under the smoke, dust all over his mouth," is "laughing" with these objects in Sandburg's "Chicago".  In a novel of this name, Archie Jones marries the Jamaican Clara, Samad Iqbal has twin sons who become an atheist and a Muslim fundamentalist, and professor Marcus Chaflen genetically engineers a "FutureMouse".  For 10 points, name these colorful body parts that title a Zadie Smith novel.;;white teeth;;teeth
Literature;;E.R. Curtius devoted Vol. 64 of Romanische Forschungen to defining and refuting this book's theses.  Lesser-known texts it investigates include Antoine de la Sale's Le Reconfort de Madame du Fresne and Ammianus Marcellinus's account of the arrest of Peter Valvomeres, while regarding more canonical works, it criticizes the Goncourts' preface against the bourgeois public and claims Don Quixote's is the most "noncritical and nonproblematic account of gaiety inEuropean letters". Its most famous sections contrast the Jewish sense of interiority and the Greek sense of detail, like that of Odysseus' scar, and claim that Dante's devotion to the title entity overwhelms his devotion to Christian figura.  Written while its author was trapped in Turkey without secondary sources, for 10 points, name this study of "The Representation of Reality in Western Literature" by Erich Auerbach.;;Mimesis(:) (The) (Representation) (of) (Reality) (in) (Western) (Literature);;
Literature;;One character of this work has a mustache that is "absurdly too big for his body" like that of a "c omic man on the films," while another character shows of his cigarette case he got "from the boxwallah". One group described in this work sees a dog that is a "half Airedale, half pariah," while later on in the work, a man in a "white drill suit and gold spectacles" recalls a time when it took six warders to dislodge a prisoner. One character in this work repeatedly says the word Ram,' while the narrator of this work remarks that he "had never realized what it means to destroy a healthy, conscious mind" when he sees one character step around a puddle of water. Taking place on a "sodden morning of the rains" in Burma, this is, for 10 points, which work by George Orwell, which sees a man sent to the gallows?;;(A) Hanging;;
Literature;;One of his work features characters like Chuck Rittersdorf and his wife Mary, and a mental institution where the inmates have been separated based on illness. This author of Time Our of Joint and A Maze of Death also wrote a short story that begins with a visit to Shardach Jones by the titular King of Elves. In addition to writing about a world in which individuals must swear fealty to corporations in Solar Lottery, he also wrote the essay "How to Build a Universe That Doesn't Fall Apart in Two Days".  This author of The Man in the High Castle is most famous for a novel features characters like Rick Deckard, who own the title animals. For 10 points, name this author of Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?;;(Philip) (Kindred) Dick;;
Literature;;The narrator of this work states that he heard the story from Rafael Escalona while he was traveling in Riohacha. A minor character shoots at clouds in order for it to rain, and suggests that the protagonists possess a letter of recommendation from Senator Onesimo Sanchez. The second of the protagonists is murdered towards this works end, though previous measures like an exploding piano fail to kill her. The protagonist falls in love with a half-Dutch half-Guajiro boy, who shows her oranges containing diamonds, and she attempts to flee to the sea with that character, Ulises. The title characters also appear in its' author's most famous work where the protagonist of this work describes having sex with seventy men a night for ten years to a young Aureliano Buendia. For 10 points, identify this novella, whose title character is whored out by an aged relative to pay back a burnt house, a work of Garcia Marquez.;;(The) (Incredible) (and) (Sad) (Tale) (of) Innocent Erendira and Her Heartless Grandmother|(La) (Increible) (y) (Triste) (Historia) (de) (la) Candida Erendira y de Su Abuela Desalmada;;
Literature;;The speaker of this poem compares the title figure's death to a "Pharoah" who "perished in a sea of red" and warns the addressee to "take not, oh! too deep a drink".  The speaker notes that the title figure's "dart will now all foes defy" and exclaims that he would "cheery have the title figure go" by offering it "fluid that never fails to please, and drown the griefs of men". The title figure is "born to sip the lake or spring" and the speaker asks "Why hither come, on vagrant wing"? and wonders "Did wasps or king-birds dismay" "or did you lose your way"? At the end the speaker asks the title insect to "take your seat in Charon's boat" and promises to "tell the hive you died afloat". For 10 points, identify this poem about a buzzing insect by Philip Freneau.;;To a Honey Bee;;
Literature;;The central locale of this poem is a fit haven for presidents who have "repaid / sin-driven / senators by not thinking about them".  The title character of this work might be "part of a novel," and this poem was initially grouped as the first in a sequence that also included "The Student" and "The Hero" called "Part of a Novel, Part of a Poem, Part of a Play".  T.S. Eliot chose this poem to lead off his compilation of its poet called Selected Poems, and this poem's title character is named C.J. Poole and has an ironic sign in red and white that reads "Danger".  Noting that the central place's "eight stranded whales," would have caused Durer to see "a reason for living / in a town like this," this poem's title character is gilding a star which stands for hope at this poem's end.  For 10 points, name this poem about a belfry-scaler, by Marianne Moore.;;(The) Steeple-Jack;;
Literature;;One break in this novel's main story comes when the story of the captivity and sexual initiation Eliza Fields by Tenebrae and Ethelmer, while earlier its main characters undergo a sexual ritual when they first cross the equator on their way to meet the Vroom family.  At one point, Darby and Cope try to impersonate the title characters, but cannot decide which to be, while later Zhang warns them of the Jesuit Zarpazo and of the "bad winds" caused by the feng shui of their endeavor.  Framed as a Christmas story told in Philadelphia by Rev. Wicks Cherrycoke, it first examines its title characters' voyage to St. Helena to take astronomical measurements, then their encounter with Washington's valet Hercules and Ben Franklin after they are called to settle a dispute between the Penns and Calverts.  For 10 points, name this 1997 novel by Thomas Pynchon about two surveyors.;;Mason & Dixon;;
Literature;;Some recent scholars have attributed to this man a 42-line excerpt long thought to be by Critias, Sisphyus.  One of this man's works introduces Silenus and his sons to an episode from the Odyssey, and in another he follows the issue of Apollo's rape of Erectheus, Ion.  He tells the story of Argive women's plea to Theseus in his The Suppliants, which followed his The Phoenician Women. Aristotle claims that people were wrong to criticized this author's unhappy endings, because that was what made him "most tragic," but criticizes him instead for using unnecessary improbabilities of Meneleus' wickedness in his Orestes and for the unused arrival of Aegeus in another play.  That latter play sees Creon and Glauce killed, as well as the title character's children.  For 10 points, name this author of The Trojan Women and Medea.;;Euripides;;
Literature;;One character in this work recalls the time when he found out his alley cat had stopped loving him for some time, and in not wanting to be judged, he had her killed at the vet. When that character asks for counsel, his wife tells him "I'm concerned with what choice you make," though through out this play she keeps being astonished by crazy things like losing her mind and the wonder of the daylight. Claire comes back from shopping for a top-less swimsuit and calls herself not "an alcoholic," but "A alcoholic," then plays an accordion to try to scare off the guests. Julia comes home after separating from Doug, her fourth husband, but finds her room occupied by Harry and Edna. They had come because of the plague, a disease of nothingness, but end up leaving when they realize they wouldn't harbor Tobias and Agnes in return. For 10 points, name this 1966 Pulitzer-winning play by Edward Albee about a fragile stability.;;(A) Delicate Balance;;
Literature;;In one section of this work, the protagonist attempts to learn more about his lover by reading a novel called Moeurs by his lover's ex-husband Arnauti.  Later in that section, the protagonist goes duck-hunting with his lover's husband and discovers Capodistria's floating corpse on the lake, but later reports indicate that Capodistria is still alive, and that the lover is now working in a kibbutz.  At the end of this work, one character is pinned underwater by a harpoon through her hand, which the protagonist lops off to save her from drowning, and that character later paints wonderfully with a fake hand.  The title character of the second section of this work writes a commentary on the protagonist's novel dubbed the "Interlinear," which reveals that his former lover's true love was his recently suicidal friend Percy Pursewarden.  The complex love affairs in this work are a result of Nessim Hosnani's spying in an attempt to undermine British interests in Palestine and Egypt, which is uncovered by writer L.G. Darley.  Consisting of Clea, Mountolive, Balthazar, and Justine, for 10 points, name this series of four novels by Lawrence Durrell.;;(the) Alexandria (Quartet);;
Literature;;Kipling wrote a poem personifying this entity in which it claims to remember the "bat-winged lizard birds" and "giant tigers".  It is "holy far from Rome" at the beginning of Oscar Wilde's "The Burden of Itys".  It is called "hoary" and addressed as a "Father" that has seen "full many a sprightly race" in Thomas Gray's Ode on a Distant Prospect of Eton College.  This entity is married in Proteus's hall to Medway in canto xi of The Faerie Queen.  Like the streets, this is "chartered" in William Blake's "London".  This entity features in a couplet that opens by invoking a bridal or wedding day which is "not long," and in "The Waste Land," it "bears no empty bottles or sandwich papers".  For 10 points, every stanza-closing line of Spenser's "Prothalamion" instructs what body of water to "run softly, till I end my song"?;;(The) Thames;;
Literature;;The speaker describes "mysterious sheep" that destroy the "curious angels and dreams we keep" after comparing himself to a shepherd in one stanza of this poem and invokes Zeno of Elea while describing an arrow that "slid tremblingly of the bow, but would not glide!"  The speaker awaits a "hollow future sentiment" from his "inner greatness' echoing knell" and in the previous stanza entreats the "justice of the noon" to "look at yourself". The second of the title locale is described as "a speckled leopard, a mantle filled with holes" and a "blue bodied serpent loosed to flash and flail" and "All things are burned" and cast "into a harsh mysterious essence" at the title location, where a "voracious worm" feeds "on those whose hearts still beat" and a "whole white race" is "dissolved" "into intricate absence". Describing a region where "The dead are sealed below this ground to rest" at the port of Cette near the Mediterranean, for 10 points, identify this poem by Paul Valéry.;;(A) Cemetery by the Sea|(Le) Cimetiere Marin;;
Literature;;This novel's protagonist compares his life to Tom Sawyer being stuck in a cave, but later realizes that only death can free him.  The protagonist's childhood friend claims that "a homosexual is someone who has chosen to let himself love a person of the same sex".  One character in this novel takes angsty night rides in her hot sports car, and after the protagonist spends a drunken night with her, he vomits in front of his English class.  The protagonist betrayed his childhood friend Kikuhiko, after whom he names his son.  His mistress Himiko steals his dream of going to Africa to gather material for a book.  For 10 points, name this novel about Bird, whose newborn child may have a mental handicap, by Kenzaburo Oe.;;(A) Personal Matter;;
Literature;;In a 2003 Nilo Cruz play, this novel is read "in the Tropics".  Its central couple meets the writer Golenischev while they vacation in Italy, and the male half takes up painting with his friend Mikhailov, though he later postpones their move to the country at his mother's wish, provoking the claim that "Respect was invented to cover the empty place where love should be".  Later, Sergei Koznyshev's book on statehood flops, so he goes to work for Slavic independence in its final part with the two central men, one of whom has found God and one of whom wishes death.  Its title character comes to St. Petersburg after learning her brother has had an affair with the governess, foreshadowing his affair with a ballerina, but though that title sister is divorced for infidelity, Dolly forgives Stepan.  Also seeing the marriage of Kitty and Levin, for 10 points, name this novel whose first sentence differentiates between happy and unhappy families, by Leo Tolstoy.;;Anna Karenina;;
Literature;;In one section of this work, a cook at a nunnery spreads rumors that various nuns are a bastard, a daughter of a cuckholded knight, and a priest's wench, causing a fight that would have been deadly had knives been present.  Another section of this work notes that after hearing a sermon, Tom Stowe brought his wife Felice home from a shrew penitentiary and beat her with two sticks.  A Glutton in this poem is on his way to mass when he's sidetracked by such figures as Rose the dish seller and Robin the roper, and instead drinks so much ale that he pisses four pints and lets out a terrible fart before vomiting a mixture so disgusting that dogs won't eat it.  The Prelude to this poem features a gathering of rats and mice deciding whether to bell the cat, and in another section, Lady Mede attempts to spurn Truth to marry False.  This poem, each section of which is dubbed a "Passus," was divided by W.W. Skeat into A, B, and C versions, the third of which was created in response to Wat Tyler's Rebellion.  For 10 points, name this poem about the dreams of a rural worker, by William Langland.;;(William's) (Vision) (of) Piers Plowman|(Visio) (Willelmi) (de) Petro Ploughman;;
Literature;;The first of this author's novels was serialized in The New Statesman and tells of how the protagonist gives up her job at the British Museum in order to qualify to live in "Pussy Cat Mansions".  She continued the storyline of that work, In the Ditch, to a work that sees Adah treated as property by her husband Francis, and another that sees Adah earn a degree in sociology, Head Above Water.  She described how Nnu Ego's children are all failures in another work, and wrote a novel in which Ma Blackie's husband Ezekiel dies and she marries the symbolically-named Okonkwo, after which Chike marries Aku-nna without paying the titular fee.  Also the author of Second-Class Citizen, The Slave Girl, and The Joys of Motherhood, for 10 points, name this author of The Bride Price, who is a woman from Nigeria.;;(Florence) (Onye) (Buchi) Emecheta;;
Literature;;At the end of Act II of Fernando Arrabal's The Architect and the Emperor of Assyria, the Emperor tries to undergo this event by himself after the Architect leaves the stage.  Malcolm Lowry's Ultramarine contains a showing of the Olga Tschechowa film about Love's one of these.  A section of James Weldon Johnson's God's Trombones named after this event contains an illustration of two men riding rearing horses and ends with a stanza repeating the phrase "I tremble".  The strain between Rivkeh and Aryeh over the title character is depicted in a painting of the "Brooklyn" version of this event in Chaim Potok's My Name is Asher Lev.  A trilogy with this noun in its name contains the books Sexus, Plexus, and Nexus.  For 10 points, name this event, the "Rosy" version of which titles a trilogy by Henry Miller.;;Crucifixion;;
Literature;;The protagonist of this play quotes Byron from Manfred: "I have not loved the world, nor the world me," while staring at himself in the mirror. At the end, he shoots his thoroughbred, and turns his gun at his daughter Sara when she demands that he brings his old self back. Patch Riley and company toss out Nicholas Gadsby, the laywer sent by Henry Harford to "settle" with the main character, who decides to seek a duel, but his daughter is afraid it would ruin his future with the boarder Simon Harford, and decides to lose her virginity to him, much as her mom Sara did for the protagonist, who was a hero of Talavera and insists on being called a major, getting drunk with Jamie Cregan. For 10 points, name this Eugene O'Neill play about the split personality of an Irish gentleman in America, Cornelius "Con" Melody, who has a bit of a lyricist in him.;;(A) Touch of the Poet;;
Literature;;One of them mentions that the author was inspired by an Antarctic expedition, but forgot which one inspired him.  The one marked 199 claims that the author does not know the origin of a ballad about Mrs. Porter, other than that it came from Sydney, Australia.  The one marked 218 quotes nineteen lines of Ovid and claims that Tiresias is an important personage despite being a "mere spectator".  Another of these, number 309, holds "it is not an accident" when commenting on a contrast between Augustine's quote "To Carthage I came" and a passage from Buddhism in Translation.  The opening one of these acknowledges a debt to Miss Jessie L. Weston's From Ritual to Romance and Frazer's The Golden Bough.  It also contains the admission that the author is "not familiar with the exact constitution of the Tarot pack of cards" despite the symbolic importance of the Hanged Man and the Phoenician Sailor.  For 10 points, name these commentaries appended to a poem, the final one of which explains the importance of the word "shantih".;;(T.S.) (Eliot's) (foot)notes (on) (The) Waste Land;;(The) Waste Land
Literature;;One character states that Jesus and Mohammed can't both be great people but agrees Napoleon was a true social reformer. Towards this play's end, one character seeks to find Hilda, whom he had beaten a couple of nights prior and spends his bus fare on the jukebox by playing a Sarah Vaughan song. One character smashes up a bottle of brandy and tears up an essay wherein the United Nations is described as a "dancing school for politicians". That character's mood is soured after two telephone conversations during which he learns that his alcoholic father is discharged from the hospital. That character also remembers flying a kite which his servant ties to a park bench that is reserved for whites only, and its end, makes a dirty joke about a Kaffir's arse. For 10 points, identify this work in which Sam Samela is spat upon by the first of the tile characters, a work of Athol Fugard.;;Master HaroldAnd the Boys;;
Literature;;This author argued that the "radical consequence of law" is to "make us pause and pause again as we enter into the risky process of knowing and judging one another" in a paper called "Appearances Aside," a response to the Brennan Lecture delivered by Robert Post.  A commentary by Adam Phillips entitled "Keeping It Moving" appeared before a chapter on "Psychic Inceptions" in this author's book on "theories in subjection" entitled The Psychic Life of Power.  This author discussed the "power of mourning and violence" in the book Precarious Life and offered a "politics of the performative" in the book Excitable Speech.  More famously, books by this author considered the "discursive limits of sex" as well as "feminism and the subversion of identity".  For 10 points, name this leading figure in queer theory, the author of Bodies that Matter and Gender Trouble.;;(Judith) Butler;;
Literature;;One scene in this work sees several characters describe what they would do at a carnival, while another scene describes a Monopoly game that has been going on for three days. The protagonist of this work has a tattoo that reads "Fighting Leathernecks," and in one scene, he reveals that he has shorts with "big white whales" under a towel. Other characters in this work include Ellis, who is described as a man who pees on himself often, and Candy Starr, a prostitute that agrees to sleep with a man with a stutter, Billy Bibbit. Dale Harding is described as the "bull goose loony" before the arrival of Randal McMurphy, and Chief Bromden tries to act as it he is deaf and dumb. For 10 points, name this novel set in a mental institute overseen by Nurse Ratched, by Ken Kesey.;;One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest;;
Literature;;Edna St. Vincent Millay's "Spring Song" claims that Spring "made a lot of clutter" by dropping these objects under trees.  In Kawabata's Beauty and Sadness, an entity in which half of these smaller subdivisions are painted red proves to Oki that Keiko knows about his affair with Otoko.  Tennyson's The Princess contains a short lyric called "Now Sleeps the Crimson one of these, and in Pound's "In a Station of the Metro," "The apparition of these faces in a crowd" is claimed to be these objects "on a wet black bough".  Another work with this noun in its title sees Inspector Godfrey investivate the deaths of brewery directors by questioning Munira, Karega, Abdulla, and Wanja.  For 10 points, name these objects that are "of Blood" in a Ngugi wa Thiong'a novel.;;petal(s);;
Literature;;The narrator of this work is annoyed by the sound of running water, and one character in this story buys a brown pig that eats orange peels. Towards its end, one character receives a parcel of asphodel bulbs wrapped in a newspaper, which tells of the death of Maria Rhomaides, and the destruction of her "Khan". The protagonist has a sister named Julia, and insists on staying in an inn, the owners of which later try to attack his group. Mr. Graham lifts the protagonist and puts him on a mule, while Mrs. Foreman calls the protagonist's daughter Antigone and the protagonist Oedipus, and declares that they must stop at the titular location. Mr. Lucas enjoys a tree that has a stream flowing from it in, for 10 points, what short story by E. M. Forster?;;("The) Road from Colonus(");;
Literature;;In one work by this person, the titular philosopher, who is surnamed Proteus, wanders around preaching against the Romans and pissing people off until he eventually sets himself on fire at the 165 Olympic Games. Another of this author's works was translated under the title The Lover of Lies, or the Doubter and contained one of the first versions of the Sorceror's Apprentice story, while he totally burned the oracle Alexander of Abonoteichus in a third work. In addition to The Death of Peregrinus, Philopseudes, and Alexander the False Prophet, he wrote such other works as one in which he imitates Herodotus in describing the cult of the goddess Atargatis and one in which the cynic Menippus makes fun of a bunch of kings and nobles for no longer being alive . His most famous work is a travelogue in which he describes meeting Scintharus in the belly of a whale after returning from the moon, where he and his crew observed a vegetable-heavy war between Endymion and Hyperion. The author of De Dea Syria, for 10 points, identify this Assyrian rhetorician and satirist who wrote in Greek, also the author of Dialogues of the Dead and True History.;;Lucian (of) (Samosata);;
Literature;;El-Enany argues that the title character's punitive action in this work mirrors the actions of al-Rawi in its author's other novel Heart of the Night.  The end of this novel sees the discovery of a book that promises to usher in the "death of tyranny, and the dawn of light and miracles" by Hanash.  This novel's title character owns a Great House at the edge of the hara.  The fifth section of this book sees that magician, named Arafa, break into the title character's mansion and kill him in a struggle over a document.  The title character casts his son Adham out of his house for arguing over a will, and his grandsons Rifa'a, Qasim, and Gabal all live in an alley.  For 10 points, name this work that caricatures Moses, Jesus, and Mohammed, written by Naguib Mahfouz.;;Children of Gebelawi|Awlad haretna|Children of the Alley;;
Literature;;His amulet was accidently found open by Arthur Bennett, who found a note from his father, which caused Father Victor to send him to Xavier, although board and tuition would be paid for anonymously. The titular character of this work encountered an old woman for the third time after throwing some luggage over a cliff, and hid the papers he found from rebellious northern kings in a safe box until Hurree the babu could come to claim them. Meanwhile at this strange old woman's estate, his travelmate had discovered the river of the Arrow which is her brook, and the horse trader Mahbub Ali congratulates his efforts on behalf of the British secret service. Son of an member of the Mavericks Irish regiment, FTP name this boy from Lahore who traveled India with a Tibetan lama, whose last name is O'Hara, in a Rudyard Kipling novel.;;Kim|Kimball (O'Hara);;
Literature;;The narrator of this work takes extreme pride in the way that his father skillfully skins weasels.  At the beginning of this story, the narrator learns that his friend had wrapped a leather belt around his neck and crept into a den in order to capture a wild puppy.  One central character repairs The Clerk's false leg in this work, and at this story's end, The Clerk is killed when he sleds down a grass hill and into a rock using a piece of debris.  The narrator, his younger brother, and a bully named Harelip have the privilege of carrying out a filthy tub of waste in this story.  One character is killed with a hatchet, injuring the narrator's hand, and the dead body is placed into a cave where it stinks up the central village.  For 10 points, name this story in which a Negro American airman is shot down and taken prisoner in a Japanese village, a work of Kenzaburo Oe.;;(The) Catch|Prize-Catch|Prize-Stock|Shiiku;;
Literature;;One character in this novel wished that his dead friend could lose his hair and grow old with him, shocking the authorities, but he was "already covered with lilies". Another character claims her body is like "a lantern down a dark lane," bringing in a ring of light: "I dazzle you, I make you believe that this is all". Both Neville and Jinny were with Mrs. Constable when they grew up, and another character understands every detective novel he reads, and joins the group for dinner in London's Hampton court. A 6-petaled flower represents the connections shared by each, as they recall that Percival "rode and fell in India". FTP name this Virginia Woolf novel about Susan, Louis, Rhoda, and Bernard, an experimental work based on a natural occurrence.;;(The) Waves;;
Literature;;One character in this work thinks that her boy companion is named Freddie, "but of course it ain't". Another has a bar companion who echoes him when ordering gin. This work opens with kids from Devil's Row fighting those from Rum Alley, including the title character's brother, who later becomes a truck driver. The title character's baby brother, Tommie, dies, but her other brother, Jimmie, survives, only to have a fight in a saloon later on with her ex-boyfriend, who dumped her for the higher-class Nellie, Jimmie's old friend Pete. It ends with Mary Johnson bawling, "I'll fergive her!'" after her daughter, the title character, killed herself after becoming a prostitute by jumping into the East River. For 10 points, name this novella about the slums of New York by Stephen Crane.;;Maggie: A Girl of the Streets;;
Literature;;The speaker of this poem hears his "ill spirit sob in each blood cell" as the words "Love, O Careless love" come out of the car radio. The speaker sees "red fire" of the "moonstruck eyes" of the title figures as they "march up their soles on Main Street. This poem also describes an individual whose "nine-knot yawl was auctioned off to a lobsterman. Set in Castine, Maine, this poem opens with a hermit heiress living "through winter in her Spartan cottage" who "buys up all the eyesores facing her shore" in a thirst for "hierarchic privacy". This poem's sixth stanza quotes Book IV or Paradise Lost as it ends with the line "I myself am hell; nobody's here -". In his Tudor Ford, the poet "climbed the hill's skull" to watch for love-cars, but finds instead an animal jabbing "her wedge-head in a cup of sour cream" and dropping her ostrich tail. Dedicated to Elizabeth Bishop and written in response to "The Armadillo," for 10 points, identify this poem from Life Studies by Robert Lowell, which describes certain white-striped animals "search in the moonlight for a bite to eat".;;Skunk Hour;;
Literature;;In one of this author's short stories, Michael Lowes recalls stealing a conch shell, but gets caught stealing a razor set and gets a three-month sentence after giving in to the titular "Impulse".  Andrew plays hide-the-hoe and other ritualized games with his children in his garden, then tells his wife Hilda that at night, their suburb becomes the titlular "Dark City," infested with child-sized maggots.   Romero and Zabriski continue boxing at the end of his "Round by Round," and he recast Demarest from his novel Blue Voyage as D., who hears his father shooting his mother and himself in his fucked-up autobiography Ushant.  Also writing poetry like Preludes for Memnon and Time in the Rock, for 10 points, name this author who wrote about Paul Haselman's mental breakdown into a white world in the short story "Silent Snow, Secret Snow".;;(Conrad) (Potter) Aiken;;
Literature;;One man in his army, Mezentius, rages in revenge after his son Lausus is killed by this man's enemy. Nisus and Euryalus die attacking his camp, and when his troops fall into chaos, Juno disguises herself as his enemy and lures him onto a ship, then unmoors it and he floats off to sea. At one point, his charioteer Metiscus is impersonated by his sister Juturna to spirit him away from danger and then drive him in battle, while another time, Juturna returns his sword to him after he loses it at a crucial moment. He is the favorite of Amata, who commits suicide after being driven to fury by Allecto, and is killed for his disrespect after killing Evander's son, Pallas. His defeat makes him unable to marry Lavinia, the daughter of Latinus. For 10 points, name this leader of the Rutulians whose death at the hands of the title character ends the Aeneid.;;Turnus;;
Literature;;One section of this work describes two handmaids, one of whom is named "Affectation" and "shows in her cheek the roses of eighteen".  Later in that section, a man who is proud of his "amber snuff-box" and the "nice conduct of a clouded cane" exclaims "My Lord, why, what the devil"?  In addition to Sir Plume, this work features such figures as Zephyretta, Momentilla, and Crispissa, who are among the spirits charged to protect certain items.  It asks "what strange motive" could "compel / A well-bred lord t'assault a gentle belle".  For 10 points, name this poem in five cantos about Belinda's loss of the title piece of hair, a poem by Alexander Pope.;;(The) Rape of the Lock;;
Literature;;When the protagonist of this work expresses admiration for a rationalist, he is warned against teachers of morality, because "they discourse like angels, but they live like men," as the hero soon finds out when the philosopher's daughter dies, and all reason becomes neglected. The maid Pekuah prefers the convent after she was abducted by the Arabs, and the sister Nekayah wants to found a college of learned women. During a flood of the Nile, the poet Imlac professes to drift through life, and longs to return to the Happy Valley, from the perfection of which they had escaped to find a "choice of life". FTP name this romance about a prince of Abyssinia written to pay for the author's mother's funeral, by Samuel Johnson.;;(The) (History) (of) Rasselas(,) (Prince) (of) (Abyssinia);;
Literature;;One passage from this poem asking about a "Guest from the future / Taking the left turn across the bridge", while another says, "A pure voice: I am ready for death.'" The poem ends with a declaration that the author's title country, "Filled with mortal dread yet", "Walked before me towards the east". The tenth section of part two of this poem begins with three lines of dots, while the twelfth is entirely blank. Two poems at the beginning of this longer one are dedicated to Olga Glebova-Sudeikina and Vsevolod Knyazev, the latter of whom committed suicide over his love for the former. The first section of this poem is set in 1913 at the House on the Fontanka in Leningrad. The third section of part one of this poem has an epigraph from Osip Mandelstam, the author's friend, while the beginning of part two of this poem mentions "snatches of Requiem, deeply and cunningly hidden", referencing the author's earlier poem. For 10 points, name this "triptych", a major Symbolist poem by Anna Akhmatova.;;Poem without a Hero|Poema bez geroya;;
Literature;;It contains a ballad between two rival lovers, Mopsa and Dorcas, and a dance of 12 satyrs. One character convinces another to stay by noting that "a lady's 'verily' is as potent as a lord's". A courtier remarks, "blessed are we that are not simple men," though he's really a pick-pocket in disguise, and dupes the clown and the shepherd to giving him gold. Paulina asks for her husband back but weds Camillo instead, and Autolycus exchanges clothes with Florizel and Perdita, who are escaping from Polixenes of Bohemia. For 10 points, name this Shakespeare play about virtuous Hermione's redemption, containing an exit by Antigonus while pursued by a bear.;;(The) Winter's Tale;;
Literature;;The narrator of this work remarks that "the sloven does not half know his business," after remarking that he helps the auctioneer. The narrator of this work tells of a man who "Drank water only," who was a "frequent gunner and fisher," who was an eighty year old farmer that was loved by all who saw him. In the eighth part of this poem, the narrator notes that "the fool who corrupted his own live body" cannot conceal himself, while the second part notes that the "expression of the face balks account". The narrator of this poem asks if "Those who defile the living are as bad as bad as those who defile death," and later goes on to ask if "the body were not the Soul, what is the Soul"?  For 10 points, name this poem in which the narrator admires the physiques of both men and women, work of Walt Whitman.;;(")I Sing the Body Electric(");;
Literature;;This poem mentions a newspaper headline "from the local Star / A curio: Red Sox Beat Yanks 5-4 / On Chapman's Homer", and says that the author's essay collection The Untamed Seahorse sold three hundred copies in a year despite its universal acclaim. Its penultimate part begins with a meditation on the Institute of Preparation for the Hereafter, and ends with a search made futile due to a misprint of "fountain" for "mountain" describing a shared image after a near-death experience. Its second part describes a night beginning with a blind date and ending with the death, and possible suicide, of the author's daughter, Hazel, while the entire poem is addressed to the author's wife, Sybil. Beginning and possibly supposed to end with "I was the shadow of the waxwing slain", for 10 points, name this 999-line poem by John Shade annotated by Charles Kinbote, the namesake of a novel by Vladimir Nabokov.;;(")Pale Fire(");;
Literature;;The fate of the protagonist is euphemistically discussed in a passage about mousetraps, and that character's father Jokan earlier explained his refusal to pay off the charges against him with the metaphor of a game of shogi.  One character in this work is nicknamed "Hard Luck" and is infatuated with the central female character, whom he later frees for 300 gold pieces.  One character tries to bribe another with ten gold pieces to solicit a prostitute, but that character takes the gold and invests in the oil trade instead, making a fortune.  A samurai named Jibuemon ensures that Hikosuke, who was earlier stabbed in the face by Yohei but blamed the central male character, does not become violent after the central couple leap out of two chests near the end of this work.  Ending with the marriage of Azuma and Yojibei, for 10 points, name this Chikamatsu Monzaemon work titled after a downed tree.;;(The) Uprooted Pine;;
Literature;;In one of his early short stories, Sir Roger de Rollo deceives his brother into saying a prayer which frees him from purgatory and overcome the titular "Devil's Wager". This man is thought to be the author of a parody of Bulwer-Lytton's Eugene Aram titled "Elizabeth Brownrigge," and he attempted to satirize the Cockney accent in a work which describes "Miss Shum's Husband" and "The Amours of Mr. Deuceace" in The Yellowplus Correspondence. He also described the adventures of Samuel whose aunt is the owner of the titular "Great Haggarty Diamond," and Samuel is the cousin of another of his creations who edits such collections as Comic Tales and Sketches and The Paris Sketchbook, Michael Angelo Titmarsh. For 10 points, identify this author who also used George Fitz-Boodle as a pseudonym, and also wrote such novels as The Luck of Barry Lyndon, The History of Henry Esmond, and Vanity Fair.;;(William) (Makepeace) Thackeray;;
Literature;;Among the "Other Poems" in the title of this collection are one in which the title creature's coat is said to be white like "male snow" that puts its arms "about our necks / murderously a little while".  In addition to "The Polar Bear," the title poem of this collection consists of ten sections; the last section contains three parts including a description of boys swimming "bare-ass," and concludes noting that the title character of this collection faithfully recorded the titular "Children's Games" with his "grim humor".  Other sections of the title poem note that a "winter-struck bush" was chosen for the foreground, and describe the titular "Self-Portrait" "In a red winter hat".  The second section of the title poem of this collection notes that "there was / a splash quite unnoticed" that signified a drowning.  For 10 points, name this poetry collection that includes "Hunters in the Snow" and "Landscape with the Fall of Icarus," written by William Carlos Williams.;;Pictures from Brueghel (and) (Other) (Poems);;
Literature;;This author took issue with the Arminian view of the title concept in his The Freedom of the Will. His longest work responded to the complaints of the Old Lights by refocusing energies on "The Work" of piety, while another emphasizes "practice" as the best of twelve "positive" signs of sainthood, versus many "negative" signs.  In addition to Some Thoughts Concerning the Revival and A Treatise Concerning Religious Affections, he wrote an essay that claims  we shall not know the title entity until we "think of the same that the sleeping rocks dream of," while another work compares mankind to a "spider, or some other loathsome insect, being held over a fire".  For 10 points, name this author of "Critique of Pure Nothingness" and "Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God".;;(Jonathan) Edwards;;
Literature;;One of the characters in this work forces his pupils to chant the "arithmetic times" and scolds the central female for baring her shoulders.  That character contrasts his own "dew-moistened" face with the another character's "leathery" one after previously denouncing him as a "greedy dog" and "insatiate camel".  The central female becomes regionally famous when a magazine photographer takes pictures of her, and is eventually tricked into sleeping with one of the title characters in the last act, titled "Night".  Sadiku acts as a go-between for the older title character, who is the "Bale" of Ilujinle.  For 10 points, name this play that contrasts the loves of Baroka and Lakunle for the village belle Sidi, a play by Wole Soyinka.;;(The) Lion and the Jewel;;
Literature;;Lord Byron's introduction to the Bride of Abydos claims that had he not written that work, he would have gone mad and undertaken this action.  At the end of Vachel Lindsay's "The Spider and the Ghost of the Fly," the fly's ghost witnesses the spider undertaking this action.  The speaker urges this action to be committed utilizing a sandwich taken out of the "lunch-box of your dreams" in a Langston Hughes poem that concludes with a traincar exploding like an atom bomb.  It is accomplished in the desert by a "naked, beastial" creature.  For 10 points, name this action undertaken in Stephen Crane's The Black Riders, which is enjoyed because the object in question is bitter, and because that object is the creature's heart.;;eating a heart;;
Literature;;This work notes that "Our age is bewailed as the age of Introversion" and asks "Must that needs be evil"?  Toward its end, it claims that Emanuel Swedenborg has "never been rightly estimated" as "the most imaginative" writer and quotes Pestalozzi's claim that "no man in God's wide earth is either willing or able to help another man".   It notes earlier that "Books are the best things, well-used; abused, among the worst," and argues that the discerning reader  finds "the least part" of Plato and Shakespeare in their works, only "the authentic utterances of the oracles".  It thinks the title figure should engage in "country laborstrades and manufacture" while urging its listeners not to be "mere thinkers" but "Man Thinking".  Delivered to the graduating class of 1837 at Harvard University, name, for 10 points, this oration by Ralph Waldo Emerson.;;("The) American Scholar(");;
Literature;;Toward its middle, its speaker notes, "Old men forget; yet all shall be forgot," having earlier claimed "By Jove, I am not covetous for gold," but "if it be a sin to covet honor/ I am the most offending soul alive". It imagines an older man who will "strip his sleeve and show his scars" and declares a relation to that man, "be he ne'er so vile/ This day shall gentle his condition". Rebuking Westmoreland's wish for his idling countrymen, and needing to stir more passion than the earlier "Once more unto the breach," its speaker predicts its addressees" will become "household words" because they are "few, we happy few".  For 10 points, name this speech given before Agincourt in Henry V that celebrates the expected feats of the "band of brothers" during the feast of the patron of cobblers.;;(The) St. Crispin('s) (Day) (Speech);;Henry V
Literature;;This work's author's sister's frontal lobotomy may be the source for the suggestion made to a visiting physician at the Lion's View Sanatorium. Aunt Violet suggests this since she believes a current patient at St. Mary's is responsible for the death of a poet who is still unknown outside of "a small coterie of friends, including his mother". While George and her mother pressure her to not lose their inheritance money, Catherine Holly tells the tale of how she procured homosexual favors for her cousin, who was then eaten by those sexually-abused youths. The mystery surrounding the death of Sebastian Venable is the plot of, FTP, which play by Tennessee Williams?;;Suddenly Last Summer;;
Literature;;The clerk Chuffey is the keeper of a secret in this novel, while the governess Ruth is so impressed with John Westlock's attempt to help her brother that she marries him. The titular character's son runs off to Wiltshire to study with an architect, who tries to marry off his daughters Mercy and Charity to gain a fortune. The fraudulent company of Montague Tigg falls apart, and Sarah Gamp acts as comic relief by quoting Mrs. Harris at every opportunity. A hostler of Blue Dragon inn, Mark Tapley, returns with said son from a disasterous venture at Eden in America, and that son later marries Mary Graham, much to Seth Pecksniff's dismay. FTP name this novel in which Jonas murders his own father, a Charles Dickens work with scenes in the US.;;Martin Chuzzlewit;;
Literature;;Among this poet's personal effects at death were verse letters to an unidentified, ill person called "The Master".  The first entry in her complete works asks the muses to "tie my Valentine!" while one of her late works claims, "The ecstasy to guess/Were a receipted bliss/ If grace could talk".  Though an early poem notes "I have never seen Volcanoes," later ones claim "When Etna basks and purrs/ Naples is more afraid," and "A crater I may contemplate/ Vesuvius at home".  She also noted "Publication is the Auction/ Of the Mind of Man" during the four-year burst of productivity after she began corresponding with Thomas Wentworth Higginson, which also produced the lines "The Soul selects her own society-/Then-shuts the Door".  For 10 points, name this author of "There's a certain slant of light" and "Because I could not stop for Death".;;(Emily) Dickinson;;
Literature;;This character is described as having "a judgment too unassailed by any attention to herself" and at one point tells her sister, "Compliments always take you by surprise, and me never".  Her mother becomes upset when she walks through six inches of mud to see that sick sister, where she is scandalized by the suggestion that she and Caroline got up to show off their figures to a guest.  That guest later defends her charge that he heartlessly reduced a man from Meryton to poverty by explaining the seduction of sister Georgina and asks her "Could you expect me to rejoice in the inferiority of your connections"?  Though nearly forced to marry the pastor at Hunsford, who is set to inherit Longbourn, she manages to overcome the title entities to become mistress of Pemberly.  For 10 points, name this sister of Jane, Mary, Lydia, and Kitty, who marries Fitzwilliam Darcy at the end of Pride and Prejudice.;;Elizabeth (Bennet)|(")Lizzy(") (Bennet);;
Literature;;This novel's protagonist carries a pocketwatch and a wristwatch, and he recalls an old friend who obsessively pulled out all of his gray hairs and died with a full head of brown hair.  The protagonist is enthralled to hear that 2,000-year-old lotus seeds sprouted, and lusted after his wife's sister.  The central family shares three bits of trout between seven people at this novel's end, and one character moves back to Kamakura to get away from her abusive husband, who barely survives a suicide attempt at the end of this work.  Shiuchi is having an affair with a war widow that he impregnates, and Fusako leaves her children with Kikuko, who aborts Shiuchi's child.  For 10 points, name this novel about an old man named Shingo, who hears the title noise that signifies his impending death, by Kawabata.;;(The) Sound of the Mountain|Yama no oto;;
Literature;;In one poem, this man imagined Samson asking "Could not once blinding me, cruel, suffice?  When first I looked on thee, I lost mine eyes".  Another of his poems imagines a woman whose beauty doesn't owe itself to "gaudy tire, or glist'ring shoe-tie," and begins by wondering who is the "not impossible she / That shall command my heart and me".  His best-known poem depicts a figure who wants to go to the "Moors" to "trade with them" for an "unvalued diadem," and begins "Love, thou art absolute sole lord / Of life and death".  A revised version of that poem appears in his Carmen Deo Nostro, though it originally appeared in 1646's Steps to the Temple.  For 10 points, name this British metaphysical poet of "A Hymn to the Name and Honor of the Admirable Saint Teresa".;;(Richard) Crashaw;;
Literature;;One character in this work claims that "one sparrow is worth ten ... petticoat-philosophers," after which he says that the soul of a "romantic creature" is "nothing but a common crocodile" and angrily breaks an armchair in two. Another character in this work repeatedly reminds her servant to give the horse Tobby an "extra measure of oats" and agrees to a pistol duel with the first character, who has become "angry enough to throw mud at the world". It ends with the gardener, the coachman, and the servant Luka walking in on the two main characters passionately kissing, a far cry from the hostility present at the beginning of the work. This work's main female character has spent seven months in mourning after the death of her husband Nikolai Mikhailovich, but that matters little to its main male character, Grigori, who forces his way into her house and demands that she pay him the twelve hundred rubles her husband owed him. For 15 points, identify this one-act comedy by Anton Chekov, in which Mrs. Popov repeatedly hurls the titular insult at Smirnov, who is kind of an asshole.;;(The) Boor|(The) Bear|Medved'(:) (Shutka) (v) (odnom) (deystvii);;
Literature;;A poetic form of this language called "Bhrajabuli" developed during the middle period of this language, and several Muslim poets at the Arrakan court used this language, exemplified by Daulat's Kazi's Lor-Candrani. One writer wrote the long poems Stream of Thought and The Strong-armed Hero, and the first renowned novelist of this language described the girl Kunda who falls in love with a married man, but commits suicide when the lover seeks to reconcile with his wife in The Poison Tree. Another writer wrote The Captive Ladie in English before using this language to describe the creation of a girl named Tilottama and the death of Meghanad. A more famous poem in this language contains the line "ami tomay bhalobashi" after describing its namesake region as "Sonar". For 10 points identify this language used by Madhusudan Dutt, Hemachandra Banerjee, and Bankim Chandra Chatterjee, and was also used to write Ghare Baire and Gitanjali by Rabindranath Tagore.;;Bengali|Bangla;;
Literature;;In Walter Miller's A Canticle for Liebowitz, Brother Kornhoer constructs one of these devices.  In Decline and Fall, Silenus's modern house is claimed to be for these objects, and not for people.  A "starry" one of these appears "in the machinery of night" to "angelheaded hipster" in Ginsberg's Howl.  Joan Didion's Democracy recalls touring Berkeley's nuclear reactor and feeling that the "new age" has advanced beyond this symbol.  Reuben Light asks one of these for spiritual advice, then shoots Ada and electrocutes himself on it in a Eugene O'Neill play named for one.  One of these devices is a metaphor for how history is a record of forces acting on people, and is contrasted with a symbol of such force in the twelfth century.  For 10 points, name this device which is paired with a "virgin" in The Education of Henry Adams.;;(a) dynamo;;
Literature;;At one point in this novel, the only possession of the canoe-bound protagonist is 300 monetary units and a can of beef stew.  Early on in this novel, the protagonist spots a colonel in a proud-looking uniform, leading him to enlist despite the fact that he was just denouncing nationalism.  The protagonist escaped a mental hospital by agreeing with everything the psychiatrists said, and he acted as a go-between for Argentine meat dealers and the woman they lusted after, Musyne.  The protagonist swings over the Britain after becoming enchanted with Macaulay's History of England, and he has a short fling with an American nurse named Lola, and also loved Molly when he worked for Ford in Dearborn, Michigan.  The protagonist's friend Leon attempts to get an elderly woman certified insane, but winds up blinding himself by setting a bomb in her doorway.  For 10 points, name this novel in which Ferdinand travels around, by Louis Celine.;;Journey to the End of (the) Night|Voyage au bout de la nuit;;
Literature;;One figure in this work recalls WWII in remembering that someone is always punished "for walking round the world in the wrong skin".  At the end of this work, a forsythia blooms in a pile of ash when the title character's wife returns to him.  Three people who console the title figure are a psychiatrist who argues that guilt is a disease, a priest who believes that guilt is reality, and a communist; soon after talking to them, the title character hears the Distant Voice from the Whirlwind.  After the deaths of characters in this work, messenger delivers the phrase "I am only escaped to tell thee..".  David is killed in a friendly-fire accident, Mary and Jonathan slam a car into a brick wall, Rebecca is raped and murdered, and Ruth is crushed when a city gets bombed, but the title figure is still not mad.  Zuss and Nickles fuck with the title figure in, for 10 points, this retelling of the Job story by Archibald MacLeish.;;J(.)B(.)
Literature;;One character in this work sees a figure from Dostoevsky's The Possessed in a dream, while another character lusts after his milk maid. That character is a tenant with the central family and is spied upon as he contemplates spending counterfeit money. This work also describes the farcical election of Pavel Skoropadsky, and the central family owns a stove which is placed near some tiles depicting Peter the Great. In chapter three of this work, Leonid Shervinsky hits on Elena after learning that her husband Sergei Talberg, a member of the title group, has left to fight Petlyura. Later, another member of the central family, Nikolka, pistol-whips a janitor after watching Colonel Nai-Turs die. The oldest member of this work's central family, the doctor Alexei, falls in love with Julia Reiss and nearly dies of typhus. Ending with the withdrawal of the Cossacks across the Dnieper, for 10 points, identify this novel set during the Russian Revolution which focuses on the Turbin family, written by Mikhail Bulgakov.;;(The) White Guard;;
Literature;;One character in this novel converses when the protagonist has candy or cheese.  A scuffle in this novel takes place when one character becomes incensed that another has touched a lace handkerchief.  The central locale smells of tobacco and sweat, and is lined with mattresses along the wall.  Among the people the protagonist encounters in this novel are a Belgian painter who is slowly going insane named Count Bragard, and a rosy-cheeked fat man named Rockyfeller, while other characters include three named after people in Pilgrim's Progress, collectively dubbed the Delectable Mountains, and a muscular black man named Jean Le Negre.  The protagonist and his friend B. are sent there when B. writes a letter that the censors find suspicious, leading to the protagonist being questioned about whether he hates the Germans.  For 10 points, name this memoir in which E.E. Cummings is thrown in the title prison.;;(The) Enormous Room;;
Literature;;A sex scene in this novel sees a woman "open up like an altar" after rubbing a wafer on her thighs and entreating the protagonist to eat it.  One character in this novel often invokes the calling of Gabriel's trumpet in her locked room, and that character also constantly strokes the pet rabbit Saga.  The protagonist enters the employ of a woman who lives in a ramshackle gothic house when he answers a newspaper advertisement that appears to call for his services specifically, and is hired to order General Llorente's memoirs.  The protagonist figures out that one woman in this novel is over 109 years old, and ultimately that he is turning into a double-person whose older half is General Llorente himself.  For 10 points, name this novel whose title character is the elderly Consuelo's young doppelganger, by Carlos Fuentes.;;Aura;;
Literature;;One line from this poem names a book which discusses "Yeats Great Rooted Blossomer" and "Keats' Sylvan Historian" whose final chapter is an attack on the "Heresy of Paraphrase". This poem compares its speaker and his lover to a phoenix: "So, to one neutral thing both sexes fit. / We die and rise the same, and prove / Mysterious by this love". The conceit is about she "to whom love was peace, that now is rage," with countries and towns begging "from above a pattern of your love!" "And if no piece of chronicle we prove, / We'll build in sonnets pretty rooms; / As well a well-wrought urn becomes / The greatest ashes, as half-acre tombs".  Calling "for God's sake hold your tongue, and let me love," FTP name this hymn of religious sanctioning of love, by John Donne.;;(The) Canonization;;
Literature;;The narrator of this work "liked Marx," but remembers once remarking  that "if you screwed Krupskaya all the time, you'd end up writing a lousy book like Materialism and Empiriocriticism". The policeman De Angelis encounters one of this work's main characters at the Picatrix and later interviews that character and the narrator. At one point, this work's narrator goes to an Umbanda ritual, where his Brazilian companion Amparo falls into a trance. After leaving Brazil, the protagonist falls in love with a woman named Lia and begins working for the publisher Mr. Garamond. The narrator and his two friends hire Count Aglie, who claims to be the immortal Comte de Saint-Germain, after which, inspired by a book by Colonel Ardenti they begin using the computer Abulafia to randomly rearrange text into a document they call "The Plan," which Diotallevi blames for his cancer. Told mostly in flashbacks, it both ends and begins with the hanging of Jacopo Belbo from the title object and the narrator Casaubon's claims that the Tres secret society are chasing him. For 10 points, identify this satire of conspiracy theories, a novel by Umberto Eco.;;Foucault's Pendulum|(Il) Pendolo di Foucault;;
Literature;;The protagonist of this work believes he has found a person with heroic stuff--another Joan of Arc, George Sand, or Madame Curie--and it's up to him to introduce her to posterity. Married to a wife who left him for a Brazilian painter, the hero of this play has spent his entire life planning to write books, and now wants to see the Pacific Ocean, or drown in it. One character in this work reads Francois Villon poems, which Boze Herzlinger thinks are stupid. Fat Paula and the Chisolms are among those held in the Black Mesa Bar-B-Q in this play, at which a gunfight breaks out after American Legionnaires led by Jason Maple show up. Its protagonist asks Duke Mantee to shoot him so that Gabby Maple will get the reward from his life insurance policy. For 10 points, identify this play about the drifter Alan Squier, a Robert Sherwood work set in Arizona.;;(The) Petrified Forest;;
Literature;;William Alexander's was known as Aurora, while the one by Richard Lynche is called Diella.  Bartholomew Griffin wrote one about a woman who was "more chaste than kind" entitled Fidessa.  Thomas Watson's was called Hecatompathia, while one dedicated to the Countess of Pembroke begins by noting that "unto the boundless Ocean" of a certain woman's beauty "runs this poor river".  That one, Samuel Daniel's Delia, is less well known than the Idea of Michael Drayton or than a work which contains 11 songs and 108 examples of another kind of poem.  For 10 points, name this kind of work, examples of which include the Astrophel and Stella of Philip Sidney and a group of 154 poems by Shakespeare.;;sonnet sequence(s)|sonnet(s);;
Literature;;One character in this work has a miscarriage after her husband's mistress Aguri carefully places a nail on a staircase which causes her to trip. At the beginning of its second section, one character has a nightmare where she pokes the eye of her husband's corpse which was buried by an avalanche. That character's lover impregnates a character whom he had earlier seen during a talk on the Fireflies chapter of The Tale of Genji, and that girl is the retarded twin sister of Akio, Harume. The discovery of an essay titled An Account of the Shrine in the Fields gives the central characters insight into the personality who seems to control their fates, Mieko. This work traces the love triangle between Tsuneo Ibuki, Toyoki Mikame, and Yasuko Togano, all of whom research spirit posession in Heian Japan. For 10 points, identify this work whose title objects are used to describe the personalities of its central characters and were important to the Noh theater, clearly the second most famous novel of Fumiko Enchi.;;Masks|Onnamen;;
Literature;;One character in this work admits that her communist mother was the "only person in her family to amount to anything," and that character describes another character who reads "Chinese poetry" and "drinks lukewarm sugarless tea". Throughout the play, that character consumes an apple, and that character also asks a character to ask her out to Warren Enright's party. One character in this work admits to considering himself as Baudelaire while in college when his told that everybody who went to his college "thought they were Averell Harriman". That character is also embarrassed after he is called Thomas Woollyhead and sees the travelers of the subway car join the female character in her vulgar dancing. Towards its end, that character claims that if Bessie Smith killed white men, she wouldn't have to created music, which leads up to his stabbing by the female. For 10 points, identify this work which ends with Lula murdering Clay, written by Imamu Amiri Baraka.;;Dutchman;;
Literature;;This work's prefatory materials include a congratulatory "Letter to the Editor" written by the author to himself and a parody of the introduction to Middleton's Life of Cicero.  Its title character gives away several hundred guineas to servants and beggars, explaining that if a woman marries for money she should be able to spend it, though her mother Henrietta had earlier criticized her for being seduced without getting paid in advance.  Framed as an exchange between Parsons Oliver and Tickletext written by Conny Keyber, it sees Mrs. Jewkes scheme to evade the efforts of Parson Williams and get its title character in bed with Squire Booby, who has that title character make her name more respectable.  For 10 points, name this work that, like Joseph Andrews, is a Henry Fielding parody of Samuel Richardson's Pamela.;;(An) (Apology) (for) (the) (Life) (of) (Miss) Shamela (Andrews);;
Literature;;The police station of this location lies over a tunnel constructed by some nuns of the Order of St. Bridget, while another resident is notified of the death of her brother, who she believes is the hobo she sees every day. In addition to Miss Frierne, one resident of this location harasses Nelly Mahone along with the teenager Leslie, but returns the notebook belonging to the main character which contains odd phrases about a person named "Cheese". Mavis is the mother of yet another notable resident of this location starts working two jobs and refuses to go out with her fiancé to save money. Its most famous resident's doings to the death of Merle Coverdale at the hands of Mr. Durce and has several confrontations with Trevor Lomas, while performing "research" for firms like Meadows, Meade & Grindley and Drover-Willis. That scotch character also keeps pointing out his "fatal flaw", and also is also thought to influence Humphrey Place's decision to not marry Dixie Morse at the beginning of this work. Dougal Douglas temporarily wrecks havoc in, for 10 points, what town whose Ballad is narrated in a novel by Muriel Spark?;;Peckham Rye;;
Literature;;Much like Jonathan Magin, the protagonist of this novel has an alarming dream in which two Mexican priests dressed as jaguars shove books straight through his body.  The three sections of this work all have the words "World" and "Head" in them, and one character in this book is a pickpocket who aspires to be the world chess champion.  The protagonist hides out in Benedikt Pfaff's cellar when his wife and that pickpocket, Fischerle, start hounding him.  The protagonist hires Therese to care for his personal 25,000-volume library, which she kicks him out of, causing him to go insane and "buy" mental copies of his entire library with his life savings.  For 10 points, name this work whose title act is Peter Wein's book-burning of self-immolation, by Elias Canetti.;;Auto-da-fe;;
Literature;;In one of this author's novels, a "corn-husk devil" named Tazol convinces Celestino Yumi to roam the countryside while exposing his penis, then accept Communion without going to confession, causing women to sin and compounding the sin by not repenting.  Another of his novels sees Lester Mead suggest that banana growers form a cooperative, only to see it squashed by Tropbanana.  In addition to Mulata and Strong Wind, this author wrote a novel in which Gaspar Ilom fights against a bunch of slash-and-burn farmers who exploit the land.  He also wrote a novel in which The Zany murders Colonel Sonriente, and deals with Angel Face's love for the title character's daughter Camila.  For 10 points, name this author of Men of Maize and The Green Pope who satirized the dictator of Guatemala in his El Senor Presidente.;;(Miguel) (Angel) Asturias;;
Literature;;This author's dissertation under Paul de Man at Iowa was titled Myself I Must Remake and focused on the poetry of Yeats.  This author attacked the current mode of teaching comparative literature, suggesting a radical reform in The Death of a Discipline.  This translator of works like Imaginary Maps and Breast Stories is also known for writing a long introduction to a short story that saw her discuss J.M. Coetzee's essay on the "Bloody Chamber".  That story is "Draupati," about a woman who is tortured for her involvement in a paramilitary movement, by Mahasweta Devi.  She also wrote a book of criticism inspired by Gramsci's terminology that advocates feminism and proposes the reestablishment of a lost collective voice.  For 10 points, name this author of "Can the Subaltern Speak?," a noted female Indian postcolonialist.;;(Gayatree) (Chakravorty) Spivak;;
Literature;;Sid Willis is a former practitioner of this activity, and carries around and talks to an implement of this activity in Percival Everett's Suder.  Until he gets caught in bed with Laura, Chet tries to make a living doing this in Stegner's The Big Rock Candy Mountain. This activity is imagined by six-year-old J. Henry Waugh in a novel about the "Universal Association" of it by Robert Coover.  In a novel focusing on this activity, Word Smith documents the activities of such practitioners of this activity as Roland Agni and Gil Gamesh, who work for the Ruppert Mundys.  Another person who does this activity for a living is shot with a silver bullet by Harriet, and is named Roy Hobbes.  For 10 points, name this sport that's at the center of Roth's Great American Novel and Malamud's The Natural.;;(playing) baseball;;
Literature;;The first poem in this collection recalls a "loved and tended" house, and is dedicated to the poet's father David.  Another poem in this collection is dedicated to "Lester after the Western" and talks about "Strong men, riding horses".  Two characters contrasted in this collection are a northern woman who "loiters in Mississippi" and a Mississippi woman who "burns bacon".  It also contains what purports to be the "last quatrain" of a "ballad for Emmitt Till," as well as a poem about some people who "strike straight".  This collection is named after a poem about two "Mostly Good" people who remember "twinklings and twinges" while eating on plain chipware with tin flatware.  Featuring a title poem about an "old yellow pair" for whom "dinner is a casual affair," for 10 points, name this poetry collection that features "We Real Cool," by Gwendolyn Brooks, about some munchers on the title legumes.;;(The) Bean Eaters;;
Literature;;Towards the end of the scene one, the female protagonist drops a bracelet as she looks out a window, and that character later describes why she is unable to fire the cook. At the beginning of this play, the protagonist describes volunteering at an accident site to a milkmaid who fulfills his request of providing him some water, and scene three of this work begins with the protagonist and his love discussing the beauty of hyacinths and is set in a room decorated with a statue of Buddha. One character suggests that the protagonist watch a performance of The Valkyeries with the Colonel and his daughter Adele. This work also sees a character come out of her closet at a dinner party, and point out that she can "stop time in its course" by stopping a pendulum clock, and rings a bell to summon Bengtsson, who then describes Hummel's criminal past; that character is "the mummy". All this occurs as the protagonist and Adele play songs on a harp, and Boecklin's Island of the Dead is played at the end of this play as a "Death Screen" is brought on for Adele. For 10 points, identify this play featuring the Young Arkenholz, by August Strindberg.;;Ghost Sonata|Spöksonaten;;
Literature;;The One Who Came Back meets The Man With The Hammer in a parable told by a mommy cow to her two children in this author's "A Mother's Tale".  In one novel by this author, three boys go swimming at 3:45 AM in the Sand Cut quarry, and the protagonist can't stop fantasizing about Minnielee Henley's vagina, which he saw when both of them were climbing a tree.  That novel by this author features a twelve-year-old named Richard, whose nickname is "Sockertees," and his internal monologue on Good Friday.  Another novel by this man sees the central figure's father take him to a Charlie Chaplin movie and give him a Life Saver to chew on, but that father soon perishes, leaving Rufus to wonder whether the butterfly that landed on his coffin was a miracle.  The author of The Morning Watch, for 10 points, name this author of A Death in the Family.;;(James) Agee;;
