British Literature;;This work describes a "Shakespeherian Rag" as "so elegant/ So intelligent".  In one section of this work, "a current under the sea" picks the bones of a man who is "a fortnight dead," and another section describes a chair in the light of a "sevenbranched candelabra". This work's second section repeats the line "HURRY UP PLEASE IT'S TIME". The speaker meets Stetson on London Bridge during this work, which sees Tireisias complain about his "wrinkled dugs". This work's final section ends with a quote from the Upanishads and is called "What the Thunder Said". For 10 points, name this poem that begins "April is the cruellest month," by T.S. Eliot.;;(The) Waste Land
Biology;;The shelterin complex protects these entities from non-homologous end joining, and they can form G-quadraplexes with bonding between G and C sequences. The TRAP assay is used to study the activity of enzymes associated with them. Disruptions in TFR2 binding to these regions results in damage signaling. The RNA-containing enzyme that extends these was discovered by Blackburn and is responsible for the characteristic repeat of these entities. Their shortening causes the end-replication problem, which leads to the Hayflick limit on eukaryotic cell division. For 10 points, name this region found at the end of linear chromosomes.;;telomere(s)
Geography;;Evidence against one hypothesis of this feature's formation stems from Abrajano's discovery of sapropel mud in a nearby body of water. Once the region around this body was colonized by the Milesians, Greek tradition referred to it as "Hospitable". One seaport on this body is near the estuary that it forms with the Dniester River. It connects to the Sea of Azov through the Strait of Kerch, while the Bosporus connects it to Marmara and through Marmara to the Aegean Sea. Notable cities on this body of water include Yalta, Odessa, and Sevastopol.  For 10 points, identify this sea bordeed by the Ukraine and Russia to the north and Turkey to the south.;;Black (Sea)
Chemistry;;Copper catalysis is used to effect the synthesis of aryl ones through the Ullman condensation. The compound BADGE, which has one of these functional groups, is an agonist for the PPAR gamma transcription factors. The Brook rearrangement is used to produce silyl forms of these, while another type which often used for phase transfer catalysis are known as the "crown" variety. Secondary ones have a tendency to spontaneously form peroxides. Cyclic ones are known as oxiranes, and when they come in three-membered rings, they are called epoxides. For 10 points, identify this functional group, which consists of two alkyl groups connected to an oxygen.;;ether(s)
Music;;One motif in this work represents the slogan "free, but happy". The third movement features a 37-measure fugue on a D pedal point. Its sixth movement asks "O death, where is thy sting"? and includes a double fugue. A soprano solo in the fifth movement ends "So will I comfort you," and its first section notably omits the violins. Movements from Handel's The Messiah are sometimes inserted into this work, as its libretto does not mention the sacrifice of Jesus. Written after the death of the composer's mother, this piece begins with the text "Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted". For 10 points, name this funeral mass by Johannes Brahms.;;(A) German Requiem|Ein Deutsches Requiem
Mythology;;One of these angrily crushed a jellyfish for failing to obtain monkey liver, and that one lives in a coral palace and owns gems that control the tides. One of these mutilated the sea slug for refusing to swear an oath of loyalty along with all the other fish, and the one of scholarship was created by the apotheosis of a politician and is associated with the ume tree. A marriage between two of them cursed a certain country's royalty of with early deaths. One of them was washed out of her father's left eye, and retreated to the Heavenly Cave after her brother went on a rampage. For 10 points, name these spirits like Raijin and Amaterasu, spirits from Shintoism.;;kami
Economics;;This man argued that higher education sorts students by ability using existing information rather than new information in "Higher Education as a Filter". He analyzed asymmetric information in "Uncertainty and the Welfare Economics of Medical Care," and he gives his name to a type of risk aversion with Pratt. With Gerard Debreu, he wrote Existence of a Competitive Equilibrium for a Competitive Economy. This author of Essays in the Theory of Risk-Bearing may be best known for a concept that states individual preferences must be translated into community preferences in voting systems. For 10 points, name this man with a namesake "impossibility theorem".;;(Kenneth) Arrow
World History;;Peter Duus wrote about the ambivalence of contemporary historians towards this period, which saw the publication of the Rescript on Education and abolished the han system. The Mito school of a certain religion became popular after this event, and this period saw a revolt ended by the Battle of Shiroyama that was led by Saigo Takamori. Its general goals, including a commitment that "evil customs of the past shall be broken off," were set forth in the Five Charter Oath. It featured the Satsuma Rebellion, and this event was in part a response to the arrival of Commodore Perry. For 10 points, identify this "restoration," that ended the Tokugawa shogunate.;;Meiji (Restoration)|Meiji (Ishin)
American Literature;;In one section of this work, a woman accepts her husband's "story of being kidnapped by pirates on Lake Michigan" to preserve their marriage. One of its sections tells a "joke of cosmic size" from Professor Newcomer. One character in this work asks why everyone lets Dora and Benjamin Pantier's son and his lover make a resting place their "unholy pillow". This book including sections about Sexsmith the Dentist and Abraham Lincoln's supposed lover Ann Rutledge. It opens with a poem about Elmer, Herman, Ella and Kate, all of whom are "sleeping on the hill". For 10 points, identify this book of poetry about some dead Midwesterners, by Edgar Lee Masters.;;Spoon River Anthology
Physics;;The probability distribution for the position of a particle in Brownian motion changes over time according to the Kolmogorov forward equation, often named for Fokker and this man. The observation that you can't trace Hawking radiation all the way back to the event horizon is called his "trans" problem. A function with a cubic term in the numerator and an exponential in the denominator, which at high frequencies reduces to the Wien approximation, describes the intensity of radiation at a given frequency and bears his name. For 10 points, the energy of a wave divided by its wavelength gives a constant represented by h, named for which German physicist?;;(Max) Planck
European History;;This event saw the publication of an open letter from Gaspar Fagels and the storming of Edward Hales's Castle. One leader involved in this event earlier published a letter to eliminate Johan and Cornelis de Witt. After this event, that latter monarch's forces would be defeated by the former at the Battle of the Boyne. This event was spurred by the Declaration of Indulgence, and it resulted when the central figure had a son who trumped his Protestant sister in the line to the throne. The descendents of the man removed in this event instigated the Jacobite wars. For 10 points, name this event that ousted James II of Britain and crowned William and Mary.;;(the)Glorious Revolution|Bloodless Revolution|Revolution of 1688
World Literature;;Hisao reveals to Asako that he plans to assassinate his father in this man's play The Rokumeikan. Akio likens the tears of his former lover to the title objects in "Fountains in the Rain," from his collection Acts of Worship. Noguchi marries the proprietress of the Setsugoan in his After the Banquet. Fusako's fiancé Ryuji is given drugged tea at the end of another of this man's novels, The Sailor Who Fell from Grace with the Sea. In one of his works, the line "when you meet the Buddha, kill him" convinces Mizoguchi to burn down the Kinkakuji. For 10 points, name this author of The Temple of the Golden Pavilion and Confessions of a Mask who killed himself on live TV in Japan.;;(Yukio) Mishima
American History;;One battle in this conflict began when the Guanica lighthouse keeper warned Governor Macias, leading to the Battle of Yacao.  A battle during this conflict was followed by the attack of Camara's Flying Relief Column, and followed a rout led by the U.S.S. Olympia. Vara de Rey's five hundred held against eight thousand enemy combatants at El Caney during this conflict. One battle in this war featured the charge of a cavalry band under Leonard Wood and was named for San Juan Hill. For 10 points, identify this "splendid little war," begun with the explosion of the U.S.S. Maine, that featured yellow journalism and the Rough Riders.;;Spanish-American (War)
Computer Science;;Munro and Suwanda advocate using a bi-parental one in some cases, allowing for square root n search times. Their "soft" variety introduces "corruptions" to increase operation speed. Crane introduced one that uses an S-value and is unbalanced, the "leftist" type. Better amortized runtime than allowed by binomial ones is achieved by lazy evaluation made possible in a specially defined forest, their "Fibonacci" type. The namesake of an n log n-time sorting algorithm, it is implemented as a tree for which all children are less in value than their parents. For 10 points, name this range of allocatable memory named for its indeterminate shape and size.;;heap
World Literature;;A discussion and recitation of Pushkin's "The Poor Knight" in this novel annoys a character whose son is offered 75,000 rubles to marry a woman he hates. One character in this work writes an "Essential Statement," and that man, Hippolyte, explains at a party that he will kill himself the next time the sun rises. The main character of this work breaks a vase at a party and rejects Aglaya, who absconds with a man posing as a count. That title character finds Nastasya murdered in the bed of a rival he met on the way home from a Swiss sanatorium, Rogozhin. For 10 points, name this novel about the foolish Prince Myshkin, by Feodor Dostoyevsky.;;(The) Idiot
Music;;The soundtrack to the film Trois Couleurs was composed by a man from this country. A soprano sings "Where has he gone, my dearest son"? in the third movement of a work commemorating this country's war dead, Symphony of Sorrowful Songs. Another composer from this country extensively quoted "Silent Night" in his Christmas Symphony and also wrote a piece based on tone clusters, Threnody to the Victims of Hiroshima. Another composer from this country wrote a Revolutionary etude as well as a set of preludes for piano that includes one in D minor called Raindrop. For 10 points, name this country, home of composer Frédéric Chopin.;;Poland
Mythology;;The pharaoh must pass through the body of one of these creaturescalled Penweti, and Horus fought one of these, a son of Set named Maga. A local god of these entities at Athribis called Khenty-Khety was an avatar of Horus. One deity personified by this animal had a cult center at Kom Ombo and a hawk-headed son name Khonsu. That deity's mother was Neith, and he invented the fish trap in order to recover the severed hands of Horus. For 10 points, name this animal, which in Egyptian mythology is personified by Sobek, a predatory reptile often associated with the Nile.;;crocodile
Biology;;Komatz et al. determined that there is a higher incidence of taurodontism in those with this condition. Its sufferers exhibit depressed secretion of inhibin B. Besides these observations of Sertoli cells in seminiferous tubules, patients exhibit increased incidence of lupus erythematosus, decreased expression of facial hair, and gynecomastia. The opportunity to form an additional methylated object protects individuals from certain recessive conditions. Patients often exhibit small testicles, though the principal effects of this condition are high serum FSH and LH levels. For 10 points, identify this trisomy in which affected individuals have two X chromosomes and one Y.;;Klinefelter's (syndrome)
British Literature;;The speaker of this poem tells of the executioner's innocent horse that scratches its behind on a tree, and this poem describes "some untidy spot" where "dogs go on with their doggy life".  This work details "white legs" that the sun shone on, "as it had to," and its end sees a "delicate ship" that "had somewhere to get to" and "sailed calmly on".  This poem describes "Something amazing, a boy falling out of the sky," and claims that "About suffering" the Old Masters were "never wrong".  Named for the gallery in which Landscape with the Fall of Icarus is housed, for 10 points, name this W.H. Auden poem.;;Musee des Beaux-Arts
European History;;The Nagoi incited riots in Uglich following an event that helped precipitate this time period. A small contingent under Stanislaw Zolkiewski defeated a much larger force under Christop Horn and Jakob de la Gardie during the Battle of Klushino during this era. During it, forces under Sigismund III Vasa laid siege to Smolensk, and this period saw the Treaty of Deulino end the Polish-Muscovite War. This period began with the failed rule of Boris Gudonov, and it saw the rule of three men known as the False Dmitris. For 10 points, identify this period that began after the death of Fyodr I and ended with the accession of Mikhail Romanov in 1613.;;Time of Troubles
Biology;;Phycobilisomes are a type of light-harvesting structures found in these organisms, and NtcA transcription factors regulate the expression of nitrogen metabolism genes in them. The KaiC phosphorylation cycle maintains circadian rhythms in these organisms. The evolutionary history of their rubisco protein is used to classify them into alpha and beta types, and the evolution of these organisms resulted in an oxygen rich atmosphere. Endosymbiosis of these organisms with eukaryotic cells is thought to have resulted in chloroplasts, though they are often named as a type of algae. For 10 points, name these organisms named for their blue-green appearance.;;cyanobacteria
American Literature;;The narrator of one of his short stories disapproves of the title character's desire to be a jazz pianist, while Jo commits perjury as Parnell defends the store-owner Lyle in a case concerning Richard's murder in another work. The title character of one of his novel murders Guillaume after ending a homosexual relationship with the protagonist David, and another work features characters such as Florence and Elizabeth Grimes and centers on the stepson of Stephen Gabriel who attains salvation on his fourteenth birthday. For 10 points, identify this author of "Sonny's Blues," Blues for Mister Charlie, Giovanni's Room, and Go Tell it on the Mountain.;;(James Arthur) Baldwin
American History;;This event was preceded by a presidential order that reversed a transfer of authority in the Daniels bill, and the role of one man involved in it would lead to the investigation of money given by the Thomson-Urrutia Treaty. Another man associated with it was earlier involved in the inquiry into the Ballinger-Pinchot affair. One man associated with it avoided jail time but resigned as Secretary of the Navy, Edwin Denby. For 10 points, name this event that stemmed from Edward Doheny and Harry Sinclair being granted rights to naval reserve lands by Interior Secretary Albert Fall, a scandal named for a Wyoming oil reserve, during the Harding administration.;;Teapot Dome (Scandal)
Music;;One character in this opera sings the aria "Di rigori armato il seno", but is interrupted by a character enraged by the talk of an attorney. In the second act, one character is duped with the help of Annina and Valzacchi in an inn. The arrival of the Commissary of Police adds to the confusion, and Herr von Faninal eventually breaks his daughter's engagement to the Baron Ochs von Lerchenau. After that engagement is broken, the Marschallin sets up the title character with Sophie despite their earlier relationship.  For 10 points, name this Richard Strauss opera in which the Marschallin had earlier made Octavian the title character by having him deliver the title silver flower.;;(Der) Rosenkavalier|Knight of the Rose;
American Literature;;The creator of one of these objects, Heinrich, falls in love with the elfish spirit Rautendelein in a work by Gerhart Hauptmann, while Dora Greenfield and Toby Gashe discover one near the Imber Abbey in a novel by Iris Murdoch. In another novel, Major Joppolo attempts to find one of these objects for the titular Italian town. A poem about these objects describes "what a world of merriment their melody foretells," and they also appear in the title of a work where Robert Jordan attempts to blow up a bridge in Spain. For 10 points, identify these objects whose "tintinnabulation" is described in an Edgar Allen Poe poem, and which toll in a work by Hemingway.;;Bell(s)
Chemistry;;In the Kjeldahl method for analyzing organic nitrogen content, this procedure is followed by titration of its ammonia product. VLE diagrams are used in the McCabe-Thiele method to determine the number of stages over which this process must occur. One type of these involves lowering the pressure on the system below the vapor pressure of the desired product, and is called the "vacuum" type. The Fenske equation gives the number of theoretical plates required for the "fractional" type of it. For 10 points, identify this process used to separate volatile liquids based on the differences in their boiling points.;;distillation
Mythology;;The first king of Ethiopia, Enalos, was married to this figure's daughter Benthesikyme. Asteria turned herself into the floating island of Delos after this god attempted to seduce her, and his union with Demeter produced Despoine and Areion. He changed another woman he raped into the Lapith warrior Caeneus, and Ovid says that Athena turned Medusa into a Gorgon after she slept with this god. He sent a monster to attack Troy after he and Apollo weren't paid for building walls for Laomedon, and he fathered Otus, Ephialtes, and Polyphemus. For 10 points, name this god whose wife Amphitrite bore his son Triton, the Greek god of earthquakes and the sea.;;Poseidon|Neptune
World History;;The election of one Pope by this name was marked by the arrest of Ciro Menotti by the duke of Modena which sparked several rebellions. One of them appointed cardinal Malatesta to preside over a council which saw Alexander V's election to the papacy, and the reign of two consecutive Popes by this name was marked by the iconoclasm launched by Leo the Isaurian. The first dude by this name sent Augustine to Britain to convert Ethelbert of Kent, while another created the Propaganda and issued the bull Inter Gravissimas, which provided an update for the Julian calendar. For 10 points, identify these popes, one of whom lends his name to a type of chanting.;;Gregory
British Literature;;The speaker of this poem describes experience as "an arch wherethrough gleams / that untraveled world," but earlier notes that "I am become a name". The title character praises his son who can "make mild a rugged people" but laments his duty to "mete and dole unequal laws to a savage race". The title character "cannot rest from travel" but claims "I am a part of all that I have met" after describing the "drunk delight" of battle in Troy. The title figure is determined to "to touch the Happy isles / and see Achilles," and resolves "To strive, to seek, to find, and not to yield". For 10 points, identify this poem about an Ithacan king by Alfred, Lord Tennyson.;;Ulysses
American History;;This man was promoted to brevet major after the same battle that saw Santa Anna ride off and abandon his false leg; he received that promotion for finding a trail that allowed Winfield Scott's forces to flank and thus win the Battle of Cerro Gordo. Between those two posts, he assumed his most famous role by replacing Joseph Johnston and later won the Seven Days Battles, but only after spending a year serving as a senior military advisor to Jefferson Davis. For 10 points, name this son of "Light Horse Harry" who was a top graduate of West Point and went on to lead the Army of Northern Virginia for the Confederacy during the Civil War.;;(Robert) (E(.)) Lee
Philosophy;;One work by this man includes as its twenty-third claim that all friendships are created for their ability to benefit, which appears in his Sententiae Vaticanae. This man agreed with Archytas that the mind is more powerful than vision and vision in turn more powerful than the other senses, and some letters he wrote to Pythocles, Menoeceus, and Herodotus. Lucretius described this man's philosophy in De Rerum Natura, and after moving to Athens, this philosopher established a school named "the Garden".  For 10 points, name this Greek philosopher who believed that the absence of pain best promoted pleasure.;;Epicurus
Geography;;The Anaconda Mining Company was founded in this state by Marcus Daly after a discovery of silver and copper deposits, and its town of Glasgow is located near its Fort Peck Lake. The Pompey's Pillar national monument in this state is notable for the signature of William Clark inscribed upon it. It has the distinction of being the only state with rivers that eventually flow into the Pacific Ocean, Gulf of Mexico, and Hudson Bay. Also home to the Glacier National park, the Clark, the Blackfoot and the Bitterroot Rivers run through Missoula in this state. For 10 points, identify this state, whose largest city is Billings.;;Montana
Philosophy;;A theorem named for him solves a special case of the Apollonius problem and gives the curvature of two Soddy circles which are tangent to three mutually tangent circles. For a given curve, a method named for this man to find the tangent line at any point relies on introducing a circle with its center on the x axis, and the change of signs in a polynomial equation can be used to find the number of real positive zeros of that polynomial according to this man's rule of signs. This French thinker lends his name to the coordinate system using the coordinates x and y. For 10 points, identify this dude who notably said "I think, therefore I am".;;(Rene) Descartes
Art;;In one of his paintings, St. Joseph holds a musical score as an angel plays a violin while the Madonna and Child are asleep. In addition to Rest on the Flight Into Egypt, he painted a his Penitent Magdalene which features a pitcher of unguent, and he also painted a Self Portrait as Bacchus and Boy With a Basket of Fruit. In one of his work three characters appear astonished as Jesus reveals his true identity at a dinner table, while in light streams into a room from the top right as the title tax collector acknowledges Jesus. For 10 points, name this creator of Supper at Emmaus and The Calling of St. Matthew, a baroque painter known for his use of chiaroscuro.;;(Michelangelo Merisi da) Caravaggio |(Michelangelo) Merisi
World History;;One account of this battle tells of the daring attack of Aminias. The day before this battle a prophecy Euphrantides led to the sacrifice of three men related to the opposing commander; that commander watched this battle from Mount Aegaleos. Damasithymus was attacked by an ally, but this attack was mistaken by both sides as favorable and allowed for the escape of Artemisia. A few weeks prior to this engagement, Ephialtes' betrayal allowed the aggressor's forces to overcome the defense led by Leonidas at Thermopylae. For 10 points, name this battle that saw Xerxes I's fleet defeated by Themistocles, named for an island near Athens.;;(Battle of) Salamis
Psychology;;A successor to this experiment was repudiated by Rank and Jacobson with the use of Valium, and used three different hospitals and the drug Astroten under the supervision of Charles Hofling. The first version of it included blinking lights, while its second version included scheduled auditory responses. This experiment was moved to a run-down office building in Bridgeport, but results did not differ significantly from when it ran in the "Interaction Laboratory" in New Haven.  For 10 points, name this experiment run at Yale that saw "teachers" administer shocks to "learners" due to the presence of an authority figure, testing the obedience of its participants.;;Milgram (Obedience Experiment)
World Literature;;One author from this country wrote described Andres dreaming about meeting a Cuban, and recounts a kidnapping of the Vip by members of "the Screwery". One of this country's leaders described the life of the titular "Tiger of the Plains" during the rule of Juan Rosas. Another author from here described the adolescent years of the movie crazed Jose Casals, while another wrote about Yu Tsun, who realizes that the title entity is a novel written by Ts'ui Pen.  For 10 points, name this country, home to the authors of Facundo, Betrayed by Rita Hayworth, and "The Garden of Forking Paths," the home country of Manuel Puig and Jorge Luis Borges.;;Argentina
Physics;;The IceCube project and its preceding AMANDA project used it to detect neutrino interactions with the Antarctic ice cap. Objects which detect this analyze the radii of certain "rings" formed by it, and it can also be observed when the motion occurs over a diffraction pattern, called the Smith-Purcell effect. The magnitude of this can is proportional to the integral over all frequencies of omega times 1 minus 1 over dielectric constant times beta squared, which is known as the Frank Tamm formula.  For 10 points, name this radiation that occurs when charged particles move through a medium faster than the speed of light, named for its Russian discoverer.;;C(h)erenkov (radiation)
American History;;Willis Richardson's "Compromise" and "The Broken Banjo" were the first two plays produced by this man's creation, the Krigwa Players. He described the cause of the titular predicament as "the sacrifice of intelligence" in order to bear children in his essay "The Damnation of Women". He created the term "double-consciousness" in an essay later republished as "Of Our Spiritual Strivings," and he was the first editor of The Crisis magazine. His meeting with opponents of the Atlanta Compromise led to the foundation of the Niagara movement. For 10 points, name this leader of the NAACP, an opponent of Booker T. Washington who wrote The Souls of Black Folk.;;(William Edward Burghardt) Du Bois
European History;;The Basilica of Saint Martin was near the location of one battle fought here, an action that was followed up by the battle of the River Berre. That battle fought here occurred shortly after the battles of the River Garonne and Bordeaux at which Odo, the duke of Aquitaine, was routed. One winning side at this location was commanded by a man who served the Merovingians as mayor of the palace, while another victor at this site captured John II and was Edward, the Black Prince. For 10 points, name this site where Abd ar-Rahman was hammered by Charles Martel, which, was the site of a 1356 British victory in the Hundred Years' War that is not Agincourt or Crecy.;;(Battle of) Poitiers |Tours
Chemistry;;The Pourbaix diagrams plot a quantity that appears in this equation as a function of pH, while a generalized form of it which includes a charge transfer coefficient is named for Butler and Volmer. An extension of this equation to various ion species, the Goldman-Hodgkin-Katz equation, and this equation relates Gibbs free energy to the electromotive force in a Galvanic cell. Often used to calculate the resting potential across neurons, this is, for 10 points, which equation used to calculate the reduction potential in electrochemistry, named for the German winner of the 1920 Nobel Prize in Chemistry?;;Nernst (equation)
Geography;;The WACA stadium can be found in a city in the southern portion of this country. The basin of one lake in this country contains cities such as Marreem. "Shires" along the longest river in this country include Deniliquin and Wakool, while sights in one city in this country include the Paddy's Market and Harbour Bridge. This country's interior contains such sites as Alice Springs and Uluru.  One delta in this country is formed by the Murray and Darling rivers, while the lake in this country is Lake Eyre and its largest mountain is Mount Kosciuszko. For 10 points, name this country that contains states such as New South Wales and Victoria.;;Australia
Social Science;;This author argued in one work that Wittgenstein's comparison of language to city is inappropriate. One essay by this author, whose other works include Local Knowledge, begins by claiming that the most difficult dimension to grasp in the revolutions of Asia and Africa is religion. This author echoed Weber in one essay that claimed that man is an animal bound in "webs of significance," and penned a work about a "Theater State," Negara, as well as Islam Observed and many essays that use "Thick Description". For 10 points, name this anthropologist, whose essay "Deep Play: Notes on the Balinese Cockfight" appears in his Interpretation of Cultures.;;(Clifford) Geertz
Art;;This collaborated with Michelozzo on the tomb of Antipope John XXIII, and produced two Prophets for Giotto's Campanile. His narrative reliefs include the Cantoria and one that shows the head of John the Baptist being brought to the title Feast of Herod. His depiction of Judith and Holofernes sees the latter's feet dangling off the pedestal, and one of his late works is a haggard wooden sculpture of Mary Magdalene. His most famous work was the first freestanding nude since ancient times, who stands over the head of the slain Goliath. For 10 points, name this Renaissance sculptor best known for his bronze David.;;Donatello
Biology;;The Macula Densa attaches one structure in this organ to another. Another structure found in this organ has mesangial, epithelia, and endothelial cells, and that structure contains a basement membrane of capillaries. That structure in this organ is surrounded by the Bowman's Capsule, and other structures in this organ include the proximal and distal tubules, the Loop of Henle, and the Glomerulus. Ureters leave these organs, and the adrenal glands can be found on top of these organs. Nephrons are the functional units of, for 10 points, these organs responsible for cleaning out the blood.;;(the) kidney(s)
British Literature;;In a work by this man, Prosperine is the secretary of James Morell, and that work sees Eugene Marchbanks declare his love to the title character. His other works include one in which George Crofts and Frank Gardner both want to marry one central character. In another of his works, Raina Petkoff marries her "chocolate cream soldier," Captain Bluntschli. Another work by this playwright of Candida features characters like Colonel Pickering, and centers on Henry Higgins' bet that he can purify Eliza Doolittle's speech. For 10 points, name this playwright of Arms and the Man, and Mrs. Warren's Profession, Major Barbara, and Pygmalion.;;(George) (Bernard) Shaw
European History;;This man ordered Richard Bayfield's burning at the stake, and also persecuted John Frith.  This man led a campaign against collaborators of William Tyndale while in his highest post, in which he was replaced by Thomas Audley after his failure to attend a certain wedding and his refusal to sign the Act of Supremacy. This man translated the first Pico della Mirandola biography into English, and established a friendship with Erasmus during Erasmus's visit to his country. For 10 points, name this patron saint of politicians and Lord Chancellor to Henry VIII, who got his head chopped off in 1535 and wrote Utopia.;;(Thomas) More
Phyiscs;;The Bohr van Leeuwen theorem states that any plasma with a kinetic equilibrium will reach a state where this phenomenon is zero. Free electron gases display the Landau type of this property, and materials exhibiting it have negative susceptibility. Superconductors display the "perfect" variety of this property in the Meissner Effect. This property is often described as Lenz's Law applied on a microscopic scale, and it was originally though to violate Earnshaw's Theorem. This property is exhibited by pyloric graphite and bismuth, and materials displaying it can be levitated for a few seconds. For 10 points, name this form of magnetism that expels applied magnetic fields.;;diamagnet(ism)
Mythology;;This figure supposedly fulfilled a promise to Prosymnus by sodomizing himself on that man's tomb. Often identified with the Phrygian horseman Sabazios and the Orphic Zagreus, he was the dedicatee of hymns called dithyrambs. He was once captured by pirates but escaped by turning them into dolphins, and he and his followers were once imprisoned by Lycurgus. Hestia gave up her throne on Olympus to him, and he was reborn out of his father's thigh after his mother saw his father in his full splendor. For 10 points, identify this son of Zeus and Semele, the Greek god of wine.;;Dionysus|Bacchus|Oeneus
American Literature;;This author wrote about a girl who refuses to throw away a chicken sandwich in "Just Before the War With the Eskimos". Another work by this author features a boy with "rickets in one leg and elephantiasis in other" fishing next to a "No Fishing!" sign while in Montreal. "The Chief" tells members of the "Comanche Club" a story about a deformed criminal named the "Laughing Man" in one of his works. Another work by this man sees the central character chat with Sibyl on the beach before shooting himself in the head.  For 10 points, name this creator of Seymour Glass in "A Perfect Day for Bananafish," who wrote about Holden in The Catcher in the Rye.;;(J(.)(erome)) (D(.)(avid)) Salinger
Religion;;Many major temples of this religion house atakhsh i warahran flames to ward off evil. Its followers believe that at the Bridge of the Separator, they will be judged by the messenger, the judge, and the keeper of covenants, respectively Sraosha, Rashnu, and Mithra. Though it isn't Sikhism, initiates don the sedra and kashti, an undershirt and girdle. Its followers believe that the six amesha spentas do battle agains the daevas created by Angra Mainyu. Sacred texts of this religion include the Vendidad, a collection of hymns known as Gathas, found in the Avesta. For 10 points, name this dualistic Persian religion with the principal good god Ahura Mazda.;;Zoroastrian(ism)
American History;;Robert Remini argued in one of his works that Martin van Buren did not introduce this bill to congress just to have it defeated, and support for this bill grew after a meeting in Harrisburg. One writing against this bill declares that there is a "striking distinction between Government and Sovereignty," and that this bill supported the "protection of one branch of industry at the expense of others". Those words appeared in John Calhoun's South Carolina Exposition and Protest, and this bill raised the tax on several imported goods. For 10 points, name this tariff that was signed into law by John Quincy Adams, with a repulsive nickname.;;(The Tariff of) Abominations |(The Tariff of) 1828
Art;;One painting by this artist of Lot Fleeing From Sodom and Belisarius and the Boy depicts Agrippina return to Rome with the ashes of her dead husband Germanicus. Like Pinkham Ryder, this man depicted Death on the Pale Horse. At the left of his most noted work, a church steeple rises above the clouds. In that work by this painter, a thunder-head looms in the background as a soldier in red hoists an enormous flag, and an Indian puts his fist on his chin and looks on at the title character, who has dropped his musket. For 10 points, name this American artist who painted an event from the Battle of Quebec in The Death of General Wolfe.;;(Benjamin) West
Music;;Elgar Howarth created a version of this piece for brass and percussion. One part of this work depicts women fighting and is titled "The Great News," and another section depicts Schmuyle and Samuel Goldberg. A Polish cart driven by oxen is depicted in another section of this work, while a "Hut on Fowl's Legs" appears in another. "Bydlo" and "Baba Yaga" appear in this work along with "The Catacombs," "The Old Castle," and "The Great Gate of Kiev". Its most popular version was orchestrated by Maurice Ravel. For 10 points, name this work with the "Promenade" theme, a suite of piano solos based on Victor Hartmann paintings, by Modest Mussorgsky.;;Pictures at an Exhibition
American Literature;;One work by this author notes "Surgeons must be very careful/ Where they take their knife!" while another poem declares that "You cannot put a fire out".  A work by this poet states that "Much sense is the starkest madness," and that "Much madness is divinest sense," and one poem by this poet notes that "Not one of all the purple host" could define victory as well as he who was defeated in "Success is counted sweetest". One of this author's poems compares hope to "the thing with feathers," and about a carriage that contained both her and eternity. For 10 points, name this poet of "I heard a fly buzz when I died" and "Because I could not stop for death".;;(Emily) Dickinson
European History;;As a military leader, this man put down rebellions in Illyricum, Pannonia, and Germany. Earlier, he had led the Roman conquest of Pannonia, but following the death of his brother Drusus, he unexpectedly retired to Rhodes. According to Tacitus, he referred to the Senate as "men fit to be slaves" and declined the Civic Crown, and later moved to Capri after the death of Germanicus. This man appointed Macro as the head of the Praetorian Guard as a replacement for a man he had executed, Sejanus, and nominated Caligula as his heir. For 10 points, name this husband of Julia and stepson of Augustus, the second Roman emperor.;;(Emperor) Tiberius (Julius Caesar Augustus)|(Emperor) Tiberius (Claudius Nero)
Physics;;Debye extended an equation describing this phenomenon to describe dielectric relaxation, and this process can be modeled by a set of integrals named for Ito. The most common equation to describe it was developed by Pierre Langevin, and Jean Baptiste Perrin used this to approximate Avogadro's number. One explanation of this process involved the kinetic theory of gases, and its namesake first observed the phenomenon in a microscope slide containing water and pollen grains. For 10 points, name this process studied by Einstein, the random motion of particles in a fluid, named for a Scottish scientist.;;Brownian (Motion)
World Literature;;Enoch unmasks an elder in one scene in this novel, and one character decides to add a section on the last scene of the book to his own book, titled after "The Pacification of the Primitive Tribes". The protagonist of this work often declares that "when a man says yes, his chi also says yes," and in one scene, he beats his wife during the Week of Peace. One character sacrifices Ikemefuna after treating him well for many years, and other characters in this novel include Nwoye, the protagonist's son, who converts to Christianity. Okonkwo commits suicide after a failed revolt against colonial powers in, for 10 points, which work of Chinua Achebe?;;Things Fall Apart
World History;;This man's mother lived too close to his father Senzangakona for him to be considered legitimate, and he was exiled after allowing a sheep to die. In one instance, he reportedly slaughtered forty oxen and 7000 people, including two girls who were buried alive with his mother, Nandi. He required his army to jog barefoot over thorny ground, introduced the weapons known as the iklwa and the assegai, a formation which involved the "chest," the "loins," and "horns" of the buffalo, and regiments with color-coded shields known as impi. For 10 points, name this man largely responsible for the mfecane in southern Africa, the ruler of the Zulu.;;Shaka (Zulu)
Mythology;;Alternate names for this god, who once fought a rival in the form of a seal, include Hallinskidi, meaning "bent stick" or "ram," and Vindhler, or "wind shelter". One kenning for the word "sword" is the "head of [this god]", which is odd, because his own sword was named "head", or Hofund. He created the serfs, peasants, and warriors after spending a night in the bed of Afi and Amma in the form of the god Rig and fathering Thrall, Karl, and Jarl. With his horse Gulltoppr, he lives in the hall Himinbjorg.  He was the son of the nine billow maidens, and he and Loki will slay each other at Ragnarok, which he will announce by blowing the Gjallarhorn. For 10 points, name this Norse god with incredibly keen senses, the keeper of the rainbow bridge Bifrost.;;Heimdall(r)
World History;;This man attempted to formally legalize his leadership by passing the Organic Laws, one of which, the Law of Succession, declared the government a monarchy and gave him the power to name his successor. His deputy prime minister was assassinated in a car bombing two years before this man would himself die. One of his first major acts as head of state was the Decree of Unification, which merged all nationalist parties under his FET party. Prior to seizing power, this man had run afoul of the leftist Popular Front, which sent him to serve as the military commander of the Canary Islands. Undeterred, he helped spark an uprising which eventually led to the horrific bombing of the Basque town of Guernica. For 10 points, identify this man, who was succeeded by King Juan Carlos I, the supreme leader of Spain from 1936 to 1975.;;(Francisco) Franco (y Bahamonde)
World Literature;;One of this man's novels centers around the Tolm family, which is overwhelmed by the titular phenomenon, while in the title character of another work is a maid who gets mixed up with a case involving Ludwig Gotten, and shoots Werner Totges after he asks "how about a bang"? In addition to The Safety Net and The Lost Honor of Katharina Blum, he described a character who befriends Rahel, falls in love with Boris, and bears the child Lev, while various members of the Faehmel family reconcile in September 1958 as Robert routinely plays the title game in another novel. For 10 points, identify this author of Group Portrait with Lady and Billiards at Half-Past Nine.;;(Heinrich) Boll
Chemistry;;Rosenheim and Callow developed a test in which a mixture of this compound and metal acetates are used to detect the presence of sterols. Millon's reagent is a solution of mercury in this substance and a similar substance, which turns red in the presence of phenolic compounds and is useful in detecting tyrosine residues. The commercial production of this compound begins with the combustion of ammonia using a platinum-rhodium catalyst; that process is the Ostwald process. For 10 points, identify this acid which is found with hydrochloric acid in aqua regia, and has chemical formula HNO3.;;nitric acid
American History;;The majority opinion in this case compares the event at hand to that of the earlier Strauder v. West Virginia and refers to the precedent set by Roberts v. City of Boston. This opinion, written by Henry Billings Brown, rejected the arguments of counsel Albion Tourgée. This case's dissenting opinion contains the line "there is in this country no superior, dominant, ruling class of citizens," an idealistic statement that contrasts with the majority's opinion that legislation is "powerless to abolish distinctions based upon physical differences". For 10 points, name this 1896 U.S. Supreme Court case, in which John Marshall Harlan was the lone dissenter to a ruling that upheld "separate but equal" laws as constitutional.;;Plessy (v.) Ferguson
World Literature;;One character traveled to New York with a theatre group performing a play called "Ours Was the Shame", and meets a friend of his brother's while buying medicine for his gonorrhea. A supermarket magnate has been slowly running the village stores out of business in this novel, and the narrator's brother starts a soccer team as a ruse to gather the village's young men to revolt against the "Emperor's" Korean store. Takashi reveals that he had had an affair with his retarded sister before committing suicide in this work. This novel chronicles Mitsu's return to his village home, and it begins with an episode recalling a friend who paints his face red and inserts a cucumber in his anus before hanging himself.  For 10 points, name this novel titled for an unheard plea, by Kenzaburo Oe.;;(The) Silent Cry
Art;;In one work by this artist, the heads of a wolf, a lion, and a dog are contrasted with three human heads of varying ages, while in a work set in a pastoral scene, Christ leans away as a Mary Magdalene dressed in red reaches out to him. In addition to An Allegory of Prudence and Noli Me Tangere, his Concert Champetre, which inspired Manet's Luncheon on the Grass, was once attributed to his teacher, Giorgione. In one painting, Cupid dips his hand in a sarcophagus on which a clothed and a nude form of the contrasting title figures are seated, while another painting shows a reclining nude on whose bed lies a sleeping dog. For 10 points, identify this artist who painted Sacred and Profane Love and Venus of Urbino.;;Titian
Philosophy;;One section in this work claims that the application of mathematical methods to philosophy "will succeed in only building card-castles". One chapter in this work refutes the cosmological and physio-theological arguments, and this work states that the title concept should regulate knowledge rather than constitute it in its first section. This work outlines the three ideas of the world, the thinker, and the being of all beings in one section and introduces the history, discipline, architectonic, and canon of the titular concept in "Transcendental Doctrines of Method". Claiming to be the "New Copernican" revolution of philosophy, for 10 points, identify this investigation into synthetic a priori truths, a first of three metaphysical critiques by Immanuel Kant.;;Critique of Pure Reason
Social Science;;This work alludes to Pliny's belief that razors would dull and bees would die in the presence of menstruating women in the chapter "Between Heaven and Earth". This work describes the soul as a "mannikin" and and the Arab burial of the "Old Man" of wheat and cites Snorri's description of the distribution of Halfdan the Black's body as a reflection of the worship of the Corn-God Osiris. A Turner painting is referenced and the priest of Nemi waiting in the grove of Diana is discussed in its first section, "The King of the Wood". Taking its name from Aeneas's method of accessing the underworld, for 10 points, identify this work of anthropology subtitled "A Study in Magic and Religion," written by James Fraser.;;The Golden Bough
American Literature;;In one early scene in this play, one character suggests that the outside environs are the "ghoul-haunted woodland of Weir" and references Edgar Allan Poe. One of this play's supporting characters works on the precision bench in the spare parts department and is judged to "look superior" compared to the rest of his friends. An unseen character is the "extremely good-looking" poet Allan Grey, who turned out to be a "degenerate" before killing himself. At one point in this play, a character angrily asserts that he is "one hundred percent American" and "not a Polack". This play primarily takes place at Elysian Fields Avenue, where we see such characters as Mitch and Stanley. For 10 points, identify this work by Tennessee Williams that describes what happens when Blanche DuBois takes the titular conveyance to visit her sister Stella.;;(A) Streetcar Named Desire
Physics;;One type of these exhibit a peculiar behavior which can be described by the Ridley-Watkins-Hilsum two-valley model; that type shows a negative differential resistance profile for fields higher than 3 KV per centimeter. Another type, which make use of quantum tunnelling, are named for Esaki, and they can be employed to rectify AC current into DC current. The ideal behaviour of these is governed by the Shockley equation, and another type employs the avalanche breakdown effect named for Zener. Yet another one of these is formed by the contact of the semiconductor, and they are symbolized by a forward triangle touching a vertical bar. For 10 points, identify these circuit elements which only allow current to pass in one direction.;;diode
American History;;The representative of Great Britain at the signing of this agreement was Lord Cushendun, while Count Manzoni represented Italy and William Lyon MacKenzie King represented Canada. Other countries who were signatories included Cuba and the "kingdom of the Serbs". One of its signatories had earlier won the Nobel Peace Prize for his work on the Locarno treaties. Ratified by the U.S. Senate on an 85 to 1 vote, this agreement was severely tested by the Mukden incident in Manchuria. The second of its namesake signatories would win the Peace Prize the year after this agreement's signing. For 10 points, identify this 1928 agreement, named for the French Prime Minister and U.S. Secretary of State at the time, that boldly declared an outlawing of war.;;Kellogg(-)Briand (Pact)
Music;;His Seventh Symphony premiered on a double feature with a work that commemorated the Battle of Vittoria, his Wellington's Victory overture. Friedrich Witt was found to be the actual composer of a C Major work originally attributed to this man, the Jena Symphony. He wrote an overture for the Kotzebue play The Ruins of Athens that includes his "Turkish March", while his poco moto bagatelle in A minor is called Für Elise. His challenging piano works include the Diabelli Variations and the Hammerklavier Sonata, while he originally dedicated his third symphony to a "Great Man" and dubbed that work Eroica. For 10 points, identify this composer who adapted the Schiller poem "Ode to Joy" in his ninth symphony and composed the Moonlight Sonata.;;(Ludwig van) Beethoven
Biology;;The "chordin" and "noggin" expressing centers in this structure contain cells which are precursors to Spemann's organizer cells, and the motility of cells during this stage may be classified as cavitation or ingression. Newport and Kirschner described a "transition" that occurs at the middle of this stage where transcription of zygotic genome begins and the cell cycle lengthens. The transition to its subsequent stage involves the formation of the endoderm, ectoderm, and mesoderm, and it sees a layer of cells forming a hollow sphere which encloses fluid called the blastocoel. For 10 points, identify this stage of development which precedes the gastrula.;;blastula
Religion;;During the reign of this king, Hiel of Bethel rebuilt the city of Jericho, which resulted in the deaths of two of his sons. One of this man's enemies was Micaiah, who predicted that the nation would be "scattered on the hills like sheep without a shepherd" after this man's death. Despite wearing a disguise, he was killed by a random arrow at Ramoth Gilead while fighting alongside Judah's king Jehoshaphat. An earlier incident in this man's reign comes in 1 Kings 21, which details his murder of Naboth in order to obtain a vineyard. The son of Omri, this king's main nemesis was Elijah, who defeated his prophets of Baal on Mount Carmel. For 10 points, identify this extremely wicked king of Israel and husband of Jezebel, whose name is alluded to in Moby-Dick.;;Ahab
British Literature;;The second stanza of this poem describes a woman who spends her days in "ignorant good-will" and her nights in argument.  This poem asks questions such as "What is it but nightfall"? "O when may it suffice"? and "Was it needless death after all"? This poem starts off stating that, "I have met them at close of day/ coming with vivid faces," and concludes by saying, "A terrible beauty is born". This poem references people that were involved in the event this poem was based on such as MacDonagh, MacBride, Connolly, and Pearse. For 10 points, name this poem that describes an important historical event that featured Michael Collins, a William Butler Yeats poem that is titled after the holiday and year of an important day in Irish history.;;Easter 1916
American Literature;;One incident in this story sees a character recounting a story about a present delivered to Alexander the Great of a living woman, which another character dismisses as "a childish fable". At one point, two characters conspire to use the contents of a Cellini vase upon the titular character in order to thwart someone they call "a vile empiric" and someone "not to be tolerated by those who respect the rules of the medical profession". This story begins when a student named Giovanni arrives at Padua and becomes entranced by his neighbor's garden. Informed by Professor Baglioni of the sinister nature of his neighbor, Giovanni is horrified to see the titular character die after consuming the antidote he gives her. For 10 points, identify this Nathaniel Hawthorne story about a scientist who experiments on his daughter to make her poisonous to humans.;;Rappacini's Daughter
American History;;This man labeled marriage as something that "must sooner or later come to pass," and had his teacher, the Earl of Bute, provide him with a list of eligible princesses before finally marrying Charlotte Sophia. Unable to form long-term alliances with such ministers as the Earl of Newcastle and George Grenville, he finally found a fruitful relationship with a man whom he would ultimately break with regarding the idea of Catholic emancipation to preserve unity with Ireland. Besides William Pitt the Younger, this man's ministers also included Lord North, who was forced out of office by a vote of no confidence after the battle of Yorktown. For 10 points, identify this British monarch, noted for his violent mental breakdown late in his life and for reigning during the American Revolution.;;George (III|the Third){1}?;;George
Physics;;The Glatzmaier-Roberts model can be used to explain events that affect it, and VADM and VDM values are often used to study its behavior. Certain data sets from Columbia river basalt flows from the Steens Mountains notably show evidence for its erratic behavior. The South Atlantic Anomaly is the location where it has its lowest intensity and the Matuyama-Brunhes boundary about marks the last inversion of it, which occurred 800,000 years ago. It helps deflect solar wind, and causes Van Allen belts to stay together. Thought to arise due to the motion of molten iron in the earth's core, for 10 points, identify this thing which makes your compass point northward.;;magnetic field (of the) earth
Music;;The march from the finale of his first symphony was reused in a work that was heavily based on Donizetti's Don Pasquale, this man's Don Procopio. The aria "Nour-Eddin, Roi de Lahore" is sung by the title slave girl of another of his operas, while another of his works centers around Catherine Glover and is based on a Sir Walter Scott novel. In addition to Djamileh and The Fair Maid of Perth, he adapted his incidental music for a Daudet play into the L'Arlesienne suites and composed an opera in which the duet "Au Fond du Temple Saint" is sung by Zurga and Nadir, his The Pearl Fishers. For 10 points, identify this French composer who wrote Escamillo's " Toreador Song" and "Habanera" for his opera Carmen.;;(Georges) Bizet
American History;;After losing a bid for his party's presidential nomination, this man held a party-unity conference with the eventual nominee in what has been dubbed the "surrender at Morningside Heights". Upon the victory of that nominee, Dwight Eisenhower, this man became Senate Majority Leader in 1953, but soon became ill and died that same year. During his three terms in the Senate, this man was known as "Mr. Republican" and supported isolationist policies, including a reluctance to join NATO. In 1947, he helped co-sponsor a law which imposed strong restrictions on organized labor with Fred Hartley, Jr. Despite his successful Senatorial career, he is perhaps best known for his family ties, as his namesake grandson served as governor of this man's home state from 1999 to 2007. For 10 points, identify this Senator from Ohio, the grandson of an obese former Chief Justice and President of the United States.;;(Robert) Taft
American Literature;;One of this man's lesser known novels is about a white man who discovers while doing research on his family that he has African-American heritage and thus begins to think of himself as black. Another of this man's novels is about the head of the Revelation Automobile Company, who marries the beautiful socialite Fran Voelker. Yet another novel explores reporter Doremus Jessup who becomes opposed to the political stances of Buzz Windrip. Besides Kingsblood Royal and It Can't Happen Here, this author is better known for tracing the lives of various Midwesterners from the state of Winnemac, many of whom either live in or visit the large city of Zenith, including the titular characters Samuel Dodsworth and Martin Arrowsmith. For 10 points, identify this American author who satirized small town life with such novels as Main Street and Babbitt.;;(Sinclair) Lewis
European History;;Participants in this event included two former attorney generals, one of whom was Francis Biddle. Robert Ley was originally going to appear at this event, but killed himself about a month prior to its beginning. One of the men who helped conceive of this event was Murray Bernays, who came up with the idea to treat various groups as criminal organizations. While Sir Norman Birkett labeled it "a precedent of the highest standing," William O. Douglas argued that it was probably "unconstitutional by American standards". During this event, the oratory of Robert Jackson helped lead to the deaths of Alfred Rosenberg and Hans Frank. For 10 points, Hans Fritzche, Hjalmar Schacht, and Franz von Papen were the only three defendants acquitted at what series of trials, held to punish the leaders of Nazi Germany after World War II?;;Nuremberg (Trials)
Biology;;Cord factors present on the cell surface of its causative agent induce the formation of granulomas, wherein those pathogens undergo phagocytosis by macrophages, and this disease can be treated with ethambutol and ripamfin. Virulent strains of its causative agents include the Erdman and H37Rv, and those organisms appear as a "bundle of cigars" in the Ziehl - Neelsen stain. The BCG vaccine protects against it, and it is detected by the Mantoux test. Its causative agent belongs to the same genus as the leprosy causing bacterium, mycobacterium, and was first identified by Robert Koch. For 10 points, identify this disease which was once called consumption.;;tuberculosis|TB
Music;;This man composed the first movement of the B-la-F String Quartet, while his vocal works include In the Kingdom of Roses and Wine and the five-song set By the Sea. His second symphony, which he later called renamed a symphonic suite, is called Antar, and he also wrote the "musical tableau" Sadko and an "Overture on Liturgical Themes" that contains the hymn "An Angel Cried Out" and is called Russian Easter Festival Overture. The "Fandango Asturiano" and the "Scene and Gypsy Song" are contained in his Capriccio Espagnole, while "The Sea and Sinbad's Ship" opens his Scheherazade. Also the composer of the operas The Snow Maiden and The Golden Cockerel, for 10 points, identify this member of the Russian Five, whose opera The Tale of Tsar Saltan contains the interlude "Flight of the Bumblebee".;;(Nikolai) (Andreyevich) Rimsky-Korsakov
British Literature;;This man was the first to translate John Barclay's poem Argenis, and the title character of one of his works is revealed to be a man by Dauphine, after Morose marries the title character. This author of Epicene and collaborated with John Marston and George Chapman on Eastward Ho! He also wrote about Littlewit, Winwife, and Dame Purecraft attending the title event, while the title character of another work attempts to convince Corbaccio and Corvino of his impending death. In his best known work, Sir Pertinax Surly sees through the opreations of Doctor Subtle and Face, who dupe people such as Epicure Mammon. For 10 points, identify this author of Bartholomew Fair, Volpone and The Alchemist.;;(Ben) Jonson
Philosophy;;This man's works were called a "farrago of nonsense" in Bertrand Russell's Unpopular Essays and he posited that free will can only exist within contracts and property rights in another work. He outlined the relationship between of the state and the family and declared that the state is "the presence of God on Earth" in one work, and he divided the mind into the objective, subjective, and absolute in another. In addition to Science of Logic and Elements of the Philosophy of Right, this man wrote a work in which men approach a state of "Absolute Consciousness" and outlined the origins of the master/slave relationship. Best known for formulating the thesis-antithesis-sythesis form of the dialectic, for 10 points, name this German philosopher, author of Phenomenology of Spirit.;;(G(.)(eorg)) (W(.)(ilhelm)) (F(.)(riedrich)) Hegel
European Literature;;One of his works describes the decay of the food-obsessed couple Afansy and Pulcheria after Pulcheria's death, while another of his creations is enraged to see his son join the voivod of Kiev during the siege of Dubno, and witnesses the execution of Ostap. In addition, one of his works sees people such as Manilov and Korbochka sell the title beings to Pavel Chichikov, and in one of his stories, the protagonist visits the "prominent personage" after the title article of clothing is stolen from him. For 10 points, identify this author of "Old World Landowners," Taras Bulba, and Dead Souls, who wrote about Akaki Akakievich in "The Overcoat".;;(Nikolai Vassilievich) Gogol
European Historyl;;While none of this man's writings have survived, extant works include the speech he gave advocating the admission of Gauls into the Senate. He wrote a treatise on dice-playing and at least twenty tomes of Etruscan history. He helped reform the Roman judicial system, expanded the empire into Mauretania and Lycia, and avoided warring with the Germans. Seneca mocked him in a work titled for the Pumpkinification of this man. He began an invasion of Britain in C.E. 43, and made the mistake of marrying Agrippina, who was eager to advance her son's rise to power and probably ended up poisoning this man. For 10 points, identify this Roman Emperor, who was succeeded by Nero, and is the narrator of a work of historical fiction by Robert Graves.;;(Tiberius) Claudius (Caesar Augustus Germanicus)
World Literature;;This author wrote about Gregory Reeves in one novel, another features Pedro de Validivia. In addition to The Infinite Plan and Inés of My Soul, this author wrote about a title character who was conceived when her mother slept with a man on his deathbed due to snakebite. One of this author's novels takes place partially in California, and features Joaquin Andieta and Eliza Sommers, and is titled Daughter of Fortune. She wrote a novel about Riad Halabi and Rolf Carlé titled Eva Luna, but this author's best known novel features an estate called Tres Marias. For 10 points, name this author who created the Trueba family, a Chilean women best known for House of the Spirits.;;(Isabel) Allende
Biology;;During development, the hyaloid artery supplys blood to this organ, and it recedes to form Cloquet's canal. One disease of this organ occurs in a Meibomian form which sees blockage of some oil glands. Another part of it is held together by the zonule of Zinn, while Amacrine cells are a type of pear shaped neurons found here. One part of this organ sees the formation of a "cherry red spot" that appears in patients suffering from Tay Sachs, and another portion of it consists of inner and outer plexiform layers and has a depression named the fovea. The canal of Schlemm is found at the base of the sclera and drains the aqueous humor. Consisting of a retina, a lens, an iris, For 10 points, identify these organs of sight.;;eye(s)
American History;;This man married a Native American woman named Morning Mist of the Haida tribe, who died five years after their marriage in 1856. During the so-called Pig War with Great Britain, he defended San Juan Island from British warships. One of this man's most grievous defeats occurred in April 1865 when he was enjoying a fish fry picnic with his officers and arrived too late to rally his troops against Union attack at Five Forks. Promoted to major general in 1862, some of his brigadier generals included Richard Garnett and Lewis Armistead, both of whom died in the battle this man is most associated with. Along with Johnston Pettigrew and Isaac Trimble, this man participated in an action that occurred after two hours of artillery barrage on Cemetery Ridge. For 10 points, identify this Confederate general, best remembered for leading an ill-fated charge during the battle of Gettysburg.;;(George) Pickett
Economics;;Lawrence Henderson established a group named for this man at Harvard University in 1932, which counted George Homans and Talcott Parsons among its members, while M. J. Farrell developed a principle of data analysis that is named for this man and Tjalling Koopmans. The first theorem of welfare guarantees that every competitive equilibrium outcome will satisfy the condition named for him, and a more generic interpretation of that condition, which factors in compensation between parties, is named for Hicks and Kaldor. A rule which states that 80% of the effects can be attributed to 20% of the causes is known as his "80-20" principle. For 10 points, identify this economist, the author of Mind and Society who lends his names to a condition where no agent can be made better off without making another agent worse off.;;(Vilfredo) Pareto
Chemistry;;Complexes containing this metallic element are used to facilitate the ring closure of an R group in an ortho position to an aryl bromide in the Parham cyclization. The 12-crown-4 and 14-crown-4 ethers are highly selective for this element, and a class of reagents containing this element and dimethyl copper is named for Henry Gilman. The di-iso-propyl-amide salt of this element is commonly used as a strong base which lacks nucleophilicity, while a hydride containing it and aluminum is a strong reducing agent.  The carbonate salt of this element is used to tread depression. For 10 points, identify this element, the lightest alkali metal with atomic number 3.;;Lithium
Religion;;One story behind this event refers to the appearance of a poor dwarf to test a king's generosity, and sees that king become the king of the underworld after requesting that dwarf to step on him. Intricate patterns known as ran-goli are drawn on this event using powdered chalk, and it marks the transition from the month of Ash-win to Kartik. This holiday also sees the exchange of gifts between a brother and sister, and Sikhs refer to this festival as the Bandi Chhorh Divas and release prisoners on this day in memory of Guru Har Gobind Ji. Jains celebrate the establishment of dharma by Mahavira during it, though more famously, people celebrate the birth of Lakshmi and commemorats the defeat of Ravana and the return to Ayodha of Sita and Rama. Celebrated most prominently by lighting of diyas, or oil lamps, for 10 points, identify this Hindu festival of lights.;;Diwali|Deepavali|Dipawali
Mythology;;In one story, this god chews up and spits out another goddess' necklace, creating five sons he trades for three of her daughters. One of this god's sons taught a rabbit to heal its wounds and earned a princess' favor, after which this god's other 80 sons killed that brother by hurling a flaming rock at him. This god forces that same son, Oo-Namuchi to spend a night in a room filled with centipedes after Oo-Namuchi tries to marry this god's daughter, Suseri-hime. He found the sword Kusanagi in the remains of the creature he is most famous for slaying, and in another story, he dishonors his sister by using her temple as a toilet, then throwing a flayed horse into it. That sister then flees into a cave, blocking out sunlight from the world. Born when his father Izanagi washed out his nose, for 10 points, name this Shinto storm god and brother of Amaterasu, most famous for slaying the eight-headed serpent Yamata-no-Orochi.;;Susa(-)no(-)o(no-Mikoto)
Art;;The artist of this painting painted a mural of the same name for the Barnes Foundation, and a portion of this painting can be seen along with some nasturtiums in another painting by the same artist. A second version of it was commissioned by Sergei Schukhin along with another painting which depicts one figure playing a violin and three others seated on the ground towards the right. The figures depicted in the original painting have a much paler skin and red hair instead of black, though both paintings feature a green foreground with a plain blue sky that lacks any depth. One of the figures leans diagonally, while another is twisting her body, and all figures have their arms interlocked as they perform the title action. For 10 points, identify this creation of Henri Matisse which features five people cavorting in a circle.;;(The) Dance|(Le) Danse
Physics;;The proportionality constant is plotted against the Sommerfeld number in the Stribeck curve, and Dahl's model gives the magnitude of this phenomenon as a function of displacement. Though it is not ferromagnetism, hysteresis operators are used to describe this phenomenon in the Bliman-Sorine Model. The LuGre model for it originally did not account for non-local memory, and the most common model for it describes interaction between asperities. The first empirical laws regarding it were developed by Coulomb who names a "dry" form of this force, and it is proportional to the normal force exerted on the object. For 10 points, identify this force which always opposes the motion of an object and comes in static and kinetic varieties.;;friction
World History;;One incident during this conflict saw Redvers H. Buller ordering troops into regions such as Colenso and the Stormberge mountains, only to see them soundly whipped in a period referred to as "Black Week". After Bullers' replacement by Frederick S. Roberts, one side began a string of military victories which culminated in the defeat of Piet Cronje. A precipitating event of this conflict included the actions of Leander Jameson, while another issue of tension revolved around the discovery of gold in the Witwatersrand region. The wrap up to this war saw Horatio Kitchener setting up concentration camps while fending off guerrilla attacks led by men like Jan Botha and Jan Christiaan Smuts. For 10 points, identify this conflict that lasted from 1899 to 1902 that pitted the British against the Dutch-descended Afrikaners in what is now South Africa.;;(Second|2nd) Boer (War)
Music;;One work by this man features the section "The soft complaining lute," which introduced that instrument to Western music, while another of his works is a cantata discoursing on the power of music. Those works, both settings of Dryden, are his Alexander's Feast and Ode for St. Cecilia's Day. Another of his works consists of an air followed by five double variations in alternating hands called The Harmonious Blacksmith. The second suite of another of his works features the movement "Alla Hornipe", and "La Paix" and "La Rejouissance" are movements of his Music for the Royal Fireworks. For 10 points, name this composer of Water Music and the oratorio Messiah.;;(George) (Frideric) Handel
Biology;;IMBX and theophylline are inhibitors of the enzymes that degrade this molecule, IMBX and theophylline . EPACs are guanidine nucleotide exchange factors that depend on this molecule, and the expression of the genes in the lac operon when a complex of this molecule and the catabolite activator protein binds to its promoting element. Another protein that binds to this has two catalytic and two regulatory subunits, PKA. This molecule is formed from an annulation reaction on ATP, with which this molecule shares a nitrogenous base component. Discovered by Earl Sutherland, for 10 points, name this molecule that widely functions as a second messenger.;;cAMP
European History;;This group's namesake bank began to decline when one of its members, nicknamed for his gout, refused to make loans to secular rulers. Benedetti Dei chronicled this group in The Report of the Years, and one member of this group was kept prisoner at the Castel Sant'Angelo during Colonna's sack of Rome and feuded with Henry VIII over the appointment of Thomas Cranmer. One member of this group excommunicated Martin Luther. In addition to Popes Clement VII and Leo X, one member of this group was killed in the Pazzi conspiracy. For 10 points, name this Florentine family that included Cosimo and Lorenzo the Magnificent.;;Medici
Religion;;One scholar of this system, Jnanagarbha, expounded its unique distinction between paramarthasatya and samvritisatya, a non-Islamic doctrine of Double Truth. This tradition cleaves to an especially extreme form of pratityasamutpada known as shunyata and calls its central figure Shakyamuni. This sect designates opposing sects that hold older beliefs by a name meaning "Lesser Vehicle" that sounds similar to this sect's name, which means "Greater Vehicle". Some figures to this sect express karuna, or compassion, to unlock the bodhicittot-pada, or awakening potential in the unenlightened. For 10 points, name this sect Buddhism that has bodhisattvas.;;Mahayana (Buddhism)
American Literature;;This author used Anderson's setting Winesburg, Ohio for a college attended by Marcus Messner in his novel Indignation. One of this author's short stories sees Ozzie Freeman threaten to jump off a roof unless a crowd acknowledges the virgin birth. One of this author's narrators recounts Seymour "Swede" Levov, and this author wrote a work that treats the Monica Lewinsky hearings and features Coleman Silk.  This author of American Pastoral and The Human Stain wrote a work in which the title character confesses his deviant sexual behavior to his psychologist. For 10 points, name this Jewish American author of Portnoy's Complaint.;;(Philip) (Milton) Roth
Religion;;This figure created a lion-headed monster that devoured itself and left the Face of Glory in response to the challenge of Jalamdhara. This god eternally holds poison in his throat, which is why his neck is blue. One form of worship for this deity is the playing of certain rhythms on a damaru, while another for is the veneration of lingams, or phallic statues. Possibly derived from Rudra, this deity is sometimes depicted seated on a tiger's skin and sometimes on Nandi, a white bull that serves him. This bearer of the Ganges in his hair is known in his role as a lover as the consort of Parvati For 10 points, name this redeemer and destroyer of the Hindu trimurti.;;Shiva
Art;;One oil study for this work depicts the central subject holding out a glass of champagne. A series of pencil sketches for this painting show the subject reclining, lying in profile, and kneeling on a nearby but not pictured couch, and many studies were done at a house in Paramé. A barely visible gold ornament on a piece of furniture in this work is the same color as that table's edge. The central figure of this work looks to the left and wears a garment with jeweled straps. This painting depicts the pale wife of Pierre Gautreau in a form-fitting black satin dress. For 10 points, name this work of John Singer Sargent.;;(Portrait of) Madame X
Physics;;A parameter named for this man approximately the cube root of the number density times the sound speed, and gives the maximum oscillation frequency for phonons, which also underpin this his model of heat capacity. He has a namesake that describes the attenuation of scattering in the Mossbauer Effect, named for him and Waller. Another parameter named for this man is equal in cgs to the square root of the kinetic temperature over the charge squared times the number density. For 10 points, name this physicist with a namesake screening length in plasmas and colloids, and for a theory of electrolyte activity that uses that length scale, devised with Hückel.;;(Peter) Debye
World History;;This man's death at Chimkent led to the division of his lands among all his male descendents, but that proved unstable and his empire was eventually re-united by his youngest son, Shah Rokh. His rise to power began when he left Amir Kazgan to enter the service of the Tughluq dynasty, then joined his brother-in-law Amir Husayn to conquer Transoxania. This ruler's forces suppressed the 1395 Persian revolt by constructing towers of skulls. The Gur-e Amir is the tomb of this ruler in the capital city where he shielded Tokhtamysh from the Russians, that city being Samarkand. For 10 points, name this Islamic Turkic-Mongol conqueror epithetically known for his lame arm.;;Tamerlane|Timur (the Lame)|Tamburlaine
Physics;;The values of this property along certain lines are the semi-major axes of the Poinsot ellipse; the colatitude partial derivative of this quantity is zero along those lines, which are known as geometric principle axes.  For planar translations, this property transforms by Steiner's theorem, which can be derived directly when one considers this quantity as a contravariant rank-two symmetric tensor. Its magnitude is equal to an object's area of gyration times its mass. For 10 points, identify the material property that is equal to the integral over a body of distance from an axis with respect to mass, is symbolized I, and is the rotational analogue of mass.;;(mass) moment of inertia
European History;;This group was granted special privelidges in Omni Datum Optimum, a bull of Innocent II. Founded by Hugh de Payns, this order was provided quarters by Baldwin II of Flanders, from the location of which quarters they derived their name. Members of this rival to the Hospitallers were purchased and executed en masse by Saladin after he won the Battle of Hattin. This order's last Grand Master, Hugh de Molay, burned at the stake at the behest of Phillip IV, who accused this order or heresy probably to sieze its assets. For 10 points, name this original religious military order of Crusader knights founded to protect Christian pilgrims to Jerusalem.;;(The) (Knights) Templar
British Literature;;in a story named for a practitioner of this activity, it is done first at the Westerhazys ', then at a wild party at the Biswangers ', and finally at Bullet Park; that retelling of the myth of Narcissus features Neddy Merrill, and is by John Cheever. Lord Byron declares himself a "degenerate modern wretch" in a poem "Written after" doing this activity. A seven-day-long contest in this activity is undertaken in full armor by Breca and Beowulf. One literary character who does this activity is a youth from Abydos who did it each evening to visit a tower in Sestos. For 10 points, name this activity that Leander did to visit Hero each night until he died after failing at it.;;swim(ming)
World History;;This person's public slapping at the Dionysia led him to denounce Meidias with his trademark "terrible earnestness". This statesman's enmity with Aeschines began when the latter was preferred as ambassador during the negotiations following the Peace of Philocrates. This man's ally Ctesiphon was accused by a rival of impropriety for proposing to reward this person, leading to a statement defending this leader's policies published as "On the Crown," and he allegedly gained oratory prowess by speaking with rocks in his mouth. For 10 points, name this Greek statesman who repudiated Philip of Macedon in speeches known as the Philippics.;;Demosthenes
European History;;In this work, one character chafes at having been "scalped," demoted from boss to assistant, and demands a more important role for his son. One character refuses Brovik, but is convinced to let go Brovik's son Ragnor go by a character who demands the "Kingdom" she has been promised, Hilda Wangel. Those demands lead the protagonist of this work to attempt to replicate a ritual he performed at a church dedication in her hometown for his wife Aline, but as he reaches the top of the large tower on the house that he himself created, he falls to his death. For 10 points, name this play about Halverd Solness, an architect; a work by Henrik Ibsen.;;(The) Master Builder
American History;;This man's father died during Lord Dunmore's War, and he founded a settlement after hearing a vision from the Master of Life. This man's namesake conflict included a faction called the Red Sticks, and was spurred when a Lenape chief died, allegedly of witchcraft, and also stemmed from the Treaty of Fort Wayne. His alleged killer used a political slogan containing his name that began "Rumpsy Dumpsy". His brother was named Teskwatawa, and suffered defeat at the hands of William Henry Harrison at Tippecanoe. For 10 points, name this brother of The Prophet, a Shawnee chief who was allegedly killed by Richard Mentor Johnson in the War of 1812.;;Tecumseh
Astronomy;;Hoyle discovered that one theory about these objects does not apply in non-uniformly rotating examples. Eddington predicted the first observed gravitational redshift from an object of this kind, initially as a way to discredit Öpik's measurement of its density. These stars are supported by Fermi pressure. Found in the lower left of a standard Hertzsprung-Russell diagram, these stars are generally bounded in mass by a quantity equal to about 1.44 solar masses and known as the Chandrasekhar limit. For 10 points, name this class of stars, the endpoint for intermediate-mass main sequence stars, that are phenomenologically small stars that giving off incoherent light.;;white dwarf(s)
European Literature;;One controversial claim about this work is that its references to Outremer date it to the First Crusade, and the oldest version of this work contains a line about its possible author Turoldus. The title character's father Milon earns the enmity of the king for marrying Princess Bertha. Mandricardo fights the title character to try to complete his set of Hector's armor. A white stag guides this work's title character through the Alps, and he fights many battles with Ogier the Dane. The title character dies while blowing his horn, and wields Durandal. For 10 points, name this chanson de geste about the title paladin's death in a Saracen ambush in Roncevaux Pass.;;(The) Song of Roland
Philosophy;;One work whose title implicitly criticizes this entity posits a "World of Interpretation". Another work about this concept claims that "the conscious subject has for his object the infinity of his own nature". A book with this word in its title prompted Max Stirner to publish The Ego and His Own, and claims that one of the central ideas in this belief system is an "externalization" of man. Josiah Royce wrote about the "Problem" of this belief, and Kierkegaard wrote a work about the "Practice in" this belief. For 10 points, name this belief system, the "Essence" of which was claimed to be nothing by Ludwig Feuerbach.;;Christianity
Social Science;;In a work whose title begins with this word, the "Individualistic Assumptions" and "Compensation Principle" are theorized. Max Ringlemann's work on the bystander effect led to his theorizes this type of "loafing". In a work that posits "strain theory," Robert K. Merton paired this word with "Theory" and "Structure". This word comes before "Choice and Individual Values" in a work by Kenneth Arrow, and a work that asks if Spencer is dead is titled after the "Structure" of this type of "Action," was written by Talcott Parsons. For 10 points, name this word, whose namesake "ology" is practiced by Max Weber and Emile Durkheim.;;social
Music;;Yoshitaka Amano wrote an adaptation of this work called Mateki. In scene III, one character causes wild animals to flee with the aria "O wenn ich doch," and a vow of silence results in another character vowing to commit suicide in its aria "Ach, ich fühl's, es ist verschwunden". One character in it uses a set of bells given to him by Three Ladies to summon a wife and scare away the Moor Monostatos; that character is named Papageno. Pamina is the addressee of its aria "Der Hölle Rache," sung by a character empowered by the blood of Sarastro and Tamino, the Queen of the Night. For 10 points, name this Mozart opera about an enchanted instrument.;;(The) Magic Flute
European History;;One decree from this event mandated that sacred scripture and tradition be treated with equal "loyalty and reverence," while another calls for the "urgent fostering" of vocations. In addition to producing Dei Verbum and Optatam Totius, this event reaffirmed Providentissimus Deus and Divino Afflante Spiritu, and it was followed by a defense of clerical celibacy, Sacerdotalis Caelibatus. One text from this council absolved Jews of blood guilt, Nostra Aetate, while another discussed the place of the Church in the modern world, Gaudiem et Spes. Establishing the vernacular mass, for 10 points, name this Catholic ecumenical council convened by John XXIII in 1962.;;(Second|2nd){1}? Vatican (Council)
Noncomputational Math;;This man improved upon Brouncker's continued fractions method to obtain a generalized solution of Pell's equations. His theorem in abstract algebra says a subgroup's order must divide the group's order, and he proved that each positive integer can be expressed as a sum of four squares. His work on the 3-body problem led to his namesake points, where the gravitational attraction of two bodies is balanced. For 10 points, name this French mathematician who lends his name to method of optimization which uses a name namesake multiplier and is useful when geometric constraints are present.;;(Joseph) (Louis) Lagrange
Mythology;;In one poem titled for this figure, Odin disguises himself as Vegtam to find out why this deity is having bad dreams, and in the Gesta Danorum he is badly wounded by Miming's sword. The dwarf Lit died on one of this god's possessions, and that possession was launched by Hyrokkin. The land of "fewest baneful runes" was home to his hall Breidablik, and his brother Hermod was denied while petitioning on his behalf by the giantess Thokk, really Loki in disguise. This owner of the ship Hringhorn was the father of Forseti by Nanna, and Vali was born to avenge his death. For 10 points, identify this Norse god of light, killed with a mistletoe dart by his brother Hodr.;;Baldur
Music;;This student of George R. Smith College began instructing such pupils as Scott Hayden and Arthur Marshall. He produced a musical tribute to Teddy Roosevelt called The Strenuous Life and also wrote a lost opera featuring Roosevelt called A Guest of Honor. An existing opera of his tells the story of a girl who is thrown into a wasps' nest after she challenges local conjurers. Besides Treemonisha, he is best known for popularizing a rhythmic genre at the turn of the century that would eventually inspire jazz. For 10 points, identify this African-American composer, whose Maple Leaf Rag and The Entertainer remain the best known works of ragtime.;;(Scott) Joplin
European Literature;;People who disappear in this work include Midas Mulligan, Richard Haley and Ellis Watt. Quentin Daniels eventually joins them when he attempts to discover the secrets of a scientifically impossible motor. Wesley Mouch passes legislation to cripple industrialists such as Dan Conway in this work. Another of its characters, Ragnar Danneskjold, is a ship-plundering pirate. Francisco d'Anconia crashes the copper market when he learns his mines are to be nationalized. It begins with Eddie's revelation to James Taggart that the Rio Norte Line is going under. For 10 points, name this novel featuring Dagny Taggart, a novel by Ayn Rand that asks "who is John Galt"?;;Atlas Shrugged
American History;;One member of this group was a feeble Belgian-born farmer named Mr. Hardkoop who was turned away by the Kesebergs and allegedly sat on a log with his head in his hands. One of the financial backers of this group was Patrick Breen, and one leader of this group was James Reed. Their problems began when Lansford W. Hastings convinced them to take his namesake "cutoff," and a contingent of them known as the "Forlorn Hope" attempted to snowshoe to Sutter's Fort. For 10 points, name this group that got stuck in the Sierra Nevadas on their way to California and resorted to cannibalism in their namesake pass.;;(the) Donner (Party)
American Literature;;This author wrote a novel whose title character saves Mordecai's sister from drowning, encounters the gambling Gwendolen Harleth, and searches for the family of Mirah Lapidoth. Another of this author's novels sees one character abandon her baby while searching for its father, Captain Donnithorne. One of this author's novels sees a character courted by Phillip Wakem and Stephen Guest named Maggie Tulliver. Another work by this author of Daniel Deronda and Adam Bede sees Reverend Causabon die, leaving his widow Dorothea Brooke to marry Will Ladislaw. For 10 points, name this author of The Mill on the Floss and Middlemarch.;;(George) Eliot|(Mary Anne) Evans
American History;;In 1834, this man ran for governor of his home state on the Anti Masonic ticket but lost to John Davis. This president appointed Robert Trimble to the Supreme Court, and was ousted as incumbent in an election that saw his opponent's wife Rachel accused of bigamy. This defending attorney in the Amistad case sorted out border disputes and acquired Florida in a treaty signed with Spanish diplomat Luis Onis. He beat out William Crawford, among others, because no candidate won the majority of electoral votes in the election of 1824 that was swung by Henry Clay's "corrupt bargain". For 10 points, name this sixth president of the United States, son a president.;;(John) Q(uincy) Adams
Philosophy;;The "consequential character" of this school of thought was outlined in "Feminism and" this by the author of Contingency, Irony, and Solidarity. Another work this school further developed the Descartian "distinct" and "clear" forms of ideas. One work of this school advocated for scientific "learning by doing" and another work named after it distinguished between tough and tender minded philosophy through an example of a squirrel racing around a tree. Expounded upon in "How to Make Our Ideas Clear" and Democracy in Education, for 10 points, name this school of philosophy expounded by Charles Sanders Peirce, John Dewey, and William James.;;pragmatism
Geography;;Among this country's bodies of water are Lake Eyasi and Lake Rukwa, and much of its southern border is formed by the Ruvuma River. Its cities include the freshwater port Mwanza, and the site of a 1967 declaration of "villagization" and the Ujamaa principle by this nation's first post-independence leader, Arusha. Gombe National Park lies near its border with Burundi, and its northern provinces are such locales as Ngoorongoro Crater, Serengeti National Park, and Olduvai Gorge. Mafia, Pemba, and Zanzibar islands lie off the eastern coast of, for 10 points, what East African nation that is home to Dodoma and Dar es Salaam?;;(United Republic of) Tanzania
World Literature;;The epigraph to this work, which describes "morbid systems" arising from the interregnum between old and new, is by Antonio Gramsci. One of this novel's characters sees a picture of herself in a Life coffee-table book, causing her to wonder why Lydia was carrying her books, and that character's husband later builds a water tank and shoots some boars. Its title character takes the keys to a "bakkie", after which he learns to drive from Daniel, who later steals Bamford's gun. It ends with Maureen abandoning her family to run toward a helicopter. For 10 points, name this novel whose title character is the servant of the Smales family, a work of Nadine Gordimer.;;July's People
Biology;;Von Gierke's disease, which results in hyper uricemia and xanthoma formation, occurs due to the accumulation of this substance. Insulin acts as an inhibitor to GSK3 which phosphorylates an enzyme in its synthesis, while a unique enzyme necessary to its synthesize has a alpha-1,6 branch is simply called "branching enzyme". The protein involved in its synthesis has a tyr-194 residue with catalytic activity and forms an octamer by successive addition of UDP glucose molecules, and its breakdown sees the cleavage of a 1,4-alpha glycosidic bond. For 10 points, identify this polymer which is the form used for storing glucose in the liver.;;glycogen
Art;;One of this man's paintings contrasts a landscape with a metal chain and a fallen tree with an interior featuring flowery wallpaper and delicately placed dishes. Another of this man's paintings shows sunlight coming through a window, and a conch shell sits upon a blanket chest. Besides Groundhog Day and Her Room, this man also painted over 200 depictions, including some nudes, of his friend Helga Testorf. He is best known for a painting that shows that two houses in the upper right, and a woman in pink faces away from the viewer and sits in a field. For 10 points, name this American painter who depicted his crippled neighbor in the 1948 work Christina's World.;;(Andrew) (Newell) Wyeth
European Literature;;One character in this work smoothly suggests that he form a "triangular friendship" with a married couple. Another character in this work becomes obsessed with the red-headed singer Diana, and it also features an academic busily researching his book on "The Domestic Industries of Brabant". The final scene of this play sees the title character discussing a "deed of spontaneous beauty" before a man dubbed "the one cock in the basket" states that Eilert did not kill himself voluntarily. Featuring such characters as the dull historian George Tesman and the sly Judge Brack, for 10 points, name this play that ends with the title woman shooting herself, by Henrik Ibsen.;;Hedda Gabler
European History;;This man's daughter Maria wound up working as a circus tiger-trainer, and painted a saintly-looking picture of him included in her biography of this man, "My Father". This man was allegedly involved in an underground sect that allegedly practiced self-flagellation and held wild orgies, the Khlysty.  He woke up Anya Vyrubova, who was in a coma after a train accident, and he was poisoned, shot three times, beaten with a dumbbell, and thrown in a river by conspirators led by Felix Yusupov. For 10 points, name this Russian Holy man, the healer of Alexei Romanov and alleged sexual consort of the empress.;;(Grigori Yefimovich) Rasputin
Chemistry;;The SPT technique, which uses selective applications of a pi pulse, was a fore-runner of one form of it, and another form makes the use of Magic Angle Spinning to eliminate line broadening. Its two dimensional form which provides information about bond connectivity is called COSY. The Pascal's triangle can be used to model the splitting of peaks when the spins of neighboring particles are coupled, and it uses tetra-methyl-silane as its base to measure the relative chemical shift of the sample. For 10 points, identify this form of spectroscopy wherein a magnetic field is applied to a sample, which is frequently performed in its Carbon 13 and Proton varieties.;;NMR (spectroscopy)
World History;;The most noted portrait of this man shows two stacks of three crowns above an ornate arch that surrounds his profile, and was painted by Gentile Bellini. This man's son sent his navy under Kemal Reis to bring the Jews and Arabs fleeing the Spanish Inquisition. A siege laid by this ruler caused Pope Callixtus III to excommunicate Halley's Comet.  His expansion was checked by Skanderbeg's revolt, and was defeated in the Night Attack by Vlad Dracula. His greatest victory came over Constantine XI and resulted in the Hagia Sofia's conversion to a mosque. Succeeded by his son Bayezid II, for 10 points, name this sultan who sacked Constantinople in 1453.;;Mehmed (II|the Second){1}?;;Mehmed
Physics;;This effect is exhibited in an oscillatory pattern in the Shubnikov de Haas effect, and its magnitude can be measured by connecting symmetrical contacts in the van der Pauw method. A secondary current can be induced in a circular metal disk in one variant for it named for Corbino. Klaus von Klitzing discovered integral changes in resistance in a MOSFET, which is the "quantum" form of this and it can be used to show that electrons serve as charge carriers. For 10 points, name this effect wherein a magnetic field applied perpendicularly to the flow of a current results in a potential difference in a transverse direction, named for its American discoverer.;;(Quantum) Hall (effect)
Music;;This man composed a Grand Duo for piano and cello based on Meyerbeer's opera Robert the Devil, and eight of this man's works make up the Mikhael Folkine ballet blanc "Les Sylphides," and another work contains three repetitions of a D-flat Major melody interrupted by one in C sharp minor and is entitled "Raindrop," This man's second piano sonata alludes to Beethoven's 32nd sonata and is nicknamed "Funeral March," and the left hand rapidly plays a sequence of harmonic minor scales in "Revolutionary Etude". Most famous for his preludes and nocturnes, for 10 points, identify this Polish-French composer of the "Minute Waltz".;;(Frederic) Chopin
Physics;;Bertrand's theorem states that stable orbits can only occur for coulomb potentials and these types of potentials. Potentials of this type possess energy eigenstates of h-bar times omega times the quantity n plus one-half and can be solved algebraically by using raising and lowering operators. These objects can be described with a second-order differential equation which equates Newton's Second Law and a displacement times Hooke's constant. For 10 points, identify these objects that experience a restoring force when displaced from their equilibrium point, examples of which include masses on springs and pendulums.;;(quantum) (simple) harmonic oscillator(s)
British History;;Less notable aspects of this document include clauses that men can't be imprisoned because of a female claim unless it's in regards to the death of her husband, and that no town or person could be forced to build a bridge. This document also made it legal for Jews to practice usury, since they were not Christians, they could not be excommunicated for charging interest on loans.  This document is perhaps more well known for the implementation of the concepts of habeas corpus and the establishment of a twenty-five baron council to keep the king in check.  For 10 points, name this document that greatly curtailed the power of King John, written in 1215.;;Magna Carta
Social Science;;One critique of this discipline notes that its early practitioners denied "coevalness" to the object it studies.  Matti Bunzel and Johannes Fabian's Time and the Other is subtitled after "How [this discipline] makes its object".  Jacques Derrida critiqued this discipline by claiming that it implies a center, and does not allow "play" in the essay "Structure, Sign, and Play". One text in this discipline makes use of the term "bricolage" to describe the process of creating mythologies, and that author founded the "structural" version of this discipline in such works as The Raw and the Cooked. For 10 points, name this discipline practiced by Claude Levi-Strauss.;;anthropology
Biology;;One type of these entities is characterized by identical sequences of about 400 repeated base pairs flanked by inverted repeats of about 15 base pairs. Another type of these structures is responsible for causing the condition of hybrid dysgenesis in Drosophila. In addition to MITEs and P elements, another type of these structures found abundantly in humans is called Alu elements which are a form of SINEs. The first one to be discovered is the Ac-Ds system which was found during studies of the maize plant. First discovered in 1983 by Barbara McClintock, for 10 points, identify these mobile sequences of DNA that are often nicknamed "jumping genes".;;transposon(s)|Jumping Genes
American History;;This man once vetoed a bill to appropriate funds for drought-stricken Texas farmers by saying "federal aidencourages the expectations of paternal care". He used the slogan "Public office is a public trust," and as President, had to deal with such incidents as a march on Washington led by Jacob Coxey. During this man's presidency, he also sent in the army to deal with a strike led by Eugene V. Debs, and this man signed both the Interstate Commerce Act and the Dawes Act. For 10 points, identify this President who defeated both James G. Blaine and Benjamin Harrison to win two nonconsecutive terms.;;(Grover) Cleveland
Relgion;;One teacher in this religion is disciplined disciples by "shouting and hitting" them with a fly-whisk, and another teacher was a major advocate of the practice of shikantaza. This belief system holds sacred an event in which a man sat silently holding a white lotus, known as the Flower Sermon. In addition to the writings of Linji and Dogen, a sacred instrument to the Fuke form of this religion is the flute-like shakuhachi; playing a single note upon it can lead to this religion's enlightenment called satori. For 10 points, name this sect of Mahayana Buddhism known for its use of extensive meditation and paradoxical riddles called koans that is quite popular in Japan.;;Zen (Buddhism)
Music;;The Scherzo movement of this work begins with the repetition of a theme played first in F and then in D major to give the impression of two different groups of people dancing. The Andante second movement of this piece ends with the woodwinds playing cadenzas that imitate the calls of the quail, nightingale and cuckoo. In the F-minor fourth movement, the violins play staccato to imitate raindrops, and the timpani and flute depict thunder and lightning of a violent thunderstorm. It opens with a movement entitled "The Awakening of Good Feelings upon Arrival in the Country". For 10 points, name this work in F Major, the 6th symphony of Ludwig on Beethoven.;;Pastoral (Symphony)|Beethoven('s) sixth |Beethoven('s) 6(th)
European History;;Prior to this man' reign, he was stabbed in the arm by an assassin's poison dagger while attempting to halt the advance of Baybars, and he spent a year as a hostage of his father's greatest political opponent in the wake of his military defeat at Lewes. This monarch was aided by Gilbert de Clare in the Battle of Evesham, which saw him defeat Simon de Montfort to end the Baron's War, and ascended the throne while still in the Holy Land. Responsible for the subjugation of Whales in 1284, he expelled the Jews from England in 1290 and executed William Wallace. For 10 points, name this successor of Henry III, a Plantagenet king nicknamed "Longshanks".;;Edward (I|the First){1}? (Longshanks);;Edward
European Literature;;One character in this novel, Viktor Sitnikov, appears in the author's first novel, in which he narrates that novel's protagonist's death during an anarchist revolution in Paris. This novel's heroes return from the university to discover Nikolai's affair with his maid, Fenitchka. The central characters are taken into the salon of the rich widow Anna Odintsova, who falls in love with one protagonist, but is rejected. The other protagonist, Arkady Kirsanov, comes to believe that some things are worthwhile after all, and to reject the nihilism of the other, who dies alone. For 10 points, name this novel about Bazarov, written by Ivan Turgenev.;;Fathers and Sons
World History;;Before the first battle at this location, poor communication involving the 10th and 13th Corps troops at Mersa Metruh nearly led to a botched retreat. At the opening of the first engagement at this location, Claude Auchinleck organized his forces along the Ruweisat Ridge. At the second battle at this location, the British employed Operation Lightfoot as a means of bypassing a minefield. During this battle, British tanks rallied from the namesake railway station to attack the enemy's gasoline supply at Tel el Aqqaqir. For 10 points, name this location of two WWII battles, the site of Bernard Montgomery's greatest victory over Erwin Rommel.;;El Alamein
Noncomputational Math;;In 1970, Paul Cohen proved by induction that these constructs alone are insufficient to create an artificial intelligence that would pass the Turing test. When one of these constructs satisfies an additional property, it is named after Harris. A version of this construct in which results are completely independent is called the Bernoulli scheme. Examples include random-walk phenomena in physics and the rolling of dice to move pieces across a game-board. For 10 points, name this kind of stochastic process in which any future set of conditions is determined by and only by the present set of conditions, named for a Soviet mathematician.;;Markov chain(s)
British Literature;;This character is first mentioned in a series of four letters addressed to a Mrs. Margaret Saville. He is the object of affection for his adopted sister, who was found in an Italian peasant village. At the end of the work he appears in, this character pursues the murderer of his brother William and friend Henry Clerval to the Arctic Circle, where he dies from pneumonia. This character's creation was inspired by both a sight of lightning striking down a tree during his childhood and the alchemical works of Paracelsus and Albertus Magnus. A notable student of Ingolstadt University, for 10 points, name this man who creates a namesake monster in a novel by Mary Shelley.;;(Victor) Frankenstein
Art;;Genre paintings by this man include one in which an old man and a boy giving a thumbs-up are seated at a table containing bread and pomegranates, and another depicting the titular brown poncho-wearing waterseller. He painted a shawled woman over a stove in Old Woman Frying Eggs. Another work by this artist has numerous lances seen in the upper right hand corner and has at the center two men negotiating in Surrender at Breda. He depicted his artist's studio with two maids-of-honor tending to the infanta Margarita in another work. For 10 points, name this Spanish court painter for Philip IV, best known for Las Meninas.;;(Diego) Velazquez
Philosophy;;This author critiqued Berthold Brecht in Men in Dark Times. "On Violence" and "Lying in Politics" were some of this author's posthumous essays in Crises of the Republic. This thinker postulated that the social realm had diverged from the public and private realms following Roman times in a work describing work, labor, and action as the vita activa, while another work begins by eschewing the need to philosophically "understand" the title entity as anything but the "most radical denial of freedom". The author of The Human Condition, for 10 points, name coiner of the term "banality of evil" in Eichmann in Jerusalem who authored The Origins of Totalitarianism.;;(Hannah) Arendt
American Literature;;Czeslaw Milosz has written a poem titled "Against" a poet from this polity, who dedicated "A Threnody" to his sister and wrote "Rock and Hawk" and "Shine, Perishing Republic!"  Another poet from this polity wrote a poem that claims "I pledge allegiance to the soil" that contains lines such as "One ecosystem, in diversity, under the sun, with joyful interpenetration for all".  In addition to this polity's Robinson Jeffers and Turtle Island author Gary Snyder, a poem set in this polity imagines Garcia Lorca by the watermelons and Walt Whitman eyeing the grocery boys.  For 10 points, name this state, a "Supermarket" in which names a poem by Allen Ginsberg.;;California
World Literature;;A sequel to this work redirects attention to natural beauty and is titled for a certain figure's "garden". It declares that one must rob a baby of its mother's milk in order to drink, and defines joy as "sorrow unmasked". The title figure of this work, which was followed by Sand and Foam, addresses the reader as "a leaf in God's forest" and it includes sections like "Reasons and Passions," and "Eating and Drinking". It begins on the Seventh of Ielool when Almitra begins a discussion in Orphalese as a ship has arrived to return the title figure, al-Mustafa, to the isle of his birth. For 10 points, name this book by Khalil Gibran.;;(The) Prophet
Mythology;;One figure of this name was the daughter of Tityos and mother of Euphemus by Poseidon. Another figure of this name is the granddaughter of Nilus through her mother Telephassa, and she was worshipped under the name Hellotis after marrying Asterion. One lover gave her a never-missing javelin, the bronze man Talos, and the dog Laelaps, and by that lover she was the mother of Rhadamanthus and Minos. Cilix wound up in Boeotia after an event involving this woman, whose father Agenor sent her brothers to retrieve her. The sister of Phoenix and Cadmus, for 10 points, name this woman who ended up in Crete after being abducted by Zeus in the form of a bull.;;Europa
Chemistry;;The Nozicki-Hiyama-Kishi reaction uses organometallic compounds featuring chromium or this element. It can be extracted from its oxide ore through heating in the presence of a mixture of hydrogen gas and carbon monoxide to yield a tetracarbonyl intermediate, which decomposes to yield four carbon monoxides in a process named for Mond. The diffraction pattern resulting from x rays fired at a crystal of this element provided evidence for the wave-particle duality in the Davisson-Germer experiment. A catalyst used to hydrogenate alkenes contains this element and aluminum, and is named for Raney. For 10 points, name this element with atomic symbol Ni.;;nickel
World History;;This ruler was supposedly punished by a deity with famine after suppressing a revolt in Subartu, and he had earlier dealt with an invasion led by four great Elamite generals. He began his reign following the defeat of a King of Umma, Lugulzaggesi, who had fought a war against Ur-Zababa. After taking Kish from Lugulzaggesi, he built his empire by extending trade from his capital city throughout to Susa and the Zagros mountains. He was succeeded by his sons Rimush and Manishtushu, and made his daughter Enheduanna the high priestess of Nanna. For 10 points, name this former sandal-bearer, a possible inspiration for the biblical Nimrod, a great king of Akkad.;;Sargon (the Great) (of Akkad)
Religion;;This group believes that the Lataif-as-Sitta, or Six Subtleties, relate to extra-sensory perception and must be present in order to be a full human. Members of this group advocate total adherence to God, tawakkul, and aspire to reach the state of self-annihilation and union with God, fana and baqa. A branch of this sect practices qawwali, the reaching God through music, and another branch practices a variation with motion, the whirling dervishes. Named for their traditional rough, woolen robes and concentrating on discovering the ultimate love of god through personal experience, for 10 points, identify this mystical branch of Islam.;;Sufi(sm)
Art;;In one text, this author described green as the symbol for the universe's primal matter, and wrote poems including one that claims of the human body "This is proportion!" This author of "The Poem of the Right Angle" designed the Curutchet House in Argentina. His buildings in the United States include Harvard University's Carpenter Center, and a building he co-designed with Oscar Niemeyer, the UN Headquarters. He described a house as "a machine for living," helped plan the city of Chandrigarh, and wrote Towards a New Architecture. For 10 points, name this designer of the Villa Savoye and Notre Dame du Haut, a prominent Swiss-French architect.;;(Le) Corbusier
Mythology;;This god's wife turned Leuce into a white poplar tree and Minthe into the mint plant.  One of his more famous possessions was crafted out of dogskin and sported a pair of wings, modeled after the helmet of Hermes, known for its ability to make its wearer invisible, and was awarded to him for his role in fighting the Titans and installing his brother as king of the gods.  He was also noted for hosting Theseus and Pirothous, who were attempting to steal his wife, and then binding them to their chairs with snakes.  For 10 points, name this god who captured Persephone and made her his wife, who was the god of wealth and the underworld.;;Hades
Music;;The third movement of this work contains sequences of triplets and tonal fourths that develops into a march led by clarinets backed in the strings. Its first movement sees the trombones quote a line from the Orthodox Requiem and contains a bassoon solo marked with six ps and and a drum part marked fff following a recapitulation of the first movement's theme. The basses play a pizzicato part pianiss-iss-iss-iss-issimo in this work's final movement, an Adagio lamentoso, and its second movement contains a limping waltz in 5/4 time. Originally titled Program Symphony, for 10 points, identify this symphony in B minor, the last of Tschaikovsky.;;(Symphony) Pathétique
Psychology;;This man met Max Wertheimer and Ruth Benedict and took extensive notes on their behavior, and also worked with Harry Harlow on studying primate sexuality. This man's best-known theory arose out of a study of such people as Benedict Spinoza and Aldous Huxley, whom this man concluded had an unhostile sense of humor and were reality-centered. Besides deducing that these people were more likely to have peak experiences, this man also believed that they had obtained required levels of love, belonging, and esteem. For 10 points, name this American psychologist who theorized that people achieved self-actualization by satisfying the hierarchy of needs.;;(Abraham) Maslow
British Literature;;A one act play by Jonathan Reynolds sees Rupert Murdoch's inability to recite this work launch his career in newspapers. The speaker compares his childhood adventures to a "man flying from something that he dreads," and imagines a hermit "in the houseless woods". The poet recollects the scenery in "'mid the din of towns and cities" and the "heavy burthen" of the "unintelligible world" is lightened at the title locale, whose "green pastoral landscape" has grown "more dear" to the speaker. The speaker recalls a gap of five years after a visit to the title location with sister Dorothy in, for 10 points, what poem about a trip to the River Wye, by William Wordsworth.;;(Lines Composed a Few Miles Above) Tintern Abbey (, on Revisiting the Banks of the River Wye)
Biology;;A disproportionation reaction using this type of compounds in the presence of alcoxides to yield esters is named for Tischenko, while another type can be formed by reacting a secondary amine with a pyridinium salt. In the presence of a strong base, two equivalents of these yield an alcohol and a carboxylic acid in the Cannizzaro reaction. They can be reduced to primary alcohols, and they react with a set of alkyl ammonium compounds to form a silver mirror in the Tollens test. For 10 points, identify these compounds which feature a carbon double bonded to an oxygen and single bonded to an alkyl group and a hydrogen, exemplified by etha-nal and propa-nal.;;aldehyde(s)
Astronomy;;Magnetohydrodynamic effects on the sun's magnetic field create this type of structure named for Parker. Horizontal wind sets the surface layer into motion, causing one of these structures to form in the ocean, in a form of them named for Ekman. A diagram of the parametric point of the Fresnel functions takes the form of this structure; that diagram is named for Cornu. The Tully-Fisher relation is the relationship between the stellar mass and intrinsic luminosity of galaxies that take this shape. For 10 points, name these structures, exemplified by galaxies like Andromeda that aren't elliptical but can be barred.;;spiral(s)
European History;;One king of this name and number married Joan of Navarre and fended off the "Epiphany Uprising". Another king by this name and number had Maximilian de Bethune, Duke de Sully negotiate the Peace of Savoy, but was assassinated by Francois Ravalliac. Yet another ruler of this name and number dealt with the rise of anti-king Rudolf of Swabia, and had installed Clement III as pope, though he had earlier traveled to Canossa to reconcile with Pope Gregory VII. For 10 points, identify this name and number shared by the Holy Roman Emperor involved in the Investiture controversy as well as the Bourbon king of Navarre who declared that "Paris is worth a Mass".;;Henry (IV|the Fourth){1}?;;Henry
Philosphy;;This thinker expanded upon Avicenna to craft his namesake methods of induction in one work, and he labeled capital as the "accumulated stock of the produce of nature" in another work. In addition to A System of Logic and Principles of Political Economy, this man claimed that the individual is sovereign over his "body and mind" in another work. This man argued that "actions are right in proportion as they tend to promote happiness" in a work titled after Jeremy Bentham's school of philosophy. For 10 points, identify this English philosopher, who outlined the "harm principle" in On Liberty, the author of The Subjection of Women and Utilitarianism.;;(John Stuart )Mill
European History;;This man described a character who has an epitelioma near his mustache, and the Agazzi family watch the conflict between Signora Frolla and Signor Ponza over Signora Ponza's identity in another work. In addition to The Man With the Flower in His Mouth and Right you are! (If you think you are), he wrote about a guy who goes to Monte Carlo and is mistaken for being dead, The Late Mattea Pascal, and a work in which a man who falls off of a horse believes he is the title Holy Roman Emperor. Better known for a work featuring a Boy, Girl, Mother, Father, Stepdaughter, and Son, for 10 points, name this author of Enrico IV and Six Characters in Search of An Author.;;(Luigi) Pirandello
American History;;The losing army in this battle was hampered by an inability to rendezvous with Colonel Barry St. Leger's force of mostly Iroquois Indians. The retreating army at this battle paused to bury one of their generals, Simon Fraser, who had been killed the previous day. The losing commander, fresh off a retaking of Fort Ticonderoga, never received aid from Henry Clinton and was defeated when enemy reinforcements under Benedict Arnold arrived. For 10 points, name this battle which took place in September and October 1777, in which American forces under Horatio Gates defeated John Burgoyne's British forces, fought at Bemis Heights and Freeman's Farm.;;(Battle of) Saratoga
American History;;The narrator of one poem by this author dismisses a "red sword of virtue," while the speaker of another of his poems from the same collection encounters a "creature, naked, bestial" who "held his heart in his hands/and ate of it". Other works by this author of the collection The Black Riders include a short story in which Johnny accuses the Swede of cheating at a card game, and another based on his own experiences after the sinking of the Commodore. This author of "The Blue Hotel" and "The Open Boat" also wrote novels starring a "girl of the streets" and Private Henry Fleming. For 10 points, identify this author of Maggie and The Red Badge of Courage.;;(Stephen) Crane
British Liteature;;One character with this occupation incinerates several men dressed as orangutans and lights them on fire in a Poe story. A stage character with this occupation is noted for singing the songs "Come Away, Death" and "The Rain it Raineth Every Day". Another character with this occupation concludes a play by laying out the degrees of the lie and marrying Audrey. An unnamed character with this job claims that "truth's a dog must to kennel" and addresses his boss as "nuncle". Trinculo in The Tempest and Feste in Twelfth Night have this occupation, as does Touchstone in As You Like It. For 10 points, name this occupation held by a character serving King Lear.;;Jester|Clown |Fool
Art;;One of his paintings shows the titular daughter of Oceanus crowning a winged horse, and Vasari notes that he painted seven frescos at the San Giovanni Evangelista church. This artist of Saturn and Philyra also painted the Saint Margaret and Saint Jerome altarpieces, and his Vision of St. Jerome features a seated Madonna and Child. One of work depicts a figure wearing a fur coat with a ring on the little finger as he gazes into the titular orb and in another, the title character rests her foot on a green pillow as a gigantic baby Jesus sits on her lap. For 10 points, identify this artist who painted Self Portrait in a Convex Mirror and Madonna With the Long Neck.;;Parmigianino
World Literature;;In one work of this author, a professor dying of cancer dictates part of a letter to Mr. Vercueil. Another of his works culminates in a plane dropping "words in Spanish" on the main character. In another work, one character denounces the "smelly underwear" of realism, and Elizabeth Costello gives two lectures on animal rights rather than literature. Susan Barton is thrown from a boat on route to Lisbon in his retelling of Robinson Crusoe titled Foe, and the professor David Lurie seduces one of his students in Disgrace. For 10 points, name this author who wrote of a gardener's trek through Apartheid era South Africa in his Life & Times of Michael K.;;(John) (Maxwell) Coetzee
Physics;;The Ornstein theorem states that Bernoulli schemes which have equivalent values for this are isomorphic, while another type of this is given by the logarithm of the covering number, and is named for Kolmogorov. One form of this quantity useful in information theory is named for Claude Shannon, and for an ideal monoatomic gas it is given by the Sackur-Tetrode equation. For an irreversible process, this quantity is always greater for the system and its surroundings according to the second law of thermodynamics. For 10 points, identify this quantity which describes the degree of disorder of a system, usually represented by the letter S.;;entropy
World History;;One ruler of this country gained power through the revolt of sargents by overthrowing a leader who had organized a secret police called the Porra. This country saw rebellions led by free black men such as Nicholas Morales and Jose Antonio Aponte in 1795 and 1812 respectively. This country also saw Carlos Manuel de Cespedes issue the Grito de Yara which led to the Ten Years War. The United States Congress also declared it did not wish to occupy this country through the Teller Amendment. For 10 points, identify this country in which Fulgencio Batista was overthrown in 1959 by Fidel Castro.;;(Republic of) Cuba
American Literature;;One of this man's poems ends with a question regarding a boat disappearing on the "black waters of the Lethe". Another of his works ends with the comment that he is putting his "queer shoulder to the wheel," and he updated William Blake in a poem inspired that claims the title flower is not a train. This author of "America" and "Sunflower Sutra," addressed another poem to Carl Solomon that contains the refrain "I'm with you in Rockland" and whose second section describes the nightmare Moloch. For 10 points, name this American poet who wrote about seeing "the best minds of my generation destroyed" in the long poem Howl.;;(Allen) Ginsberg
Philosophy;;This man claimed that reason cannot answer moral quandaries and denounced asceticism in one work, and wrote of Philo and Demea's discussion of the cosmological and teleological arguments in another. In another work, this man asks whether moral approval is a rational or emotional response in "Of the Understandings". This author of An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals and Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion wrote another work that describes the "transgression of the laws of nature" by a Deity in the section "Of Miracles". For 10 points, name this thinker who wrote A Treatise of Human Nature and An Essay Concerning Human Understanding.;;(David) Hume
Physics;;The real portion of the Clausius-Mossoti factor gives the direction of the force that this entity exerts. An oscillating example of this entity produces spectral lines in the effect named for Autler and Townes. This entity is used to control the size of "conductive channels" in a certain type of transistor, often contrasted with a bipolar junction transistor. The presence of this entity causes birefringence in the Kerr effect, and the splitting of spectral lines in the presence of one of these entities is known as the Stark effect. For 10 points, name this entity measured in newtons per coulomb, a field that surrounds point charges and is denoted E.;;(the) electric field
American History;;This man won an important early political victory by contrasting his views against that of his segregationist opponent, George Mahoney, who used the slogan "Your Home is Your Castle--Protect It". Upon election, he alienated liberals by ordering the arrest of protesters at Bowie State College and blaming H. Rap Brown and SNCC for the riots in Cambridge in 1967. His conservatism was further seen in a later position, in which he mocked liberals as "nattering nabobs". This governor of Maryland was selected as a running mate in 1968. For 10 points, name this vice president who resigned in 1973 over a bribery scandal, the first vice-president of Richard Nixon.;;(Spiro) (Theodore) Agnew
Art;;This artist painted a street sweeper and a woman in green holding her hands above her head in The Dead Man, and depicted blue figures and a seven-candle chandelier above a marriage ceremony in The Wedding Candles. One of his paintings shows a white Eiffel Tower behind himself painting, and another shows a man toting a sack an army advancing with red flags, and a burning place of worship around the central dying figure. This artist of White Crucifixion and Self Portrait with Seven Fingers painted some upside-down houses and a sheep facing a green man's face in another work. For 10 points, name this Belarussian who painted I and the Village.;;(Marc) Chagall
Chemistry;;A typical Dean-Stark apparatus contains two of these entities, one connected to a fractioning column and the other below a tap on a burette. One of these entities is sometimes named for Kitasato, and contains an arm that can be attached to an aspirator. In addition to that type named for Buchner, a version of these entities can have gas introduced into them via a side-arm, in the type named for Schlenk. The Florence type has a round bottom, and the version with vacuum-enclosing walls is named for Dewar. For 10 points, name these common pieces of laboratory glassware, exemplified by the Erlenmeyer type.;;flask(s)
European Literature;;At one point in this work, the narrator obtains a stolen panel of the Ghent Altarpiece in a bar called "Mexico City," which is situated in a red light district likened to the innermost circle of hell by the concentric patterns of Amsterdam's canals. The narrator recounts how he came to be haunted by laughter one evening in the Pont des Arts in Paris, which he later discovers to be his own laughter, and he is ultimately unable to forget an instance in which he failed to assist a drowning woman. For 10 points, name this work about the moral descent of "judge-penitent" Jean-Baptiste Clamence, a work of Albert Camus.;;(The) Fall|(La) Chute
World History;;This dynasty adopted a law code called the Yassa and considered "southerners" its lowest class, and it saw the introduction of paper money and Arabic numerals. It finished off its predecessor at the Battle of Yamen and established its capital at Dadu. Problems faced by this dynasty included its costly military campaigns against Java and a successful revolt that saw Zhu Yuanzhang declare himself Hongwu Emperor and found the Ming Dynasty, the Red Turban Rebellion. For 10 points, name this Chinese dynasty that hosted Marco Polo and attempted to invade Japan, but is best known for being founded by the leader of the Mongols, Kublai Khan.;;(Great) Yuan (Dynasty)
Biology;;One of this concept's namesakes names an inequality that is the more general form of Carleman's inequality. A diagram that depicts the results of this principle depicts it as a curved segment on an equilateral triangle named for de Finetti. This principle yields an equation stated as "one equals p-squared plus two-p-q plus q-squared," and it only holds when disturbing influences like gene flow and non-random mating are not present. For 10 points, name this principle that states that allele and genotype frequencies in a population remain constant, a doubly-eponymous principle from population biology.;;Hardy(-)Weinberg (Equilibrium)
Economics;;In this work's introduction, the author mentions Icelandic communities in the time of the Sagas, as well as the Polynesian Islanders. Another section of this work analyzes such groups as the YMCA, while discussing the religious zeal which seems to permeate college athletics. This work concludes with a section on "elegant diction" and "conventional spelling". Another chapter discusses "the gambling proclivity" and is entitled "The Belief in Luck," while another chapter of this work describes the wearing of liveries and owning spacious servants quarters. For 10 points, name this work which coined the term "conspicuous consumption," work by Thorstein Veblen.;;(The) Theory of the Leisure Class
Religion;;One tradition of this name is a celebration of fruits and occurs on a holiday that commemorates the New Year of Trees. In addition that one falling on Tu Bishavt, another ceremony of this name include a dialogue with a wicked character who asks "what does it all mean to you" and the hiding and discovery of the afikomen. Additions to this ceremony's form include songs titled "Who Knows One" and "Next Year in Jerusalem," and that form includes the Four Questions and the story of Exodus and is contained in the Haggadah. For 10 points, identify this ritual meal containing bitter herbs and matzah eaten on Passover.;;Seder
American History;;The youngest man to hold this position defeated machine politician John Hylan in a World War I era election.  This first holder of this position after the polity it governs was consolidated created its public transportation system and is Robert Van Wyck. In addition to John Mitchel, the first and only black man to serve in this position was David Dinkins. The holder of this position is entitled to live in a house located in Carl Schurz Park, called Gracie Mansion. A former holder of this position co-sponsored a bill with Norris that outlawed yellow dog contracts. For 10 points, name this position  held by people like Fiorello La Guardia, Rudy Giuliani, and Michael Bloomberg.;;Mayor (of) New York (City)
Music;;This man adapted A.E. Housman's "Is my team ploughing" into the third part of his song cycle On Wenlock Edge, and he provided six quotes from the Book of Solomon to accompany his suite Flos Campi. "The March Past of the Kitchen Utensils" is the third section of one of his works, while a Meredith poem is the basis for another. In addition to incidental music for The Wasps and The Lark Ascending, he adapted his score for Scott of the Antarctic into his Sinfonia Antarctica and set poems from Leaves of Grass in his first symphony. For 10 points, identify this British composer of A Sea Symphony and fantasias on "Greensleeves" and a Theme of Thomas Tallis.;;(Ralph) Vaughan Williams
World Literature;;. One author from this country wrote about Adah, who leaves Pussy Cat Mansions.  Another author from this country wrote a novel "in Rotten English". In addition to the authors of In the Ditch and Sozaboy, another author from this country wrote the poems "Elegy For Alto" and "Heavensgate". Those authors from this country are Buchi Emecheta, Ken Saro-Wiwa, and Christopher Okigbo. Another author from this country wrote novels like A Man of the People and Anthills of the Savannah. For 10 points, name this country, home to the author of Arrow of God, Chinua Achebe.;;Nigeria
World History;;This man funded a military corps known as the streltsy, which led to the annexations of Kazan and Astrakhan. At one point during this man's rule, he abdicated the throne and was replaced by Simeon Bekbulatovich. Difficulties in his later years included a botched military campaign to retake western Slavic lands in the Livonian War, and the harsh government he created called the oprichnina, a far cry from his earlier Chosen Council. He killed his own son, bringing about the downfall of the Rurik Dynasty. For 10 points, identify this Russian leader who served as the first man to take the title tsar and is best known for his rampant acts of cruelty.;;Ivan (IV|the Fourth|the Terrible){1}?;;Ivan
Mythology;;Abhimanyu, in his mother's womb, overhears this figure describing the tactics behind breaking the "chakra-vyuha" formation to Subhadra, and like Achilles, this figure dies after he is shot in his foot with an arrow by an erring hunter. He also lifts Mount Go-var-dhana to provide shelter for the residents of Vrinadavana, and his best known devotee is Mira Bai. This husband of Rukmini is the eight child of Devaki is exchanged with Yashoda's child by Vasudeva, and this figure kills Devaki's evil cousin Kans. For 10 points, identify this avatar of Vishnu, best known for stealing butter and serving as Arjuna's charioteer when he narrated the Bhagavad Gita.;;Krishna
European History;;During one of this man's military campaigns, he left the government in the hands of Hubert Walter. Earlier, he had become embroiled in a campaign against the Gascons, who had revolted against his rule, while yet another conflict saw him conquering Messina and forcing a treaty that named Tancred the king of Sicily. He died while besieging the castle at Chalus. This victor over the Saracens at Acre was separated from his wife, Berengaria of Navarre, when he was captured by Duke Leopold, who handed him over to his enemy Henry VI. For 10 points, name this British monarch, who went on the Third Crusade, the brother of John noted for his lion-heartedness.;;Richard (I|the First){1}?|Richard (the) Lion (-) Hearted
British Literatutre;;One character in this novel dies under unexplained circumstances after he takes out a large insurance policy in his lover's name.  One character's lover has an affair with Sir Pitt, her husband's brother, while he is in jail for gambling debts in this work. In addition to the protagonist's failed marriage with Rawdon Crawley, this novel sees its protagonist meet her best friend at Miss Pinkerton's School, and another character marries George Osborne, although she was loved by Captain Dobbin.  For 10 points, name this novel about Amelia Sedley and Becky Sharp, a work by William Makepeace Thackeray.;;Vanity Fair
Mythology;;Romulus and Remus were fed by one type of these creatures named Picus. Tasting the blood of Fafnir allowed Sigurd to understand them. The jotun Hraesvelgr took the form of one of them, and Fionnuala and her brothers spent 900 years as a type of them. A Sufi poem sees a "conference" of them cross seven valleys to find Simurgh, and the one representing Ra's soul was called the bennu. One king of them was the son of Kashyap and Vinata, and other myths describe a group of them being scared away from a lake with bronze clappers by Heracles. For 10 points, name these creatures, mythical examples of which include Garuda, the Stymphalian ones, and the phoenix.;;bird(s)
American Literature;;Minor characters in this work include Samson and Armistid, who serve as hosts for the main characters during their journey. Other characters in this work include Skeet MacGowan, who works in a drugstore, and Mr. Moseley, a smug druggist in Mottson. One chapter in this work is narrated by the Reverend Whitfield, who had an illegitimate affair with one of the characters, which produced the son Jewel. Noted for the line "My mother is a fish" said by the child Vardaman, this work also features Cash and Dewey Dell. For 10 points, name this novel by William Faulkner, which describes the attempts of the Bundren family to bury their recently deceased matriarch.;;As I Lay Dying
Music;;This primary artist behind this work was inspired by the work of George Russell, Ravel, and Bartok. Piano playing by Wynton Kelly is featured on the track "Freeloader Freddie" and this work contains a themeless track of Spanish accented solos called "Flamenco Sketches". One track on this album switches between three modes, "Blue in Green," and a melody from bassist Paul Chambers intertwines with a series of broken piano chords from Bill Evans to open the first track, "So What". Featuring Cannonball Adderley and John Coltrane on saxophone, for 10 points, name this experimental 1959 modal jazz album of trumpeter Miles Davis.;;Kind of Blue
Computer Science;;The WAM is an type of the "stage" version of them, which operate on theoretical systems. Briggs, Cooper, and Torczon made a type of optimization for them known as "rematerialization," while other methods of optimizing them include peepholing, which reduces the total number of instructions. Adding forward declarations makes "single-pass" ones less error-prone. Those that aren't used until runtime are known as "Just-In-Time" ones, and ones written in the language they're used for are called bootstrappers. Usually consisting of a lexical analyzer, a parser, and a code generator, for 10 points, name these objects that convert source code into machine code.;;compiler(s)
World History;;One force involved in this event dismantled and carried the Faidherbe to its location. That force had little luck recruiting local Shilluks, and was not reinforced by a group led by Christian de Bonchamps. Resolved by a 1904 entente signed by Theodore Delcasse, it was caused by Gabriel Hanotaux ordering a force to march from Gabon to the namesake town, now called Kodok. The other side in this event was led in part by Horace Smith-Dorrien had previously won a victory at Omdurman. For 10 points, name this 1898 incident from the Scramble for Africa which was resolved by negotiations between Marchand and Kitchener and took place at a namesake Sudanese town.;;Fashoda (Incident)
World Literature;;In one of this man's novels, the main character nearly crashes into two Jehovah's Witnesses after running over a dog. One of his non-fictional works contrasts Venezuela's war for independence with an aging conquistador's search, his The Loss of El Dorado. Another of his works features Mr. Popo and the poet B. Wordsworth, who never complete any of their projects. Another of his novels sees the "big man" spell trouble for Salim's new shop. The title character of another of his works must put up with his overzealous Tulsi family he marries into. For 10 poitns, name this Trinidadian author of A Bend in the River and A House for Mr. Biswas.;;(Sir Vidiahar Surajprasad) Naipaul
Biology;;The condensation of this compound and succinyl-coA results in the synthesis of ALA, which is the first step of heme synthesis. Every third residue in collagen features this amino acid, and the interconversion between this compound and serine is performed by serine hydroxymethylase. The presence of this amino acid is obligatory for the opening of channels of the NMDA receptors, and it functions as an inhibitory neurotransmitter in the central nervous system. Like proline, it is usually not found in alpha helices because of its small size, and it is the only amino acid which does not exhibit chirality. For 10 points, identify this simplest of the amino acids.;;glycine
American History;;Unsuccessful candidates for the nomination in this election included Judson Harmon and Champ Clark. On the Republican side, vice presidential nominee James Sherman died before the election took place. Eugene Debs ran for the fourth straight time, and this election also saw a strong third party candidate who was shot by John Schrank. Election slogans this year saw the Democrats pushing for "New Freedom," while the Progressives, or Bull Mooses, advocated "New Nationalism". For 10 points, name this election year in which New Jersey Governor Woodrow Wilson ousted incumbent William Howard Taft despite the best efforts of Bull-Moose Teddy Roosevelt.;;(Election of) 1912
Art;;One of his paintings shows several men in the nude preparing for battle as the titular Spartan king stares calmly at the viewer, and he depicted several people holding staffs with the title symbols in another work. This artist of Leonidas at Thermopylae and The Distribution of the Eagles also painted The Portrait of Madame Recamier. In one of his paintings the title character points upward while holding a cup as several people turn away in grief, while another shows some sorrowful women in the background as three young men raise their arms to make a pledge. For 10 points, identify this dude who painted The Death of Socrates and The Oath of the Horatii.;;(Jacques) (Louis) David
Philosophy;;He outlined Socratic parrhesia in the lecture series Discourse and Truth. The history of the discontinuous is discussed in his The Archaeology of Knowledge. He discussed the shift from subjects to population and argued against the repressive hypothesis in one work, and analyzed proper scientific discourse and Las Meninas in another. In addition to The History of Sexuality and The Order of Things, this thinker discussed the classical period's ignorance of disease and the eradication of leprosy in one work, and in another, treated Bentham's Panopticon. For 10 points, name this philosopher, author of Madness and Civilization and Discipline and Punish.;;(Michel) Foucault
European Literature;;One character in this work states that female devils have clefts and cloven feet, while the males have horns.  Another character in this work heats congealed blood over a fire, and the words "Homo fuge" are inscribed on the arm of the title character, who knows not where he should fly. That title character calls his servants, Valdes and Cornelius, to bring him books on necromancy.  After he has the books, his first act of magic is to summon a devil, who will become his servant for the next twenty-four years.  For 10 points, name this play in which the title character summons Mephastophilis and sells his soul to the devil, a work by Christopher Marlowe.;;Doctor Faustus
Chemistry;;When a gradient in this causes mass transfer of fluids, that phenomenon is known as the Marangoni effect, and this quantity is multiplied by volume to the two thirds in an equation which relates it to temperature, the Eotvos rule. The fact that this acts as a proportionality constant between the work done on a liquid-vapor interface and the change in the interfacial area is demonstrated by the Young-Laplace equation, and this phenomenon causes cohesion of molecules, which can explain capillary action. For 10 points, identify this phenomenon which is reduced by surfactants and which allows insects to walk on water.;;surface tension
World History;;This document's second article grants one party "undisturbed possession" of its Lands and Estates Forests Fisheries and was preceded by a declaration of independence written by James Busby. One of this agreement's versions was produced by Henry and Edward Williams, and it was preceded by the Musket War. The signing of this document was followed by the killing of 22 British mercenaries in the Wairau Massacre led by Te Rauparaha in an attempt to uphold its continuation of Rangatiratanga, or chieftainship. Co-authored by William Hobson and signed by 500 Maori chiefs, for 10 points, identify this treaty that created the British colony of New Zealand.;;(Treaty of) Waitangi
Philosophy;;This man labeled words as "human artifacts" in "Posits and Reality". He treated the use of the word "rabbit" across tribes and argued for a "naturalized epistemology" in Ontological Relativity. He wrote about "reception and perception" from the body in Roots of Reference, and established the study of knowledge as a branch of science in "Epistemology Naturalized". He claims that radical translation leads to indeterminancy in meaning, and he describes the difference between synthetic and analytic ideals in another work from his collection From a Logical Point of View. For 10 points, name this author of Word and Object and The Two Dogmas of Empiricism.;;(W(.)(illard)) (V(.)(an)) (O(.)(rman)) Quine
American Literature;;One of this author's works sees Captain Bartlett learn that he had killed a man to protect a buried treasure that turns out to be a chest of worthless trinkets. In another work, this author described a man who recites Baudelaire to a prostitute named Fat Violet. This author of Gold wrote of a man who encounters the "little formless fears," a railway car porter who becomes a dictator sought by Smithers and Lem. He also wrote of Mary's descent into morphine addiction, and of the patrons of Harry Hope's bar who deal with their "pipe dreams". For 10 points, name this author of The Emperor Jones, Long Day's Journey into Night, and The Iceman Cometh.;;(Eugene) (Gladstone) O'Neill
Physics;;Pair potentials in these systems can be calculated by an equation which uses the Hamaker constant. The earliest model for a charged metal plate in these systems was developed by Helmholtz, and has been replaced by a modification of the Gouy-Chapman theory named for Stern. Richard Zsigmondy invented a microscope to observe these systems, which can be modeled by DLVO theory. Induction of clumping in these systems is termed flocculation, whereas the dispersion of light in these systems is known as the Tyndall effect. For 10 points, identify these systems wherein small particles are suspended in a medium, exemplified by aerosols and emulsions.;;colloid(s)
European History;;One leader of this group reasserted power after Charles of Valois dissolved the government of the Cherchi, and they fought a war against Ezzelino III at the battle of Cassano d'Adda with the help of Ezzelino's brother in law Manfred I. They were massacred in a battle during which they were betrayed by Bocca degli Abati, and they are named for the Bavarian Dukes who opposed the rise of the Hohenstaufens. Dante Alighieri was a member of the white party of this group, which held power in cities such as Genoa and Mantua. For 10 points, identify this faction that allied with the papacy and opposed the Ghibellines.;;Guelph(s)
Religion;;In one section, this work's author indignantly asks "Don't we have the right to take a wife"?, while another section sees the author appalled at men living with their fathers' wives. This work is marked by such helpful advice as to "eat whatever is put before you," giving believers the right to eat food sacrificed to idols. Other passages in this work see the author commenting that it is "disgraceful" for women to speak in church, as well as a passage in the thirteenth chapter that describes a certain concept as "patient and kind". For 10 points, name this Pauline epistle, famous for its passage on "love," written to the titular residents of a former Greek city-state.;;First Corinthians|Corinthians I
Music;;One of this piece's movements, titled "You Can Tell Great Men By the Style of Their Mounts", plays after a section depicting the title figure meeting a "Woman in Green". Its last section features the pieces "Shipwreck" and "Whitsun Hymn", while other notable sections include "Aase's Death" and "Solveig's Song". Another piece is whistled by Peter Lorre's character in M and features an accelerating theme that depicts the title character escaping from trolls. For 10 points, identify this work which contains "Morning Mood", "Anitra's Dance", and "In the Hall of the Mountain King", a suite written for an Ibsen play by Edvard Grieg.;;Peer Gynt
European History;;This author wrote a work in which the fascist Mother Peep gives a speech as Edouard and the main character frantically search for a briefcase containing "evidence" about the title character, who lures victims like Dany to a pool by offering to show them a "picture of the Colonel". Another of his plays sees The Martins pay a visit to The Smiths, and the Fire Chief plays a game of ding-dong ditch and remarks about the titular unseen character "who always wears her hair in the same way". For 10 points, name this absurdist playwright of The Killer and The Bald Soprano, who also wrote a work in which everyone but Berengér become the titular animals, Rhinoceros.;;(Eugene) Ionesco
European Literature;;In this work, the head of one character is buried by hand, and its location is later decorated with marble.  That character was killed following the discovery of one of his previous affairs by his future father-in-law, the Marquis de la Mole, who promised him a title and money after his daughter was impregnated.  Its protagonist, who was actually in love with his previous lover, Madame de Renal, met Mathilde after a stint in the seminary, as he believed that the church was a more useful tool for attaining power than the army. For 10 points, name this novel about Julien Sorel, a work by Stendahl in which the church and army are represented by the titular colors.;;(The) Red and the Black
Art;;One proponent of this movement decorated the Sanssouci Palace. Besides Francois Gaspard Adam, another sculpture of this school created a bust of Pope Benedict XIII, and also sculpted the Barbarini Faun. Yet another sculptor of this movement depicted a lion eating a dude's thigh in Milo of Croton and showed a winged figure shushing the viewer in his Amour Menacent. Another sculpture from this movement shows Cupid fashioning a bow out of the club of Herclues, while another proponent shows Peter the Great on a rearing horse in the Bronze Horseman. For 10 points, name this movement of Etienne Falconet and Bouchardon, an ornate 18th-century style.;;rococo
Chemistry;;hey are formed from an aryl halide and an organocopper reagent in the Castro Stephens reaction, and the addition of azides to one of them is an example of a "click chemistry" reaction studied by Sharpless. The products of the Corey-Fuchs reaction also have these groups, and they can be produced via an E2 elimination of vicinal dihalides. In the presence of Mercury sulfate and a catalytic amount of acid, water is added across these functional groups to yield ketones, and the terminal types have a pKa of about 25. For 10 points, identify these functional groups which contain carbon-carbon triple bonds, whose best known example is acetylene or ethyne.;;alkyne(s)
Music;;A work by Gastaldon based on the same source as this opera is called Mala Pasqua! Its mezzo-soprano claims that her lover is more handsome than heaven's angels in "Fior di giaggiolo", while this work opens with villagers singing "Gli arancio olezzano". Lucia learns about the adultery at the center of this work in the aria "Vio lo sapete", which is sung by Santuzza. The protagonist bites Alfio's ear after Alfio refuses his offer to drink, made in the aria "Viva il vino spumeggiante". Turiddu dies at the end of this work, which is often performed with Leon-cavallo's Pagliacci. For 10 points, name this verismo opera based on a Giovanni Verga story, by Pietro Mascagni.;;Cavalleria Rusticana
European History;;He won the presidency after declaring the so-called "war at the top," which pitted him against his former intellectual advisers. As president, he proposed a "NATO bis," a shadow NATO for countries not part of the main organization. His wife, Danuta, claimed his Nobel Peace Prize for him in 1983. Ousted from the presidency by Aleksander Kwasniewski in 1995, this man was previously honored for his work in leading a concerted group action at the shipyards of Gdansk in August of 1980. For 10 points, identify this man, the president of Poland from 1980 to 1985, who served as the head of the first free trade union within the Soviet bloc, Solidarity.;;(Lech) Walesa
Physics;;This man's brother is the namesake of a compactification that associates a Hausdorff topological group H with G, and also names a theory that characterizes the gamma function with Mollerup. He names the last theory of the so-called "Old Quantum" school along with Kramers and Slater. He names the units that express electron magnetic dipole moment, and the lowest-energy orbital for an electron is known as his "radius". With Werner Heisenberg he formulated the Copenhagen interpretation, which he defended in a series of debates with Einstein. For 10 points, name this scientist whose namesake model of the atom worked for hydrogen, a noted Dane.;;(Niels) (Henrik David) Bohr
Religion;;In this work's supplement, the apocalypse will bring about a new world made of non-living material that beautified by fire and a new heaven and hell. This work's third section discusses the role of the inherent grace of the sacraments in the salvation of the soul, and its second section formulates the doctrines of just war and natural law and is entitled "Ethics". This work's first section contains the author's analysis of the nature of the universe and his Five Proofs of the existence of God. Attempting to apply Aristotelian logic to Catholic theology, for 10 points, identify this scholastic work of theology by Thomas Aquinas.;;Summa Theologica
American Literature;;This is the last name of an author who wrote about an illegitimate daughter of Thomas Jefferson titled Clotel, and another author with this surname described a sleepwalking figure who studies the murder of Waldagrave in Arthur Mervyn and also wrote Wieland. A play by Eugene O'Neill featuring various mask-wearers has a title character by this name, who is called a "Great God". A priest with this last name features in detective stories written by G. K. Chesterton, and it is the last name of a character who sees his wife Faith attend a meeting of devil worshippers. For 10 points, identify this name of a "Young Goodman" in a Nathaniel Hawthorne short story.;;Brown
Art;;One of these works sees a stream of papers blowing past as a group of blue-clad travelers on a winding path struggle against a strong wind. In another of them, merchants toss things to each other on the roof of a shop below a kite reading "longevity". People carry sacks of grain to a watermill in another of them, while their title object can be seen through a barrel near a temple in "the Eastern Capital" in others. Another of them shows two sets of blue-clad oarsmen hunkering down as their boats are tossed around by the Great Wave off Kanagawa. For 10 points, identify this series of ukiyo-e woodblock prints which all contain the titular peak, a work of Hokusai.;;(36|Thirty- six) Views of Mount Fuji
Biology;;Null mutations in the SLC19A2 gene result in Roger's disease wherein the transport of this molecule is hindered, while a cofactor which decarboxylates carboxylate in the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex is the pyrophosphate of this molecule. Pyrimidine phosphate is an intermediate in its biosynthesis which couples with a ring structure called thaizole. Christian Eijkman first observed the causes of the disease that occurs due to its deficiency, and it was discovered in rice bran which helped explain why more Asians suffered from its deficiency. For 10 points, identify this compound whose deficiency causes Beri Beri.;;(vitamin) B1 |thiamine
British Literatue;;In this work, Mr. Dumby agrees with Lady Statfield that it has been a "quite delightful" season, only to immediately agree that the season was instead "dreadfully dull". It opens as the main character is arranging a fresh bowl of roses, and later the Duchess of Berwick drives the protagonist to rip open a sealed checkbook, finding several large sums given to another woman. That protagonist of this work leaves a letter for her husband and leaves to escape with Lord Darlington, but Ms. Erlynne reveals herself to be Margaret's long lost mother. For 10 points, name this play by Oscar Wilde, whose title object is Margaret's birthday gift from her husband.;;Lady Windermere's Fan
World History;;Two of this man's subordinates ordered the murder by a car bomb in Washington, D.C. of Orlando Letelie. Less than a decade after taking power, this man pushed forward a new Constitution that declared the armed forces the "guarantors of institutionality". As leader, this man enforced his rule with a security apparatus called the National Intelligence Directorate, and received economic advice students of Milton Friedman dubbed the "Chicago Boys". He was arrested in 1998 in the U.K. on a warrant from the Spanish government. For 10 points, name this man who replaced Salvador Allende in a 1973 coup, the former dictator of Chile.;;(Auguso) Pinochet
Mythology;;Figures in their myths include a pair of lovers that were turned into volcanoes and a group of drunken gods known as the "four hundred rabbits". One of their gods carried a seashell on his back representing the moon after refusing to jump into a fire to become the fifth sun, while another wore flayed human skin. A crocodilian monster covered in mouths caused one of their gods to lose his foot and replace it with a smoking mirror. Their rain god demanded child sacrifices, while a dog-headed skeleton god guided people to their underworld, Mictlan. For 10 points, identify these people who worshipped such gods as Tezcatlipoca, Huitzilopochtli, and Quetzalcoatl.;;Aztec (mythology)
World Literature;;One work of this man features a ritual "to make a mother rip her son like bread/across a banqueting board!" in his adaptation The Bacchae. One of this man's plays contains four alternate endings, and a prostitute called "Madame Tortoise," who is a story-telling spirit. In addition to A Dance of the Forests, he wrote about the teacher Eman who takes the place of a young boy in a ritual in his The Strong Breed, and another work in which Elisen is slighted by Simon Pilkings. One of his works sees Baroka and Lakunle vie for the love of Sidi. For 10 points, identify this Nigerian playwright best remembered for The Lion and the Jewel and Death and the King's Horseman.;;(Wole) Soyinka
Philosophy;;This man refuted Nietzsche's master-slave morality in Power: A New Social Analysis and distinguished between knowledge by acquaintance and knowledge by description in The Problems of Philosophy. He treated sentences about the "present king of France in his "On Denoting," and he labeled churches as the "principle enemy of moral progress" in one work, and in another work he attempted to cast mathematical objects as Platonic ideals and asked whether the set of all sets contains itself in his namesake paradox. For 10 points, identify this philosopher of Why I am not a Christian, who with Alfred Whitehead co-wrote Principia Mathematica.;;(Bertrand) (Arthur William) Russell
Economics;;A chapter introduced in later editions of this work differentiates between "insular" and "case" poverty, while another chapter analyzes the growth in personal debt and is titled "The Bill Collector Cometh". This work repeatedly decries the importance of production of goods in chapters such as "The Paramount Position of Production" and calls the desire to produce more "The Dependence Effect". The author also criticizes politicians and economists who strive to be predictable to avoid controversy and calls that mentality "conventional wisdom". For 10 points, identify this work, the magnum opus of John Kenneth Galbraith.;;(The) Affluent Society
American Literature;;He claimed that "kindness and goodness do not make a fellow tall" in "Lily has a Rose," and retold the story of Little Eva and Eliza in his ballet Tom. He wrote of males who "cannot chat of this and that" in "the boys i mean are not refined". He told of a man "more blond than you" who "will not kiss your ... flag" in his "I Sing of Olaf, Glad and Big". He wrote of "someones marrying their everyones/ laughing their cryings" in one work, and told of a French concentration camp run by Appolyon in World War I in a work based on Pilgrim's Progress. For 10 points, name this author of "Anyone Lived in a Pretty How Town" and The Enormous Room.;;(e.e) cummings
European History;;The Enham regulations were drawn up by Wulfstan II, who served as an advisor to both this man and his successor. His reign saw Byrhtnoth lose the Battle of Maldon to the Vikings, and this king also paid a gigantic Danegeld to stop the armies of Thorkell the Tall. He was saved from an attacking army by Ulfcytel after ordering the St. Brice's Day massacre and enraging his rival Sweyn Forkbeard. Eventually supplanted as King of England by Sweyn's son Canute, for 10 points, identify this father of Edward the Confessor whose nickname comes from his "ill counsel" rather than his unpreparedness.;;Aethelred (the Unready|II|the Second){1}?;;Aethelred
European History;;This treaty's tenth article calls "traffic in slaves irreconcilable with the principles of humanity and justice," and its ninth article urges the U.S. to end hostilities with the Indians and restore their land. This treaty promised to set up numerous commissions to properly decide various boundary disputes, thus dodging the issues that precipitated the war it ended. The primary American negotiators were two future secretaries of state, Henry Clay and John Quincy Adams. For 10 points, identify this treaty signed in Belgium on December 24, 1814, before the Battle of New Orleans, but which still marked the official end of the War of 1812.;;(Treaty of) Ghent
Philosophy;;He agreed with Montaigne's assertion that certainty in mathematical axioms is impossible without God's intervention in "On the Art of Persuasion," and proposed theorems of projective geometry in Essay on Conics. This man masqueraded as Louis de Montalte to refute the Jesuit concept of "actual grace" and to support Jansenism in an epistolary work. Another of his works outlines the trivial causes of love, the case for belief in God, and how different the world would be without the distinct nose of Cleopatra. For 10 points, name this author of The Provincial Letters and Pensées, a French philosopher and mathematician with namesake triangle and wager.;;(Blaise) Pascal
Geography;;Parks in this city include James W. Cownie Soccer Park and Waterworks Park, and it is home to Easter Lake and Gray's Lake. This city's second tallest building is The Ruan Center, and its tallest building is The Principal Tower. This city's colleges include the AIB College of Business and Grand View University, and it is home to a minor league hockey team called the Stars, as well as the Chicago Cubs Triple A team. The Raccoon River intersects this city's namesake river in its downtown, which is also home to Drake University. For 10 points, name this city that is both the most populated city and capital of Iowa.;;Des Moines
British Literature;;One character in this work has the unladylike habit of going to the post office in inclement weather. One scene in this novel sees the central characters journey to Box Hill, and one character in this novel mortifies the protagonist when she compares the estate of Maple Grove to Hartfield. The protagonist's oft-sick father is fond of calling married characters "poor". One character in this work marries Robert Martin after failing to snag Mr. Elton, and Jane Fairfax, is secretly married to Frank Churchill in this work. This novel ends with the title character married to Mr. Knightley. For 10 points, name this novel featuring a certain Miss Woodhouse, by Jane Austen.;;Emma
Art;;An early work by this artist shows a centaur blowing a conch as Neptune arrives in a seashell, and another of his works shows George Augustus Elliot pointing toward a sinking ship at the Siege of Gibraltar. One of his paintings shows the title character meeting Faith dressed in a bright white robe and Hope dressed in blue, while another is a portrait of Henry Pelham who has a rodent enchained. In addition to The Red Cross Knight and Boy with a Squirrel, he painted a portrait of Paul Revere, and another of his works shows a man ready to strike a fish as a young man struggles to reach for a helping hand. For 10 points, name this painter of Watson and the Shark.;;(John) (Singleton) Copley
American History;;This man accepted one of his Cabinet positions to replace a man who had been killed in a naval explosion, Abel P. Upshur. This man's home, Fort Hill, can currently be seen at the university founded by his son-in-law, Thomas Green Clemson. In his final speech in the Senate, he said that the Union cannot be saved by "eulogies," and after his death, this man's A Disquisition on Government was published. Known as "The Young Hercules," this man served as Vice-President under two administrations until his resignation in 1832. For 10 points, name this South Carolina politician, one of the losers of the Election of 1824.;;(John) (Caldwell) Calhoun
Biology;;Toward the end of this process, enzymes such as CPSF and CStF bind to the phosphorylated C terminal domain of the main enzyme of this process. It is terminated when a GC rich sequence with inverted repeats forms a hairpin like structure. In prokaryotes, sigma factors are necessary to initiate this process, while in eukaryotes, a TFIID subunit interacts with a four nucleotide structure called the Pribnow box, initiating this process. The Pribnow box is analogous to the TATA box found in prokaryotes, and the addition of a poly A tail is independent of the template. For 10 points, name this process which uses RNA polymerase to make a copy of mRNA from DNA.;;transcription
American Literature;;In one of this author's works, a young woman becomes jealous of a young black girl named Nancy, while another work describes the life of Quebec resident Cecile Auclair. Besides Sapphira and the Slave Girl and Shadows on the Rock, this author wrote of the lives of scholar Godfrey St. Peter and engineer Bartley Alexander in The Professor's House and Alexander's Bridge. She is better known for a work focusing on Jean Marie Latour's religious activities in New Mexico and another work focusing on Alexandra Bergson. For 10 points, identify this American author who described western expansion in the novels Death Comes for the Archbishop and O Pioneers!.;;(Willa Sibert) Cather
Physics;;One of these particles is electrically neutral and decays into an electron-positron pair and a photon in the Dalitz decay. Another type of these particles was discovered by Rochester and Butler after the analysis of certain 'V' events. The unusual decay of one of these particles was called the tau theta puzzle, and experiments to study them by Cronin and Fitch was the first evidence for CP violation. The muon was wrongly classified as one of these particles, whose existence was proposed by Hideki Yukawa, and they are bosons with integer spins. For 10 points, name these particles composed of a quark-anti-quark pair, exemplified by the j/psi particle and pions and kaons.;;meson(s)
Mythology;;According to the Homeric Hymn to Aphrodite, this figure, often depicted holding a chicken, was traded for a boon that either left its receiver "babbling endlessly" behind "shining doors" or turned that receiver into a cicada. That story claims that Tithonus was made immortal in exchange for the release of this figure by Eos, while in other stories, a pair of water-walking horses was given to his father, either Laomedon or Tros. He would eventually be turned into the constellation Aquarius after being abducted by an eagle, and he was made immortal after replacing Hebe on Mt. Olympus. For 10 points, name this Trojan prince who became Zeus' cup-bearer.;;Ganymede(s)
European History;;One king from this country came to power after defeating his mother Teresa at the battle of St. Mamede, and the remnants of Celtic inhabitations in this country are called citanias. H. R. Lang compiled a book of songs written during the reign of King Dennis I of this country, and another of its rulers came to power after defeating John of Castile at the Battle of Aljubarrota. Another king from this country captured the port city of Ceuta. That king established the city of Sagres and was the founder of the Aviz dynasty, and it signed the Treaty of Tordesillas with Spain. For 10 points, name this country, home of the Braganza dynasty and Henry the Navigator.;;Portugal
Religion;;Initiates to this belief system wear ilekes and are made part of a house of the Godparents, or ile. Adherents of this system can be possessed by spirits in the "Mounting of the Horse" during a drum party, or bembé. Followers attempt to influence their lives through ancestor spirits, or egun. One figure in this religion alternates between a divine policeman and a divine protector, Elegba, and its creator figure is named Olodumare. Believers offer fruit and  candles, and sacrifice small animals like chickens, to appease its personifications of natural forces, or orishas. A mixture of Catholic and Yoruba beliefs, for 10 points, name this syncretic Caribbean religion.;;Santer(i|í){1}?a
Computer Science;;The Pollaczek-Khinchin formula is used to analyze the M/G/1 type of them, and Kendall's notation is used to classify them. "Pagoda" and "leftist tree" are names is given to types of one variety of these, implemented with binary trees, and the van Emde-Boas tree is one of these for which the cost of all operations is based on the number of keys. A double-ended one of them, also known as a head-tail linked list, is called a deque [DECK]. Discrete event simulations often make use of the "priority" variety of this data structure, which is essentially the opposite of a stack. For 10 points, name this first-in-first-out data structure, used to model lines of waiting people.;;queue(s)
American Literature;;In one play featuring this character, he is first seen naming the "Five Moods" under the tutelage of Mentor Graham. In a poem about this character, "the sins of all the war-lords" burn his heart. He was the subject of a Richard Hofstadter essay that described the "self-made myth". This subject of a play by Robert Sherwood and a poem by Vachel Lindsay that sees him "walk at midnight," was also the subject of a six-volume biography covering his "Prairie Years" and his "War Years" by Carl Sandburg. For 10 points, name this literary character who is the implied subject of the Walt Whitman poem "O Captain, My Captain!," the sixteenth President of the United States.;;(Abraham) Lincoln
Sociology;;This work discusses the "ebionitic elements of the New Testament" in Richard Baxter's The Saints Everlasting Rest, and its fifth chapter outlines "outlook". Its author argues that the interaction of the two title concepts has left man in an "iron cage of rationality" and discusses the rise pietism and asceticism in a certain man's "Conception of the Calling". It claims that the "vocational calling" led to a "steel hard casing" of work from which there is no escape, which causes the title group to conflate wealth and predestination. For 10 points, name this sociological work that examines the connection between Calvinist ethics and business success, by Max Weber.;;The Protestant Ethic (and Spirit of Capitalism)
World Literature;;One of this man's works discusses the creation of a giant "prostitute spider". In one of this man's works, he describes his country's fascination with toilets, and claims that the western world is "white," in contrast with the title shade of his country. Joji Kawai has an affair with the title waitress in another of his novels. This author of "The Tattooer," "In Praise of Shadows," and Naomi wrote a novel in which the protagonist's wife "goes to Suma" to see her lover Mr. Aso, and another in which Yukiko has a blemish under her eye and Taeko falls ill. For 10 points, name this Japanese author of Some Prefer Nettles and The Makioka Sisters.;;(Junichiro) Tanizaki
Music;;A piccolo is featured in his Tritsch-Tratsch-Polka, and this man wrote of a love triangle between Pepi, Josef, and Count Zedlau in Weiner Blut in addition to composing a choral waltz with a 137 bar introduction entitled "Wine, Women, and Song". A trumpet fanfare and timpani roll concludes his Kaiser-Waltzer. Rosalind and Count Orflosky hold a party to get back at Count Eisenstein for abandoning Falke while dressed as the titular creature in an operetta by this man. Better known for composing a collection of six dances titled Tales from the Vienna Woods, for 10 points, name this composer of Die Fledermaus, a "waltz king" who composed The Blue Danube.;;(Johann Sebastian) Strauss Jr|Strauss (the) Younger
World History;;Friar Valverde allegedly gave this person a Bible, but this man didn't know how to open a book, and threw it at the Friar's face. This son of Paccha was the highest-ranking casualty in the so-called War of the Two Brothers. His downfall was chronicled by Garcilaso de la Vega, and this man was supposed to be traded for the "ransom room" full of precious metals, but the Europeans reneged and had him strangled instead. After his defeat at Cajamarca, his half-brother Husacar was installed as a puppet ruler. For 10 points, name this man who was defeated by Francisco Pizarro, the last king of the Incans.;;Atahualpa
Chemistry;;N-alkenes can be used as a reference in the Kovats index which is useful in this technique, and the van Deemter equation was originally developed to explain the band broadening in this technique. It requires an inert carrier such as argon or carbon dioxide, and it can be followed up by passing the product through a large electric potential and burning them. The injection of the mixture can be done via a split or a splitless injector, and this process can used either a capillary column or a packed column. For 10 points, identify this procedure in which more volatile compounds travel more quickly through the stationary column, a type of chromatography.;;gas(-liquid chromatography)
European Literature;;One of this author's novels sees a title character try to wear a pom-pom around his neck in order to hide his giant adam's apple. Nine cooks serve the nameless narrator of one of this man's novels, who is married to Ilsebill. Eddi Amsel and Harry Liebenau narrate sections of this man's work that concentrates on the animal breeding of the Matern family, and this author discussed journalist Paul Pokriefke's reactions to the sinking of the Wilhelm Gustave in another work. This man wrote Crabwalk, Dog Years, Cat and Mouse, and The Flounder. For 10 points, name this author of the Danzig Trilogy, which contains a novel about Oskar Matzerath, The Tin Drum.;;(Gunter) (Wilhelm) Grass
Mythology;;The Dogon god Amma punishes Yurugu for committing incest within one of these structures. The Polynesian god Tane separates his mother and father, Papa and Rangi, who are in the form of one. In Taoist myth, the god Pangu smashes open one of them, forging the top half into the sky and the bottom half into the earth. In the Kalevala, the world is created from the fragments of one of these objects after it is smashed on Ilmatar's knee. The mound of dirt from which the Milky Way arose was the site of one of these which contained Ra and was created by an ibis. For 10 points, name this type of object that features in creation myths that involve hatching.;;egg
European History;;The Holy Roman emperor of this name and number oversaw the Sack of Magdeburg and Tilly's loss at the First Battle of Breitenfeld.  Another monarch with this name and number agreed to a prenuptial agreement summarized by the motto "Tanto monta, monta tanto," and led a conflict that ended with the surrender of Boabdil. That monarch issued the 1492 decree that expelled the Jews from his country, and was the father of Juana the Mad.  For 10 points, name this name and number of the ruler nicknamed "The Catholic," the conqueror of Granada from Aragon who married Isabella I of Castile during the reconquista.;;Ferdinand (II|the Second){1}?;;Ferdinand
American Literature;;A short story by this author sees Travis take Eckles on a hunting expedition. One of this author's novels sees Mrs. Bowles and Mrs. Phelps break down after reading "Dover Beach". This author wrote about Leo, whose attempts to build a happiness machine go awry when it burns his garage down.  In another of this man's novels, the protagonist is married to Mildred, and falls in with Granger after meeting Clarisse McClellan and Faber and surviving a procaine injection from a mechanical hound. For 10 points, name this author of "A Sound of Thunder" and Dandelion Wine, who wrote about firefighter Guy Montag in Fahrenheit 451.;;(Ray) (Douglas) Bradbury
Physics;;Along with Saha, he sometimes lends his name to an equation of state which fits well for densities below 0.8 times the critical density, and the quantum mechanical form of an ideal gas is named for him. A Tonks-Girardeau gas is an example of a phase where particles named for him exhibit repulsion along one dimension, and he lends his name to a statistical distribution which is used to model particles with integer spin along with Albert Einstein. For 10 points, identify this Indian physicist, whose namesake particles mediate the fundamental forces of nature, and are exemplified by photons, gluons, and W and Z particles.;;(Satyendranath) (Nath) Bose
British Literature;;One character in this work foils the ambitions of William by hiring the "hedge-priest" Sir Oliver Martext to marry him to his love Audrey. Another character in it writes a series of poems to his love interest which he pins on trees after earlier throwing the wrestler Charles. The shepherds Phebe and Silvius are among those married by Hymen in this play. Its protagonists disguised themselves as Aliena and Ganymede and moved to the Forest of Arden to escape the usurper Duke Frederick. For 10 points, identify this play which contains Jaques's "All the world's a stage" speech and ends with the marriages of Oliver and Orlando to Celia and Rosalind.;;As You Like It (Or What You Will)
Philosophy;;This work's preface applauds Descartes for not making it "obligatory for every man to doubt," and one section of this work tells of a man who would rather his child think him a monster than lose faith in God. Another part of this work contrasts the easy path of Knight of Infinite Resignation with the difficult one of Knight of Faith, and questions whether one has an absolute duty to obey God in the second problema. It takes its title from Phillipians 2:21 and discusses the teleological suspension of the ethical of Abraham's sacrifice of Isaac. For 10 points, name this work ostensibly written by Johannes de Silentio, about authentic religiousity, actually by Søren Kierkegaard.;;Fear and Trembling
Art;;The back right of this painting shows a man on a white horse, just above a man in the foreground wearing a black hat with a red feather.  To the left of the knee of this painting's title figure is a black man with most of his face obscured. The original copy of this work was destroyed in Bremen by the Royal Air Force, and this work was defaced in 2003 when a picture of the 9/11 attacks was glued to it. The banner at the center of this painting is historically incorrect, and is being hosted by James Monroe as rowers paddle around chunks of ice. For 10 points, name this Emmanuel Leutze painting that shows the first U.S. president leading troops to the Battle of Trenton.;;Washington Crossing the Delaware
Psychology;;This man examined the connection between tradition and ego formation in the essay collection Insight and Responsibility. He described the development from "vow to vocation" of a man he labeled "Homo Religiousus" in one work, and of another man's struggle to break with religious tradition in another work of psychoanalytic theory. In addition to writing Gandhi's Truth and Young Man Luther, this man coined the term "identity crisis" and outlined a series of conflicts including generativity vs. stagnation and industry vs. inferiority. For 10 points identify this author of Childhood and Society, the creator of an eight stage scale of personality development.;;(Erik) (Homburger) Erikson
Biology;;If a certain value for these systems falls between the values of the individual components, the system is known as the "saddle" type of them. One technique used on these systems involves adding an "MSA," and another way to "break" them is to use a molecular sieve. The "hetero" version of them contains a vapor phase. They can be classified as "positive" or "negative" depending on how their vapor pressure differs from that of an ideal substance, and these mixtures deviate from Raoult's law. For 10 points, name these mixtures that cannot be separated by simple distillation.;;azeotrope(s)
Music;;One section of this work is sung in falsetto by a swan being roasted on a spit and is titled "Once I had dwelt on lakes," while another section requires a baritone to sing falsetto and is called "Dies, nox et omnia". The latter is found in the third section of this work, "The Court of Love," while the "Reie" dance is featured in the scene "On the Lawn," which is found in its section "Springtime". Opening a triptych that ends with Trionfo di Afrodite, it was first performed in Frankfurt in 1937, and its first and last sections are titled after a certain "Imperatrix Mundi". For 10 points, identify this cantata that begins and ends with "O Fortuna," a work of Carl Orff.;;Carmina Burana
World Literature;;In one of this man's short stories, Mr. A. M. tries to fix a rat problem in his apartment complex, only to have a rat-looking government inspector eat in his kitchen. The title character of one of his novels is a friend of the cafe owner Tarzan who accidentally kills innocent civilians though he wishes to take revenge against Alwan. In addition to The Thief and the Dogs, he wrote about a barber's attempts to rescue Hamida from prostitution, while the tyrannical al-Sayyid Ahmad controls his wife and household in a series of works titled Sugar Street, Palace of Desire, and Palace Walk. For 10 Points, name this Egyptian author of Midaq Alley and The Cairo Trilogy.;;(Naguib) Mahfouz
Religion;;One text from this belief system tells how Makeda vows to stop worshipping the sun. In addition to revering The Promise Key and Kebra Nagast, followers of this religion practice "I and I" to bring them closer to God. Its members do not ingest pork, shellfish, or alcohol in order to preserve the temple of their bodies by following I-tal, and they are taught to avoid oppressive structures of Babylon, or white culture. In it, corruption is burned out of one's heard through the use of ganja, or cannabis, and it holds that Marcus Garvey was a prophet. For 10 points, identify this religion that holds that Haile Selassie was Jah, a reincarnation of God, most prevalent in Jamaica.;;Rasta(farianism)
European Literature;;One of his works includes the censor-wary director Panfilovivch, who is putting on the titular Dymogatsky play, The Crimson Island. He also wrote of Philip Preobrazhensky, who uses the mongrel Sharik to create a hybrid human named Polygraph. One of his plays is about Alexei, a hetman in Kiev who works with the Germans against the Bolsheviks, which is based on his novel The White Guard. Another of his works is interspersed with chapters about Pontius Pilate killing Yeshua Ha-Nosri and includes the talking cat Behemoth and Woland, who meets the title lovers in Moscow. For 10 points, name this author of Heart of a Dog and The Master and Margarita.;;(Mikhail) (Afanasyevich) Bulgakov
World History;;This nation was home to a mythical "enchanted city of the Caesars" that Sebastian Cabot sought from Sancti Spiritus. A civil war that featured opposition from Juan Facundo Quiroga was fought during the creation of this country's presidency, a position held by Bernardino Rivadavia. The "Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo" brought attention to the desaparecidos of the regime of Jorge Videla during the Dirty War here. The descamisados, or "shirtless ones" supported a politician in this cuontry. Leopold Galtieri was forced out of its presidency because of this nation's invasion of the Falklands. For 10 points, name this country that was once led by Juan and Eva Peron.;;(Republic of) Argentina
Music;;This creator of Three Gopi Maidens was reviled for putting on Revolt, which was set to Honegger's music. This artist's Errand into the Maze followed a Samuel Barber written work entitled Cave of the Heart that studied Medea. Louis Horst composed Frontier for this person, and with Isamu Noguchi she used sculpture instead if flats and drops. This Denishawn student is most noted for working on a piece that contains sections depicting a Revivalist and a newly married bride.  That work includes variations on the hymn "Simple Gifts" and depicts Pennsylvania Shakers. For 10 points, name this choreographer of Aaron Copland's Appalachian Spring.;;(Martha) Graham
British Literature;;One of his early works commented on Burke's text about our Ideas of the Sublime and Beautiful, and he contrasted laughing and sentimental comedy in his Essay on Theatre. He wrote of the "long-remembered beggar" residing in the "sheltered cot" of Auburn in one of his poems. He wrote of Sophia, who marries Mr. Burchell in a work about the misfortunes of Dr. Primrose. In another work of this author of "The Deserted Village," George Hastings encounters Tony Lumpkin at the Three Pidgeons pub, and Kate Hardcastle is mistaken for a maid and marries Young Marlow. For 10 points, name this author of The Vicar of Wakefield and She Stoops to Conquer.;;(Oliver) Goldsmith
Physics;;The Ahlfors-Bers theorem proved a "moduli problem" named for this man. Along with Christoffel, he names a four index tensor whose trace gives the Ricci tensor. Infinitely many sheets often cover the complex plane in his "surfaces" that can represent multiple-valued functions. Functions which satisfy the Laplace equation in two dimensions satisfy equations named for him and Cauchy because they're analytic, and he proposed that the non-trivial zeros of a namesake function lie along a "critical strip". For 10 points, identify this namesake of a zeta function, who developed an integration method involving summing the areas of very small rectangles.;;(Georg) (Frederich Bernhard) Riemann
Biology;;One member of this phylum is model organism N. vectensis, used to study the bilaterally symmetric body plan. Recent inquiry into the musculature of this phylum has led Seipel and Schmid to classify them as triploblastic, though they are most commonly thought to have two epithelial layers with mesoglea in between. One characteristic feature of this phylum contains structures like a "finger" and a cilium that acts as a trigger; a barbed cell known as a nematocyst used to deliver toxins. Members of this phylum come in two forms, the sessile polyp and the swimming medusa. For 10 points, name this phylum that contains anemones, corals, and jellyfish.;;cnideria
World History;;This man built himself a full-scale residence city in which each of the four quarters had its own presiding deity. During one battle, this man acted on false information that the opposing army was at Aleppo and walked into a trap of 2,500 enemy chariots. He ordered the construction of hypostyle hall at Karnak and statues of himself at Abu Simbel. He conquered Katna and Tunip, revenging his earlier strategic defeat by Muwatilli II that led to the first recorded peace treaty, with Hattusili I. For 10 points, name this Egyptian pharaoh who succeeded Seti I and fought the Hittites at Kadesh, who reigned during such prosperity that he received the epithet "the Great".;;Ramses (II|the Second){1}?|Ramses (the) Great;;Ramses