Biology;;One phylum of this type of animal is a grasshopper parasite that infects its host with the urge to drown itself, bringing the parasite to the water for breeding.  Another phylum of this type of animal bears live young and gets around with pairs of legs that move together; those are known as Onychophora, or the "velvet" type.  Another phylum of this type of animal displays a distinguishing scolex, while another species of this type was the first organism to have its entire genome sequenced.  For 10 points, name this type of animal exemplified by C. elegans as well as the phyla platyhelminthes and annelida, the flat and segmented types.;;worm(s)
European Literature;;One author from this country wrote a story about Karl Hediger, who marries Hermine Frymann after agreeing to carry the titular "Banner of the Upright Seven"; that story is collected in The People of Seldwyla. A novelist from this country wrote about an imprisoned man who insists that he is a Texan named Jim White instead of a man named Anatol in I'm Not Stiller. A playwright from this country wrote about Alfred Ill, who is sacrificed by the town of Gullen after the arrival of the wealthiest woman in the world, in The Visit. For 10 points, name this European country home to Max Frisch and Friedrich Durrenmatt, which is also the setting of Schiller's play William Tell.;;Switzerland
Religion;;After the death of Sita, Shiva created the demon Virabhadra by performing this action on himself. The city of Megara fell to King Minos after Scylla performed this action on King Nisus. According to the Skáldskaparmál, the sons of Ivaldi crafted Skidbladnir and Mjollnir after Loki atoned for performing this action as a prank on the wife of Thor, Sif. The Book of Judges describes how a Nazarite was blinded and imprisoned in Gaza after a servant performed this action on him. For 10 points, name this action which caused the loss of strength of Samson.;;cutting hair
Philosophy;;French philosopher Bernard Stiegler was heavily influenced by this philosopher, and interpreted his work in a work about a "Fault of Epimetheus".  Victor Farias criticized this philosopher for his political views, and this philosopher's thought was said to undergo a "turn" or "die Kehre".  His lectures include one on "Hölderlin's Hymn: The Ister".  Another of his works was intended to have a second part about the "destruktion" of the history of philosophy, and the first part of that work introduced the being for whom being is in question, dasein.  For 10 points, name this German philosopher who wrote Being and Time.;;(Martin) Heidegger
Astronomy;;A theorized inner region to this area is named after Hills.  Safranov and Cameron proposed the two most widely accepted models of its origin, and the object Gliese 710 may cause havoc here sometime within the next ten million years.  2000 CR105 is one of only two objects identified that may belong to this group.  Richard A. Muller suggested that a brown dwarf that orbits the sun periodically disrupts this area, and it extends nearly a quarter of the way to Proxima Centauri.  For 10 points, name this region of space thought to contain 90377 Sedna, theorized to be the source of long-range comets and named after a Dutch dude.;;(Opik)(-)Oort Cloud
Music;;Benjamin Britten based his Young Persons's Guide to the Orchestra on the theme of this man's Abdelazar.  This man's mentor composed the masq ue Venus and Adonis and was named John Blow.  His compositions were collected by his widow in Orpheus Britannicus, whose preface was written by a son of this man's contemporary and friend John Playford.  He composed operas based on King Arthur and Spenser's The Faerie Queen, and another of his operas contained the noted aria "When I am Laid in Earth".  For 10 points, name this English Baroque composer of Dido and Aeneas.;;(Henry) Purcell
American Literature;;This author wrote about the relationship between Redfern and Martha Hersland in The Making of Americans. Another of this author's works includes sections about "The Good Anna," "The Gentle Lena," and Melanctha Herbert, who decides to marry Dr. Jeff Campbell. Her prose poems such as "In Between" and "A Carafe, That is a Blind Glass" appear in her poetry collection inspired by Cubism, Tender Buttons. She wrote the libretti for Four Saints in Three Acts and The Mother of Us All, as well as the line "a rose is a rose is a rose is a rose". For 10 points, name this Modernist author of Three Lives and The Autobiography of Alice B. Toklas.;;(Gertrude) Stein
United States History;;During the Great Depression, Franklin Roosevelt transplanted poor farmers to an experimental colony located in this state's Matanuska Valley. James Wickersham was the longtime opponent of the Guggenheim interests in this state, and introduced its first statehood bill. In 1964, this state was devastated by the Good Friday Earthquake. Its drive for statehood was spearheaded by Bob Bartlett and one of the two Senators who voted against the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, Ernest Gruening. This state is divided into boroughs instead of counties, and more recent senators from this state include Mike Gravel (gruh-vell) and Ted Stevens. For 10 points, name this state purchased from Russia by William Seward.;;Alaska
Religion;;An apocryphal "Testament" by this Biblical character gives his wife's name as Sitis, and claims that she sold her hair to Satan before cursing God and dying.  The Protestants used a quotation from this man's namesake book as their motto, "After darkness I hope for light".  At the beginning of his namesake book, three figures claiming to be the "friends" of this man berate him; their names are Bildad, Eliphaz, and Zophar.  His namesake book contains Elihu's speech, and God refuses to answer his questions with anything besides "I am the Lord".  For 10 points, name this man whom "the Satan" is allowed to corrupt by God, but who remains pious.;;Job
Geography;;This country's Sechura Desert is crossed by the Cascajal and Piura Rivers. This country's highest peak is Mount Huascaran, and notable archaeological sites in this country include the Huaca del Sol and Sipan, ruins of the Moche civilization. Visitors to this country can see the Amazon Rainforest in Iquitos, travel to the cities of Cajamarca and Arequipa, and row to Taquile Island, which lies 13,700 feet above sea level on this country's side of Lake Titicaca. The battles of Junín and Ayacucho were fought in this country, which contains the ruins of Machu Picchu. For 10 points, name this country west of Bolivia and north of Chile, whose capital is Lima.;;Peru
British Literature;;This poem is followed by a poem that asks "I wonder by my troth, what thou and I / Did, till we loved"? in its author's collected Songs and Sonnets. This poem argues that "though parents grudge, and you, we're met / And cloistered in these living walls of jet". The speaker asks this poem's addressee "Cruel and sudden, hast thou since / Purpled thy nail in blood of innocence"?, and compares the title figure to a marriage bed and marriage temple. Describing how the title figure "sucked me first, and now sucks thee," the speaker uses the "two bloods mingled" harmlessly in the title animal as a metaphor for sex. For 10 points, name this poem about an insect by John Donne.;;(The) Flea
World Literature;;This author wrote about a lieutenant's conflicted loyalties between his First Division and his country, resolved by committing suicide, in his short story "Patriotism".  Restaurant proprietress Kazu attempts to help her husband Yuken run for political office in his novel After the Banquet, while Noboru kills Ryuji in lieu of allowing him to marry his mother in this author's The Sailor Who Fell from Grace with the Sea.  Other protagonists of this author include Kochan, who obsesses over his sexuality, and Mizoguchi, who burns down a building.  For 10 points, name this Japanese author of Confessions of a Mask and The Temple of the Golden Pavilion.;;(Yukio) Mishima
United States History;;Fighting at this battle along Assunpink Creek saw the Knyphausen regiment surrounded, while the two major avenues in the town where this battle took place were King and Queen Streets.  One commander in this battle wasn't awoken until the other side had captured an important redoubt; his name was Johann Rall.  The highly trained professional soldiers on one side were hung over from Christmas partying and thus ineffectual.  For 10 points, name this Revolutionary War battle that saw Washington cross the Delaware and kick some drunken Hessian ass.;;(Battle of) Trenton
Biology;;An organopalladium one is used in the Heck Reaction. In ring-closing metathesis, one of these is added to a diene carrying an ammonium salt group in order to make it water-soluble. Another class of these compounds consists of a transition metal such as vanadium or titanium and a main group metal alkyl compound, which is usually an aluminum alkyl. More famous ones include manganese dioxide, which is used to decompose hydrogen peroxide, and iron, which is used in the Haber process. Compounds named for Grubbs and Ziegler-Natta are examples of, for 10 points, what substances which speed up the rate of a chemical reaction?;;catalyst(s)
Economics;;Murray Rothbard suggests that social taboos can eliminate the "classical" form of this phenomenon.  The Beveridge curve plots this against the vacancy rate. The NAIRU is a measure of this for a market with neither upward nor downward pressure on inflation. Okun's Law predicts a 2.5 percent gap in GDP for every additional one percent rise in the rate of this. Keynes argued that because wages are "sticky," this is caused by a drop in aggregate demand. For 10 points, name this statistic plotted against inflation on the Phillips Curve, which measures the percentage of people out of work.;;unemployment
Art;;An alligator and three turban-clan men on horseback attack the titular black African mammal in this artist's painting The Hippopotamus Hunt. This artist portrayed Triton blowing a seashell beneath Cybele and Neptune in his painting The Union of Earth and Water, and his more violent paintings include Allegory of Peace and War and the recently discovered Massacre of the Innocents. His wife Hélène Fourment modeled for his paintings The Three Graces and The Garden of Love. He also painted a cycle of canvases about Marie de Medici, as well as a painting of men trying to raise the body of Christ, The Elevation of the Cross. For 10 points, name this Baroque Flemish painter known for his fleshy nudes.;;(Peter) (Paul) Rubens
European History;;Ferdinand I of this region defeated Bermudo III of another region, merging those two regions together.  A ruler dubbed "the Cruel" from this region engaged in a conflict with his neighbor called the War of the Two Peters.  Alfonso VIII hailed from here; he was the victorious commander at Las Navas de Tolosa, which led to the downfall of this region's Kingdom of Toledo.  This was the home region of the mother of Holy Roman Emperor Charles V, Joanna the Mad.  This region was united with Aragon when its queen married Ferdinand II.  For 10 points, name this historical region that today is paired with La Mancha or Leon (lay-OWN), the home of Isabella.;;Castil(l)e
Physics;;Chan and Kim at Penn State discovered that crystals can display this phenomenon.  One instance of this phenomenon is distinguished by either an A or B phase, and is anisotropic.  Some materials that exhibit this phenomenon display a 30 nm Rollin film, and their movement sometimes displays the Onnes Effect.  Landau theorized that quantum sound waves are responsible for this effect, which he posited occurs below the lambda point.  For 10 points, name this property notably displayed by helium, when a liquid or gas displays no resistance to flow.;;superfluid(it(y|ies){1}?)
Music;;At this man's death, he left the unfinished opera Monna Vanna.  His songs include In the Silence of the Night and Lilacs in addition to his wordless Opus 34, Vocalise.  He dubbed the third movement an "introspective reverie" of a set of solo piano pieces known as his Six Moments Musicaux.  The fifth movement of one of his pieces is called "Lord, Now Lettest Thou" and is also dubbed the "Kiev Chant"; that work is formally titled All-Night Vigil but is better known as his Vespers.  He also wrote a choral symphony based on a translation by Konstantin Balmont that featured the Dies Irae theme, based on a Poe poem.  For 10 points, name this Russian composer of The Bells symphony and Rhapsody on a Theme of Paganini.;;(Sergei) (Vasilevich) Rachmanino(ff)(v)
European History;;The Cantino Planisphere depicts the results of this treaty, which was sanctioned by Pope Julius II twelve years after its signing. This treaty was spurred by one side's dissatisfaction with the Inter Caetera Papal Bull issued one year earlier by Pope Alexander VI. This treaty established a line 370 leagues west of the Cape Verde Islands, which was later extended through both poles by the Treaty of Zaragoza. Signed on June 7, 1494, it allowed one side to claim the coast of Brazil in 1500. For 10 points, name this treaty that divided up the New World between Portugal and Spain.;;(Treaty of) Tordesillas
United States History;;The Covode Committee chastised him for allowing the War and Navy Departments to award no-bid contracts, and late in his term he promoted his Postmaster General, Joseph Holt, to Secretary of War.  Along with John Mason and Pierre Soule, this then ambassador of England was directed by William L. Marcy to explore the feasibility of purchasing Cuba via the Ostend Manifesto.  He gained office thanks to the splintering of votes from Millard Fillmore on the Know Nothing ticket and John C. Fremont on the Republican ticket.  For 10 points, identify this bachelor president from Pennsylvania who saw seven states secede from the Union after his successor, Abraham Lincoln, was elected.;;(James) Buchanan
Music;;The last of these compositions is an unfinished G-minor piece that is either called Zwickau or the Jungendsinfonie.  These pieces are sometimes paired on recordings with their composer's "Manfred" overture.  The final completed one of these is in D-minor, and two versions exist, the earlier 4-movement piece with Italian tempo markings, and the later pause-less 5-movement arrangement marked in German.  The third is in five movements, with the fourth movement commemorating the archbishop of Cologne's promotion to cardinal, and depicts life along a certain river.  For 10 points, name these orchestral works, the third of which is the Rhenish and the first of which is the Spring.;;(Robert) Schumann symphonies
Mythology;;A ruler named after this deity is a semi-legendary king of Tollan and was named Topiltzin.  Several Mormons, including President of the Church John Taylor, claim that this deity is the same as Jesus.  This man either threw his father's assassins off a cliff, or rubbed chili peppers in their open wounds and made challaces out of their skulls in the manner of Mike Sorice.  His mother is held to be Chamalman, while his father is Tonacatecutle.  One myth holds that he left his followers using a raft of snakes, while another holds that his opposite, Tezcatlipoca, exiled him.  For 10 points, name this creator sky deity, a feathered serpent of the Aztec pantheon who is not to be confused with Hernan Cortes.;;Quetzalcoatl
Chemistry;;Maryanoff and Reitz studied deviations from the proposed mechanism of this reaction, discovering a phenomenon they dubbed "stereochemical drift".  One modification of this reaction uses phenyllithium and hydrochloric acid to convert an erthyro betaine into the threo variety. That modification allows the products of this reaction to be made in the E or trans form, while the normal variety can only create the Z or cis form.  This reaction with a modification named after Schlosser has a phenylphosphine oxide byproduct which is created from a phosphonium ylide (ih-lid) reagent. Initiated by reacting an aldehyde or ketone with an ylide, for 10 points, identify this organic synthesis that is used to synthesize alkenes.;;Wittig (reaction)
American Literature;;Tush Hawg tries to get Nunkie to play a game of cards in this author's play Poker!, while more successful plays included From Sun to Sun and All de Live Long Day.  In a short story by this author, the protagonist is criticized by her husband Sykes for hypocritically working on the Sabbath until that wife, Delia Jones, "talks back".  Besides Sweat, this Eatonville native author is probably best known for a work that ends with a hurricane and the contracting of rabies by Teacake, the third husband of the protagonist, Janie Crawford.  For 10 points, identify this Harlem Renaissance author who wrote Their Eyes Were Watching God.;;(Zora) (Neale) Hurston
British Literature;;During a thunderstorm, this character is given wine from a drunken butler and says that he would teach the drunkard how to "snare the nimble marmoset" as a gesture of thanks and praise. In another part of the play this character is in he is said to have attempted to have raped his master's daughter and would have populated the island with many versions of himself if he were not stopped. This character's mother worshipped the goddess Setebos and trapped the water sprite, Ariel in a ‘cloven pine' for 14 years. Son of the witch Sycorax and servant of the wizard Prospero, for 10 points, identify this monstrous mooncalf from Shakespeare's The Tempest.;;Caliban
Art;;Canova created a nude sculpture of this figure holding an apple and a spear posing as Mars the Peacemaker.  His portrait where he is holding a staff with a pointing hand on the end of it is often compared to God the Father from the Ghent Altarpiece, a portrait by Ingres.  Antoine-Jean Gros depicted touching soldiers dying of the plague at the Pesthouse in Jaffa.  He is shown crowing his kneeling wife in a coronation portrait by the artist of The Sabine Women.  For 10 points, identify this man shown on his horse crossing the Alps by David.;;Napoleon (I) (Bonaparte)
Physics;;A hypothetical method of decay for these particles involves breaking into a positron and a neutral pion and would have a half-life on the order of 10 to the 35 years. In astronomy, these particles are employed in a namesake chain located in the core's of stars in order to synthesis lighter elements.  Particles of this type are typically composed of two up quarks and a single down quark and these particles make up about 90% of all cosmic rays. Discovered by Ernest Rutherford, for 10 points, identify this subatomic particles that contributes the positive charge of an atom's nucleus.;;proton(s)
Geography;;In the east of this country lies the city of Perquin in Morazan department, near the site of the El Mozote, where several hundred civilians were killed in a massacre. The west of this country is notable for its Ruta de Flores and archaeological sites like Joya (hoya) de Ceren and Tazumal, and the neo-Gothic cathedral of the country's second-largest city Santa Ana. This country's capital is home to the Flor Blanca stadium, where a dirty dishrag was famously raised in place of another country's burnt flag, and the more modern Cuscutlan Stadium. Home to cities such as San Miguel and San Vicente, for 10 points, name this Central American country with no Caribbean coastline bordered by Guatemala and Honduras.;;(El) Salvador
British Literature;;"An Abyssinian maid" appears to the reader of this work "Singing of Mount Abora" and the narrator states that those who can hear her music "should see them[selves] there" and "Weave a circle round" the title character three times. Its title was inspired by a passage from Purchas' Pilgrimage, and its author was interrupted from writing by someone from Porlock. "Gardens bright with sinuous rills" and "many an incense-bearing tree" also appear along Alph the sacred river, which runs "through caverns measureless to man," in, for 10 points, what Coleridge poem whose title ruler decrees a "stately pleasure dome" in Xanadu.;;Kubla Khan
European History;;Despite the advantage of one side's Chassepot rifles in this conflict, that side got bogged down near the Saar River early in this war.  Other engagements in this war saw the successive defeat of forces under Bazaine at the battles of Mars-la-Tour and Gravelotte.  As a consequence of this conflict, the Papal States were annexed by Italy and Alsace-Lorraine also changed hands in the Treaty of Frankfurt.  Prompted by the attempt to install Prince Leopold on the throne of Spain by Otto von Bismarck, it saw the decisive Battle of Sedan and led to the Paris Commune.  For 10 points, identify this conflict that saw the defeat of Napoleon III and the 2nd Empire.;;Franco(-)Prussian (War)
Biology;;Immunoblots of urea fractions from sufferers of it show that the misfolded TDP-43 protein is a major component of UBIs and similar pathological molecules are found in FTLD-U sufferers. Mutations in the SOD1 gene are found in some patients suffering from its familial variety which hurts their ability to attack free radicals, while the elevated presence of BMAA in the diet of the Chamorro people of Guam increases their risk of suffering from a complex of Parkinsonism and this disease. High levels of glutamate lead to widespread motor neuron degeneration, but patients retain their cognitive abilities. For 10 points, identify this disease, which Stephen Hawking suffers from and is also known as Lou Gehrig's disease.;;A(myotrophic) L(ateral) S(clerosis)
Anthropology;;Takeo Doi criticized one of this author's works in The Anatomy of Dependence.  Alongside Gene Weltfish, this author of Race: Science and Politics wrote a pamphlet that bashed Nazism on the basis that all humans are equally intelligent, The Races of Mankind.  This anthropologist contrasted the "Apollonian" and "Dionysian" cultures of the Pueblo and Plains Indians, in a work that also talked about the Dobu and Kwakiutl, and another of her works talked about the "shame culture" that led to ritual suicide in Japan.  For 10 points, name this author of Patterns of Culture and The Chrysanthemum and the Sword.;;(Ruth) Benedict
Philosophy;;His theory of history claimed that new movements arise out of the contradictions in their forerunners in his talkings, posthumously published as Lectures on the Philosophy of History.  Strongly influenced by Jakob Bohme, his idea of sublation between propositions was outlined in his The Science of Logic, and he divided the mind into "subjective," "objective," and "absolute" categories in his three-part work Philosophy of Right.  His magnum opus contains the first postulation of the Master/Slave synthesis.  For 10 points, name this founder of the dialectic who wrote the Phenomenology of Spirit.;;(Georg) (Wilheim) (Friedrich) Hegel
Computer Science;;A parallel approach to this algorithm requires only n over two iterations and is known as either alternating or odd-even.  One optimization to this algorithm is the Cocktail approach, while it is improved significantly with the Combing approach because the turtles that normally slow down this algorithm move faster because they're compared with elements far apart.  Although it shares a Big O of n squared runtime with Insertion Sort, it is typically much slower for randomized data.  Functioning by swapping pairs of elements in the wrong order, for 10 points, identify this naive sorting algorithm.;;bubble sort
European History;;This man's calligrapher Omar Aqta was so skilled that he supposedly transcribed the entire Qu'ran on a signet ring.  He promoted unity among his soldiers by founding the tradition of Kurash wrestling.  His grandson Shah Rukh briefly reunited his empire after it was divvied up among his descendants.  He kidnapped the artisans of Damascus and was victorious over Tughluq at Panipat in 1398, after which he sacked Delhi.  He waged war with the Knights of Rhodes at Smyrna, and his underling Tokhtamysh fought against Russia for him before turning against him, leading this man to order rebels' skulls stacked into pyramids.  For 10 points, name this Samarkand-based cripple.;;Tamerlane
World Literature;;Many of this man's ideas for his works are collected in his Notebooks, 1960-1977, which details his inspiration for People are Living There.  Miss Helen collects cement sculptures which she arranges to face east, and converses with Elsa Barlow in this author's The Road to Mecca.  One of this man's works features the bond between Zachariah and Morris, two brothers with different colored skin, while another of his works takes place in St. George's Park Tea Room and sees Sam Semela's relationship with Hally altered.  For 10 points, name this South African author of The Blood Knot and MASTER HAROLD...and the Boys.;;(Harold) (Athol) (Lannigan) Fugard
Mythology;;In addition to his more common form, this god can take on the appearance of a dog-faced baboon in his avatar of A'an, the god of equilibrium. In one myth, this god gambles with the moon and wins obtaining 5 extra days of light to create a 365-day calendar so that Nut can bear children. He is the masculine counterpart of Maat and stands with her on the other side of Re's solar barge. A god of magic, he bestowed upon Isis the magic incantations to help resurrect both Osiris and Horus and is also seen as a god of writing and scribes. Often associated with Hermes Trismegistus in Greek times, for 10 points, identify this Egyptian god known for his ibis shaped head.;;Thoth
Anthropology;;Notable creations of this civilization include the Kunz Axe which shows a figure crossing its arms and a child holding a were-jaguar in the Las Limas Monument.  Some scholars have hypothesized that their most famous relics also doubled as thrones, and their writing system is demonstrated on the Cascajal Block at their site at San Lorenzo.  They constructed a Great Pyramid at La Venta, and they are named for the Nahuatl word for "rubber people", as they probably originated the ballgame.  For 10 points, identify this ancient civilization of Mesoamerica, best known for their colossal stone heads.;;Olmec(s) (Civilization)
American Literature;;One of his earliest works describes the misadventures of a purple knight riding a horse that looks vaguely like an armadillo. Minor characters in other works include the Learned English Dog, Webb Traverse and Teddy Bloat. His short stories include such works such as "Entropy" and "The Secret Integration," and are collected in Slow Learner. Better known works include one where Dr. Hilarious goes insane while Oedipa Maas searches for Trystero, and another labyrinthine work that describes Tyrone Slothrop's search across Europe for the V2 rocket 00000. For ten points, name this famously reclusive author of The Crying of Lot 49 and Gravity's Rainbow.;;(Thomas) (Ruggles) Pynchon
Astronomy;;These objects possess an ergosphere within which occurs the Lense-Thirring effect. The Reissner-Nordstrom metric is used to describe non-rotating ones that possess electrical charge. Mass, electric charge, and angular momentum are the only properties of these objects according to the No Hair Theorem, and energy may be extracted from these via the Penrose Process. Pair production in one of these may result in Hawking Radiation if it occurs near the event horizon. Formed when a supernova remnant exceeds the Oppenheimer-Volkoff limit, this is, for 10 points, what type of collapsed star that is named for its ability to trap light?;;black hole(s)
European History;;The Turks were briefly involved in this conflict, withdrawing after taking Azov from Russia. This conflict began when Augustus the Strong of Poland attacked Livonia, while Schleswig and Holstein were marched upon by the forces of Denmark and Norway under Frederick IV. Important battles include the Russian siege of Narva and the decisive Swedish defeat at Poltava. Ending with the 1721 Treaty of Nystad in which Sweden lost most of its overseas territory and Russia gained control of the Baltic, this is, for ten points, what war that saw a large anti-Swedish coalition?;;Great Northern (War)
Art;;Some experts state that this painting was produced as its artist's reaction to Matisse's Bonheur de Vivre while other early sketches indicate that the artist intended to include two men, one of whom was holding a skull. The bottom of this painting includes a small table on which a watermelon, some grapes, and other fruits are placed. One figure is partially covered in a pink robe, and a different figure holds a white sheet to cover her genitals. Yet another figure's breast is rendered as a quadrilateral, and that woman and the figure underneath her are wearing African masks. For ten points, identify this cubist work depicting five prostitutes on the title street, a work by Pablo Picasso.;;(Les) Demoiselles d'Avignon
British Literature;;Literary critic Buckner Trawick has noted this poem's resemblance to Arthur Hugh Clough's "The Bothie of Toper-na-Fuosich", although he also suggests it may be common source material in Thucydides. In the third stanza, the poet notes that he "hears the long, withdrawing roar" of the "Sea of Faith", and sees the retreat of the "night-wind" down the "naked shingles of the world". At the end, he declares "Ah, Love, let us be true, for the world Hath really neither joy, nor love, nor light", and earlier, he notes that Sophocles may have had similar feelings on the Aegean. For ten points, identify this poem in which ignorant armies clash by night on a darkling plain, a work by Matthew Arnold.;;Dover Beach
Religion;;This sect raised an army in 1943, but was disbanded after the communists came to power and exiled their "pope". According to their creation myth, originally there existed the formless Tao from which God was born, and God then formed the Goddess from himself. They modeled their organizational structure on the Roman Catholic Church, and their temples are adorned with image of a large eye inside a triangle. Among its saints it counts Jesus Christ, Sun Yat-Sen, and Victor Hugo. For ten points, identify this relatively new syncretic religion whose worship is based in Vietnam.;;Cao Dai
Biology;;In the Epstein-Barr virus, the protein BHRF1 acts as an inhibitor for this process, and MDM2 induces polyubiquitination of a protein that promotes this process. The compound ABT-737 is antagonistic to Bcl2 and promotes oligomerization of BAX and BAK proteins, thereby inducing this process, which is accompanied by permeabilization of the inner mitochondrial membrane. During it, chromatin becomes tightly condensed at the nuclear membrane, a characteristic known as pyknosis. Blebs appear on the cellular membrane, and endonucleases begin to rapidly chop up DNA. For 10 points, identify this cellular process that occurs as a form of tumor suppression and is known as programmed cell death.;;apoptosis
European History;;One general in this battle was delayed as he had been successfully held at Quatre-Bras, and Karl von Brulow's troops were able to attack the other side on their eastern flank. That side's general was forced to use Georges Mouton to stop the advance, but another of that side's commanders, Michel Ney, captured a farmhouse and began artillery bombardment of the Allied position. Because the general on the French side waited for the ground to dry, Blucher was able to reach the battlefield in time to support Wellington's troops. For ten points, identify this battle fought during the Hundred Days in a Belgian town, a defeat for Napoleon that ended in exile on St. Helena.;;(Battle of) Waterloo
Mythology;;Kennings that dub the sky a "thing of" this god mean that he may be more similar to Zeus and Jupiter than another god he is more commonly associated with.  His consort is identified as Zisa in a very early text, and in the Lokasenna, Loki threatens to cuckold this god. His rune is an arrow pointing upwards, and he was known as the god of temples. At Ragnarok, he is destined to be killed by the dog that guarded the gates of Hel, Garm. The most famous story about him concerns how, upon being bound with Gleipnir, Fenrir bit off his right hand. For ten points, identify this Norse god of combat, the namesake of Tuesday.;;Tyr
World Literature;;One character in this novel begins a friendship with a woman who works at the Red Lantern, a brothel, and gives her money to start a new life. One character, Amanda, gets pregnant, and the father's brother Jaime performs an abortion on her. The central family in this work lives in the estate Tres Marias, and after Rosa's death, one character remains silent nine years, only to predict her daughter's eventual husband afterward. Esteban Garcia arrests and tortures one character in this novel, and that character, Alba, is protected by her grandmother Clara's spirit. For ten points, identify this Magical Realist novel about Blanca Trueba and her mother and daughter, a work by Isabel Allende.;;(The) House of the Spirits
Philosophy;;The author praises France and the Jews while deriding the English in its eighth section, "People and Fatherlands". The fourth section is comprised of aphorisms, and the work concludes with a poetic aftersong on friendship. Attacking the author's predecessors for their acceptance of Christian morality in its first section, "On the Prejudices of Philosophers," it expands upon ideas the author first demonstrated in Thus Spoke Zarathustra. For ten points, identify this philosophical text subtitled "Prelude to a Philosophy of the Future," a work of Friedrich Nietzsche.;;Beyond Good and Evil
Chemistry;;In the Fritsch-Buttenburg-Wiechell rearrangement, one of these is synthesized from a vinyl bromide. Cadiot-Chodkiewicz coupling results in a molecule with two of these functional groups. Addition of water to these compounds in the presence of sulfuric acid results in the formation of an enol, while catalytic hydrogenation with Lindlar's catalyst stereoselectively forms a syn product. Their functional carbon atoms are sp hybridized. They are inherently unstable, and terminal ones can be deprotonated to yield acetylide ions. For 10 points, identify these hydrocarbons with at least one triple carbon-carbon bond, the simplest example of which is ethyne.;;alkyne(s)
European History;;This man rose to public prominence after successfully inciting his city-state to capture Salamis from Megara. After this man achieved power, he immediately returned seized land and freed all enslaved citizens, and during his rule, his city-state achieved the use of coins. After promulgating his laws on wooden tablets, this ruler left on a series of journeys. Directly after this man's death, his friend and general Pisistratus became tyrant of Athens. For ten points, identify this humane ruler of Athens who ended rule by aristocracy in favor of plutocracy by establishing the Council of 400 and ruled until 560 BC.;;Solon
Art;;The steel frame for this structure was designed by Gunvald Aus and Kort Berle. That steel skeleton supports articulated piers that rise to the pyramidal top, which is richly decorated with ornate gothic detailing. This building's neo-Gothic design led Parkes Cadman to declare it a "cathedral of commerce", and it was the world's tallest building until the construction of 40 Wall Street in 1930 in the same city. This skyscraper across from City Hall on Broadway rises 792 feet and cost the retail magnate who commissioned it $13 million in 1910, and the tower bears his name. For 10 points, identify this New York skyscraper with architect Cass Gilbert that bears the name of a defunct chain of stores.;;Woolworth (Building)
American Literature;;This man collaborated with Donald Gallup on a play published in 1981, The Calms of Capricorn, and this man wrote a work entitled Chris Christofferson, which was later re-titled. In one of his plays, after the title character encounters the Formless Fears, he comes upon a Pullman porter who he'd earlier killed by a razor, Jeff, and later, he removes all of the outward trappings which distinguish him from the natives. In addition to The Great God Brown and The Emperor Jones, this man wrote a play in which the Mannon family's saga mirrors the Oresteia, and yet another in which Hickey Hickman persuades characters to temporarily abandon their pipe dreams in Harry Hope's bar. For ten points, identify this playwright of The Iceman Cometh and Mourning Becomes Electra.;;(Eugene) O'Neill
United States History;;Leaders of this group such as Wild Cat and John Horse met with President Polk, but those leaders eventually left for Mexico. Chief Billy Bowlegs instigated a conflict between this group and the U.S. government, and this group embarrassed Duncan Clinch in one battle. General Edmund Gaines' attack on Fort Negro provoked Commander Garcia, a member of this group, towards one conflict, and other leaders of this group included Sam Jones. Major Dade's forces were massacred by this group, and the Treaties of Moultrie Creek and General Jesup's Treaty of Payne's Landing were signed by this group. Fought against by Andrew Jackson, and led by such men as Micanopy and Osceola, FTP, name this Native American tribe originally inhabiting Florida.;;Seminole(s)
Chemistry;;The IceCube project in Antarctica is designed to detect these particles in the previously unexplored PeV energy region and is based on the earlier AMANDA project also located near the South Pole. The direct Urca process, described by George Gamow, is one the simplest interstellar processes which produce these particles, and it is currently unproven whether these particles are Majorana particles, serving as their own antiparticles. Work conducted at Super-Kamiokande provided evidence for flavor oscillation, which in turn proves that they have non-zero mass. For 10 points, name these extremely low-mass, uncharged leptons, which come in tau, mu, and electron varieties.;;neutrino
Economics;;According to his theory of distribution, he believed that national income would move from the capitalists to the landlords, leading to stagnation. He argued that inflation was caused by the increased lending of the Bank of England in his first published work. He defined the concept of rent and formulated the theory of comparative advantage, and as well as writing The High Price of Bullion, he argued against the tariffs imposed by the Corn Laws in an 1815 essay. For ten points, identify this English economist, author of On the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation and formulator of the Iron Law of Wages.;;(David) Ricardo
Music;;This man composed a Romance for the unusual instrumentation of a harmonica and full orchestra. This man wrote a set of five songs that incorporate George Herbert poems, Five Mystical Songs, and his choral works include To An Unknown Region and The Sacred City. More well-known works by this composer include three Norfolk Rhapsodies. Other works by this composer include operas based on Pilgrim's Progress and Synge's Riders to the Sea.  For ten points, identify this composer of Fantasia on a Theme of Thomas Tallis and Simphonia Antarctica.;;(Ralph) (Vaughan) Williams
Geography;;Lake Hévíz, the largest thermal lake in the world and a tourist destination noted for its curative properties, is located in this country. Its highest point is Kékes in the Mátra range, but most of the country consists of plains and hills. The largest lake of central Europe, Lake Balaton, is located in this country. The Ipoly River flows along this country's border with Slovakia, and the Drava River forms most of its border with Croatia. However, its largest river is the Danube, which flows through its capital. This is, for ten points, what Eastern European country with capital at Budapest?;;Hungary
World Literature;;Early in this novel, one character comes home drenched in mercurochrome, which his wife mistakes for blood; that character is later actually soaked in blood during an event dubbed a "jolly good thing" by Reginald Dyer.  The main character is born to the clown Wee Willie Winkie and his wife, but is actually the son of William Methwold, an Englishman who leaves shortly after his birth.The beginning of this novel features the crazy boatman Kai and the protagonist's grandfather, a doctor named Aadam Aziz.  The protagonist is switched at birth by Mary Pereira, with a boy named Shiva; both infants received special powers due to their time of birth. For 10 points, name this work written as a narrative by Saleem Sinai, by Salman Rushdie.;;Midnight's Children
World History;;One of its later rulers effectively started ruling it after defeating a leader allied with Vytautus. One leader of this polity was defeated at the Battle of Kulikovo, while another ruler of it was assassinated after conquering Tabriz. In addition to Egidu, Mamai, and Jani Beg, one of its leaders sacked Moscow in 1382, and was named Tokhtamysh. The earlier military leadership of the general Subedei had helped it gain land along the Volga, though it was dealt a major blow when its capital Sarai Berke was sacked by Tamarlane in 1395. Originally consisting of Blue and White components, for 10 points, name this khanate first established under Batu Khan, perhaps named for the color of Batu's tent.;;(The) Golden Horde
World History;;Chris Hani served as chief of staff of this political party until his 1993 assassination. Its former militant branch, the Umkhonto we Sizwech, carried out a successful attack against the Koeberg nuclear power plant in 1982. That wing, also known as the Spear of the Nation, was headquartered in Rivonia, where 19 of this party's members were arrested in a farmhouse in 1963. Those arrested included Arthur Goldreich and Govan Mbeki, the latter of whom was a fellow Robben Island inmate of this party's most well-known president, Nelson Mandela. For 10 points, name this party that has continued to dominate politics in Cape Town since the fall of Apartheid.;;A(frican) N(ational) C(ongress)
Philosophy;;The founder of this term later added an "i-c" in the middle to make it "ugly enough to be safe from kidnappers" because he believed this ideal was being misrepresented in the media.  This term was supposedly first used at a meeting of the Metaphyscial Club, and modern proponents of this school include Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature author Richard Rorty.  Its ideas were first written in its founder's paper, "How To Make Our Ideas Clear," and another man associated with this school wrote Democracy and Education.  For 10 points, name this school of philosophy, whose proponents included John Dewey and Charles Sanders Peirce, that titles a work by William James.;;pragmatism
British Literature;;While aboard the Cassandra and the Walrus he acted as quartermaster alongside the gunner Israel. He trusts that his African wife will manage his estate during his absence from Bristol and his mobility is limited by an injury he sustained while in the service of Edward Hawke. He is responsible for the death of Arrow and after his schemes are revealed Abraham Gray is persuaded to leave him.  He leads a mutiny against Trelawney and Smollet, the captain of the Hispaniola, and his nicknames are Barbecue and the Sea-Cook. For 10 points, this is what crutch-yielding pirate whose parrot's cries of "Pieces of eight! Pieces of eight!" end Stevenson's Treasure Island.;;Long John Silver
Biology;;Mice lacking Cks2 were sterile because the gametes were unable to progress beyond this stage. Before this can begin, an E3 ubiquitin ligase must be activated  which destroys the targets through the 26S proteasome. The degradation of one of those targets, securin, allows separase to breakdown cohesin, which marks the start of this. The cohesins hold together sister chromatids, and, once separated, daughter chromosomes are formed and move towards the spindle poles. For 10 points, give the name of this stage of mitosis, which results in two sets of chromosomes being formed at the poles of the cell and that starts after metaphase.;;anaphase
Art;;. He made models for a museum dedicated to the creator of three-sided soccer, but the concept was never pursued. The building that houses the Kuwaiti parliament is his most recent major work, completed in 1984. Bent Flyvbjerg claimed in Harvard Design Magazine that this man's lack of numerous masterpieces results from his being blamed as the cause of a 1400 percent cost overrun on his most famous project, during which he collaborated with Ove Arup & Partners. That building is composed of hemispherical shells and sits on Bennalong Pike in a certain harbor. For 10 points, name this Danish architect who designed the Sydney Opera House.;;(Jorn) Utzon
United States History;;Justice David Josiah Brewer was out of the country during this case, meaning only eight justices contributed to the final vote. Albion W. Tourgée and Samuel F. Phillips each helped prepare briefs for the plaintiff and were the only men to argue for him. William Rehnquist wrote a "Random Thought" supporting this decision two years prior to the 1954 case that would overturn it. John Marshall Harlan was the lone supporter of the plaintiff, who had previously lost his case against the State of Louisiana, which he claimed had denied him his Fourteenth amendment rights by jailing him for his refusal to sit in a colored train car. For 10 points, name this 1896 Supreme Court case that upheld the doctrine of "separate but equal".;;Plessy (v) Ferguson
Physics;;In its tensor form, this can be defined through a 3x3 matrix where its elements off of the principle diagonal are called "products". By putting the tensor into reduced row-echelon form, the principal type of this can be determined from the values of the principle diagonal. For the scalar form, the Huygens-Steiner theorem allows for it to be calculated for a rigid object with a displaced axis of rotation, and is also known as the parallel axis theorem. For 10 points, name this principle that was first defined by Euler in 1730, the rotational analog of mass.;;(mass) moment of inertia
European History;;Precursors to this war included the Uskok War, and during this war the Peace of Polyanov put a member of the House of Vasa, Wladyslaw, on the throne of Russia. During this conflict, Christian IV of Denmark lost an eye at the Battle of Kohlberger Heide. The victor at that battle secured an alliance with John George of Saxony. The Battle of Lutter saw the Danes routed and the Count von Campo led troops to victory at Nordlingen. Frederick V was earlier chased out after a defeat at White Mountain, and after the Truce of Altmark, a prominent military commander led his forces to victories at Breitenfeld and Lutzen. With prominent commanders including Tilly, Wallenstein, and Gustavus Adolphus, FTP, name this war concluded with the Peace of Westphalia.;;Thirty Years' (War)
European Literature;;In this novel, Homais writes disparaging commentaries in the local Yonville newspaper.  Later, the protagonist is inspired by sappy scenes in the Rouen theater.  In this work, Monsieur Homais argues for a procedure to correct a stable boy's club foot, but the operation is botched and the boy's leg is amputated at the thigh. The protagonist meets Lheureux, who convinces her to buy on credit and leads her into debt, and her lovers include Leon Dupuis and Rodolphe Boulanger. For 10 points, name this novel in which the adulterous Emma commits suicide with arsenic, by Gustave Flaubert.;;Madame Bovary
Chemistry;;This compound and ammonium molybdate make are the components of Splittgerber's reagent, which is used to detect the presence of phosphates in water. When it is combined with a dichromate ion, it produces an oxidizing agent that can turn a primary alcohol into a carboxylic acid, and is called Jones reagent. This compound is able to dehydrate sucrose, and often acts as a catalyst for the Fischer esterification reaction. A solution of this compound and the gas that generates it is called "oleum" or the "fuming" form of it. Originally mass produced via the lead chamber process, it is now produced using a Vanadium oxide catalyst through the Contact process. For 10 points, identify compound also known as oil of vitriol, this strong acid with formula H2SO4.;;sulfuric (acid)
Music;;Shostakovich had planned on making his a celebration of Soviet victory against the Nazis but decided on a lighter mood, leading to its censorship in the USSR. The intensity of Mahler's is attributed to the fact that he had learned of his wife Alma's infidelity just before composing it. Schubert's is his second-to-last composition of this format and is known as the Great. Dvorak's was composed during an extensive visit to the United States and is called the From the New World. For 10 points, name this numbered composition, one of which uses the Schiller poem "Ode to Joy," and is known as Beethoven's Choral.;;ninth symphony
American Literature;;The third child of this novel's protagonist is born feebleminded after crows encircle the house on the day of her birth, an ill omen.  The central family abandons their farm to beg in the city, but is able to return after they loot some rich people's homes during military action.  During a time of drought, the fourth child of the protagonist is strangled to death by her mother.  The male protagonist addicts his aunt and uncle to opium and takes in the concubine Lotus Blossom.  The female protagonist has unbound feet that show she was once a slave; her name is O-lan. For 10 points, name this work that begins with the marriage of Wang Lung, a work by Pearl Buck.;;(The) Good Earth
United States History;;It was formed when Frank Munsey announced that he would be funding its most famous candidate's campaign. Its founding occurred shortly after many were dissatisfied with the candidate chosen at the National Convention in Chicago, and Hiram Johnson ran as its Vice-Presidential candidate.  Its platform was based on New Nationalism, and its most prominent figure ran against his disappointing handpicked successor after returning from an African safari. For 10 points, name this third party whose 88 electoral votes trumped Taft's 8, but which also failed to gain a third term for Theodore Roosevelt.;;Progressive (Party)
Art;;Despite the fact that Rotherhithe is west of Sheerness, the titular object is shown moving towards the east, which is corroborated by the appearance of a new moon in the background. It's artist notably called it his "Darling". When first hung, an excerpt from Campbell's Ye Mariners of England accompanied it, reading "The flag which braved the battle and the breeze/No longer owns her". A black steamboat is present in front of the titular vessel which is being "tugged to her last Berth to be broken up" in, for 10 points, what painting of a 98-gun ship from Lord Nelson's fleet, a work by J.M.W. Turner.;;(The) Fighting Temeraire
Chemistry;;A recent paper by Adel Awad notes that using certain values for the boundary metric in Kerr-AdS blackholes may result in the violation of this principle. For a system with heterogenous components, its mathematical formulation includes a term for the sum of the chemical potentials of the particles times the number of particles itself. It was first stated in an 1850 paper by Rudolf Clausius in which he showed that there was a contradiction between the ideas of Sadi Carnot and the basic principle of this law. For 10 points, identify this law of thermodynamics which states that the change in internal energy is equal to the work work done on the system, which ultimately implies that the energy of the universe is constant.;;First (Law) (of Thermodynamics)
American Literature;;This author fictionalized Sherwood Anderson as Dawson Fairchild in a novel set aboard the yacht Nausikaa in his second novel, Mosquitoes.  His novel Flags in the Dust introduced many characters from his later works, including Colonel Sartoris, the protagonist of his short story "Barn Burning" and a sympathizer of Mrs. Grierson's in his other short "A Rose for Emily". Both of these works, as well as a novel about the Bundrens' journey to bury their matriarch, take place his fictional Yoknapatawpha County. For 10 points, name this author of As I Lay Dying.;;(William) Faulkner
European History;;This event took its popular name from an event that saw only St. Abban the Hermit and Vortigern escape from a banquet crashed by a bunch of Saxons.  The central target of this event was captured, given a pistol, and told to shoot himself, but refused and was shot point-blank by Michel Lippert.  During its conception it was often referred to as "Operation Hummingbird"  Those loyal to Franz von Papen were targeted, and the main objective was to end the independence of the SA under Ernst Röhm. For 10 points, name this 1934 mass execution in which the Nazis killed at least 85 political opponents.;;Night of the Long Knives
Psychology;;author claimed that neurotics and primitive men benefited the most from animism in his essay "Animism, Magic, and the Omnipotence of Thought". He criticized Adler's "masculine protest" in his work On Narcissism, and claimed that Akhenaton was an ancestor of a Biblical figure in Moses and Monotheism.  This author combined the "Death instinct" that he postulated in his Beyond the Pleasure Principle with the theories of his Totem and Taboo in the work Civilization and its Discontents.  For 10 points, name this man who theorized the Electra and Oedipus complexes and wrote The Interpretation of Dreams.;;(Sigmund) Freud
Geography;;Its eponymous sardine and the variants of its Tropheus genus inhabit all four of its major geographical divisions and over 98% of this body of water's cichlid species is endemic. The Ruzizi River enters it from the north after leaving Lake Kivu and its other major source is the Malagarasi River, which empties into it about 25 miles south of Kigoma. Kigoma is also the railhead for the train connecting it to Dar es Salaam, the capital of the nation to whom this lake lent part of its name. Burundi, Zambia, and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, all border, for 10 points, what central African lake that is one of the namesakes of its eastern neighbor Tanzania.;;(Lake) Tanganyika
World History;;This event prompted the AWC/AWP to request that Picasso have his Guernica removed from the MoMA in protest. William Peers was charged with conducting the investigation of this event, while the prosecution it prompted was conducted by William Eckhardt. Rewarded with Soldier's Medals in 1998, Hugh Thompson and his crew are credited with stopping this event. The uncovering of it was credited in part to Ron Ridenhour, the photographs of Ronald Haeberle, and the reporting which earned Seymour Hersh a Pulitzer in 1970. Lt. William Calley was the only person convicted of war crimes tied to, for 10 points, what massacre of several hundred Vietnamese in 1968?;;My Lai (massacre)
Biology;;A specific form of this process  is graphically represented as "dumbbell shaped" and is alternatively called vicariant. In a 1977 paper, Jared Diamond discussed the "inter-archipelagial" and "continental" method of this process, the latter of which is only applicable to birds. Two ways in which this process can occur are ploidy changes, and hybridization, and it can also occur due to adaptive radiation. The rate of the occurrence of this process is often disrupted in punctuated equilibrium, and it exists in peripatric, sympatric, and allopatric varieties. For 10 points, name this biological process which makes a group of organisms unable to interbreed with another.;;speciation
Economics;;This man repudiated the Walrasian school after he published a work critical of the marginal productivity theory of distribution. In his magnum opus, he argued that actions are based on illogical decisions called "residues" and are justified by "derivations". In additio to writing Cours d'economie politique and Mind and Society, his collaborative work with Francis Edgeworth resulted in the indifference curve, and he is also the namesake of a distribution, which leads to the conclusion that 80% of the outcome can be attributed to 20% of the causes. For 10 points, identify this economist, who also names a condition where no person can be made better of without making anybody worse off.;;(Vilfredo) Pareto
Math Theory;;Dobinski's formula implies that its nth moment is given by the partitions of a set of size n when it has an expected value of 1. The difference between two of these with different variables and parameters is given by a function named for J.G. Skellam. This function's mean and variance are the parameter itself, which is the product of the number of events times the expectation value, and is represented by lambda. Often used to model the probability of rare events, for 10 points, identify this probability function, which gives the expected probability of that event occurring within a certain time period and is named for a French mathematician.;;Poisson (distribution)
Mythology;;This immortal's imprisonment leads to the creation of the eunuch Asu-shu-namir, who demands the return of a bag full of life-giving water.  This deity is plagued with sixty diseases by Namtar, but after being revived, this character passes through seven gates and sheds one article of clothing at each one. This immortal caused her father Anu to kill Gilgamesh with the Bull of Heaven, and alongside Sin and Shamash, she is part of a triad. This sister of Ereshkigal is the love of Tammuz, and the Sumerian equivalent of Inanna. For 10 points, name this Babylonian fertility goddess.;;Ishtar
American Literature;;The poet of this work wrote a letter to Chrystine Yates explaining that the use of the word "sigh" in the last stanza was not regretful; that line claims that the speaker will be "telling this with a sigh...ages and ages hence".  First published in its author's collection Mountain Interval, this poem's speaker describes how he "kept the first for another day," and how he "looked down one as far as I could To where it bent in the undergrowth". The first line of this poem describes paths that "diverged in a yellow wood". For 10 points, name this Robert Frost poem where he makes a decision to take "the one less traveled by, And that has made all the difference".;;(The) Road Not Taken
Art;;In the background of this painting, a man dressed in orange and black pants plays a musical instrument, and a girl with blond hair in a ponytail stands on one foot. Four people can be seen rowing in this painting, which also includes a dog that is sniffing at a napkin in the bottom right, where a man with a black hat and cane is sitting down and looking at the body of water in front of him. It also features a lady wearing a bustle, who has a monkey on a leash. Housed in the Art Institute of Chicago, for 10 points, name this huge pointillist work depicting a group of people relaxing outside at the titular time of day, a painting by Georges Seurat.;;Sunday Afternoon (on the Island of La Grand Jatte)
United States History;;Alexandra Alvarez argued about the "inaccuracy" of its transcription in a Washington Post article, and also noted the recurrence of phrases such as "Brotherhood" and "You got it" in its recording. It makes an analogy of making a "bad check" which is returned due to "insufficient funds" and notes that there is no time to "take the tranquilizing drug of gradualism". Towards its end, the speaker hopes that "Jews and Gentiles, Protestants, and Catholics will be able to join hands" and declares that "we will not be satisfied" until "basic mobility" for a negro is "from a smaller ghetto to a larger one". For 10 points, name this August 28, 1963 speech given by Martin Luther King on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial.;;(I Have a) Dream (Speech)
World Literature;;A half-native of this country murders members of the Newby family and is hanged in The Chant of Jimmie Blacksmith by one author from this country. This country's only Nobel Laureate wrote The Vivisector and a novel about a German explorer of this country, Voss, while another author from here wrote a historical novel based on the Jerilderie Letter about a band of criminals in this country, The True History of the Kelly Gang.  For 10 points, name this country that is home to Thomas Keneally, Patrick White, and Peter Carey, who set his Oscar and Lucinda in this country's outback.;;Australia
Sociology;;The last paragraph of this book describes sub specie aeternitatis, and the author describes how "the perspective of eternity is not a perspective from a certain place beyond the world". This work claims that actors will adopt a "maximin" strategy and strive for "primary social goods" in theorizing a counterpart to Hobbes's "state of nature" that it dubs the "original position".  This book describes two sub-ideas of its main theme, the Principle of Equal, and the Difference Principle, and was refuted in Robert Nozzick's Anarchy, State, and Utopia. For 10 points, name this work that describes "a veil of ignorance," a 1971 work by John Rawls.;;(A) Theory of Justice
Chemistry;;A Monte Carlo simulation predicts that it prefers to migrate to the surface of a cluster of similar molecules due to the mismatch of bond angles. The Zundel and Eigen structures for it show that it forms complexes with two and three molecules respectively, and other structures are mostly unresolved due to its short existence during autoionization. Arrhenius defined an acid as a substance which releases it in aqueous solution, and it is the strongest acidic species that can exist in water. For 10 points, identify this ion, the protonated form of water.;;hydronium (ion)
World History;;This man's forces were successful at the Battle of Tecoac. His chief advisors included Matias Romero and Jose Lamintour, who helped to greatly improve his country's infrastructure. He forced his handpicked successor to become governor of Guanajuato, Manuel Gonzalez, and succeeded Lerdo in his country's highest office. He announced his retirement in the periodical Pearson's Magazine, only to go into exile in Paris, succeeded by Francisco de la Barra, after he won a rigged election against Francisco Madero, his eventual successor. FTP, name this Oaxacan who ruled Mexico as a dictatorial president for parts of thirty six years, finally going into exile in 1911.;;(Jose) (de) (la) (Cruz) (Porfirio) Diaz (Mori)
British Literature;;In one of this author's novels, the title character goes off to fight in the Crimean War before Dr. Shrapnel's radical ideas nearly derail his successes.  In addition to Beauchamp's Career, this author wrote about Ferdinand Laxley, who threatens to duel with the title character should he ever become a gentleman in his Evan Harrington.  Another of his title characters abandons his cousin Clare for Tom Blaize's daughter Lucy, while yet another title character of this author abandons her husband Augustus Warwick for her family home.  In addition to The Ordeal of Richard Feverel and Diana of the Crossways, this author wrote a novel featuring Laetitia Dale and Sir Willoughby Patterne.  For 10 points, name this British author of the sonnet sequence Modern Love and the novel The Egoist.;;(George) Meredith
Geography;;This city was formerly home to the Pruitt-Igoe housing projects that were torn down in the 1970s.  Towns in a neighboring state that are across a river from this city include Venice and Brooklyn, while smaller rivers in and near this metropolis include Meremac and Des Peres.  A suburb of this city contains a popular entertainment area known as the Delmar Loop.  Forest Park sits in the west of this city, whose suburbs include Clayton, Florissant, and Ladue. For 10 points, name this Midwestern city that is home to Washington University and the Gateway Arch.;;St, Louis (Missouri)
Astronomy;;The gravitational redshift of its photons can be described as "integrated" or non-integrated depending on where the last scattering occurs and is known as the Sachs-Wolfe Effect, while the influence of electrons on it through inverse Compton scattering is known as the Sunyaev-Zeldovich effect. COBE studies the anisotropy of this phenomenon while WMAP measures its temperature. It was hypothesized by George Gamow, and its accidental discovery by Arno Penzias, and Robert Wilson in 1964 was a major blow to the Steady State model of the Universe. For 10 points, name this feature remnant of the Big Bang, whose temperature is about 2.7 Kelvins.;;C(osmic) M(icrowave) B(ackground) R(adiation)
Art;;The Galleria Borghese contains two self-portraits by this man done seven years apart, as a "Young Man" and "Mature Man".  He designed a large bronze, four-legged structure known as the "baldachino" for St. Peter's Basilica, and along with his father Pietro, he completed the Fontana della Barcaccia that contains a sculpted ship; that fountain is located below the Spanish Steps.  This sculptor of Angel with the Crown of Thorns and The Rape of Proserpina also sculpted a work that is flanked by balconies of statues of Florentine nobles, who look on a scene topped with gilded rays in which an angel pierces the title figure with an arrow.  For 10 points, name this sculptor of The Ecstasy of St. Theresa.;;(Gian) (Lorenzo) Bernini
European History;;While a duke, this man drove the Scots from Berwick-upon-Tweed and was appointed Governor of the North.  This man's ascent to the throne occurred due to his interaction with Earl Rivers at Stony Stratford, and he would later reconcile with Rivers' sister, Elizabeth Woodville. He was married to Anne Neville, and his brother George, Duke of Clarence was executed for treason during the reign of his predecessor, Edward IV. This monarch was replaced by Henry VII after he lost the War of the Roses, ending the house of York.  For 10 points, name this British king who was defeated and killed at the Battle of Bosworth Field.;;Richard III
World Literature;;A J.M. Barrie novel republished as Peter Pan in Kensington was originally titled The Little White one of these. The unnamed son of Jeronimo and Inez discovers his deformities in a Donoso novel about an "obscene" one "of the night". The titular toy of one of these creatures is a possession of Toru Okada, who goes around searching for his cat in a Haruki Murakami novel, while one of these creatures "whirled in the autumn winds" and "marked the edge of one of many circles" in a Wallace Stevens poem which discusses "Thirteen Ways of Looking" at a black one of these creatures. For 10 points, identify this word, which also names an Aristophanes play wherein Euelpides and Peisetarios help the titular creatures build Cloudcuckooland.;;bird(s)
Religion;;Along with satanists and Paloists, members of this faith were accused of carrying out the Matamoros murders in 1989.  They were involved in a 1987 incident in Hialeah, Florida, that led to a Supreme Court ruling in favor of this religion. A common practice among adherents of this faith is sprinkling liquid mercury around their homes, and figures in this religion include Babalz Ayi, Oggzn, Eleggua, and Shangs.  Macumba and Lukumi are alternate names for this religion whose supreme god is Olurun. For 10 points, name this Yoruban religion prominent in Cuba, and whose spirits are known as orishas.;;Santeria
European Literature;;. In one of this man's works, Fyodor finds true love in Zina Mertz as he passionately criticizes the work of Nikolai Chernyshevski. In addition to The Gift, he also wrote about a title character who meets his ex-wife's son Victor, and struggles to maintain a job as a professor of Waindell College. The narrator of one of his works writes a commentary of the titular poem and believes he is exiled king of Zembla, Charles Kinbote, and his most famous work is narrated by a scholar from a jail cell as he recounts his adventures with the titular nymphet. For 10 points, name this Russian born author of Pnin, Pale Fire, and Lolita.;;(Vladmir) Nabokov
United States History;;Three days before this battle, a division under Daniel Tyler attempted to attack a confederate flank, which resulted in a skirmish at Blackburn's Ford. Col. Nathan Evans was an important figure for the Confederates, who retreated to Matthews Hill after learning of Union attack on the Confederate Left Flank. Reinforcements under General Bee prevented the Union troops from fording the namesake river, and earlier, Robert Patterson failed to stop the advance of Johnston's troops in the Shenandoah valley. It was a loss for the union troops under Irwin McDowell to confederates led by P.G.T. Beauregard, and Thomas Jackson also acquired the nickname "stonewall" during this battle. For 10 points, identify this first major battle fought during the American Civil War.;;First Bull Run
Chemistry;;When it occurs with 1,1-diarylethylene it is called the Wagner-Jauregg (yow-reg) reaction, although other benzenoid compounds usually do not undergo this reaction, while the aza modification of it can be used when either of two reactants contain imines. Lewis acids can be used to control the quantities of endo and exo products produced in this reaction which requires an overlap of the HOMO and LUMO. For 10 points, identify this 4+2 cycloaddition reaction wherein conjugated diene reacts with a dienophile to produce a cyclohexene system, named for its two German discoverers.;;Diels(-)Alder Reaction
British Literature;;The beginning of this work describes the title character's engagement to Sarah, which broken after he is falsely accused by William Dane of stealing the money belonging to Lantern Yard. In another part, one character attempts to sell his brother's horse, but only manages to hurt it, and ends up stealing gold that the title character has been hoarding. The title character finds a baby girl who refuses to live with Nancy Lammeter and Godfrey Cass, and this novel ends happily with the marriage of Eppie to Aaron Winthrop. For 10 points, identify this novel about a weaver of Ravelow, a work of George Eliot.;;Silas Marner
Music;;In Act IV of this opera, one character sings the aria "Vecchia Zamarra" while agreeing to pawn a prized overcoat. In Act II, one character sings "Quando m'en vo" in which she complains about her shoes, and orders Alcindoro to find a new pair. In the duet "Sono Andati"? two characters recount a scene from Act I, where one character sings the aria "Che Gelinda Manina" as he searches for another character's keys. It is based on a work by Henri Murger, though another opera by this name was written by Leoncavallo. Featuring a relationship between Musetta and Marcello, For 10 points, identify this Giacomo Puccini opera about Rodolfo's love for Mimi, who dies from tuberculosis.;;La Boheme
European History;;Eberhard of Franconia attempted to depose this man and replace him with Thankmar (tahnk-mahr), but this man defeated Eberhard and his allies at the battle of Andernach. He also invaded Italy after his son and brother attempted to do so, and he married the woman who was held captive by Berengar, Adelaide. He divested Liudolf and Conrad the Red of their titles at the Diet of Auerstadt. He established his capital at Magdeburg, though he is better known for defeating the Magyars at the Battle of Lechfeld. For 10 points, identify this son of Henry the Fowler, who was crowned Holy Roman Emperor in 962.;;Otto (I) (The Great)
Astronomy;;The Lundmark law is a quadratic form of this law, which was found to better fit empirical observations by I. E. Segal, and the Tully-Fisher relation can be used to estimate on of the quantities in its mathematical expression. Friedmann's equations can yield the constant of proportionality in this law, while recent recent observations of Cepheid variables estimate that constant to be between 65 and 80 kilometers per second-megaparsec. For 10 points, identify this law developed by a namesake American astronomer, which states that the redshift of light coming from any source is proportional to the distance of the source.;;Hubble's (Law)
Mythology;;This son of Muireann (mih-ran) Muncheam (mun-kham) once beheaded the demon Aillen mac Midna, who had previously raided Tara every Samhain (suh-vehn). For that act, Cormac mac Airt rewarded this man with a position previously held the man who killed this man's father had Cumhaill (cuh-vell), Goll mac Morna. He once threw the Isle of Man at a rival and also legendarily built the Giant's Causeway. He encountered a doe while hunting; that doe transformed into his wife Sadb (Sad-dub), who eventually gave birth to his son Oisin. While apprenticed to Finnegas, this character burned his thumb on a creature who'd previously lived in the Boyne. For 10 points, identify this mythical Irish hunter-warrior who led the Fianna and caught the Salmon of Knowledge.;;Finn MacCool
World History;;Events like the Slagter's Nek Incident preceded this action. The lead singer of the band Dschingis Khan, Louis Potgieter, is a descendant of Hendrik, one of the men involved in this event, and many like, Potgieter, were Doppers. One incident in this event was an attack on Mosega, and Delagoa Bay was the intended target of Louis Tregardt, a Swede. After this incident, states were begun at places such as Potchefstroom and Winburg, and among the leaders of this event were Piet Retief and Andreus Pretorius. Provoked by the negative influences of the Xhosa and the British, FTP, name this South African event which led to the establishment of the Orange Free State and the Transvaal.;;Great Trek
Physics;;This theory led to the formation of a quantum interpretation of the Zeno effect. For an ideal gas, the quantity described by this theory is evaluated by dividing the square root of the product of the Boltzmann constant, mass and temperature of the gas, and two pi into Planck's constant. One confirmation for it came from Otto Stern's experiments with Helium atoms, though it was first confirmed when high energy electrons were fired at a nickel atom in the Davisson-Germer experiment. Described by a French physicist, for 10 points, identify this theory which describes an inverse relationship between wavelength and momentum and thus explains the wave-particle duality of matter.;;de Broglie (Hypothesis)
Computer Science;;The Sorites paradox applies to an entity of this name, while the buddy-block allocator helps manage another entity with this name. A variation of a third entity with this name, invented by Aragon and Seidel in 1989, adds a priority attribute to the data, while Chazelle's "soft" version "corrupts" the data in order to achieve constant-time-bounded operations. The Fibonacci version uses several trees at once, while the "leftist" version, much like NAQT, utilizes an s-value. The namesake of a big O of n log n sorting algorithm, for 10 points, give this term referring to either a large pool of dynamically allocatable memory also known as the free store or a modified tree in which each child is either greater or less than its parent, both named for their arbitrary size.;;heap
United States History;;Leaders of this event stole mail and held it at the Blackhorse Tavern, and a failed mediation of this event was led by Hugh Henry Brackenridge.  David Bradford's coerced role in this event led to his acquittal in its aftermath, and people involved in this skirmish attacked John Neville's slaves.  Its leader eventually fled to Louisiana after he was crushed by the so-called "Watermelon Army," and Meriwether Lewis fought for Daniel Morgan's Virginia militia that helped put down this rising.  For 10 points, name this revolt quashed by Lighthorse Harry Lee and George Washington, fought in Pennsylvania and spurred by Hamilton's high tax on alcohol.;;Whiskey Rebellion
European Literature;;One character in this work likes war because it requires people to register troops and keep an inventory of rations. Towards the end, one of the title characters dreams about living in Amsterdam as she worries about marrying off her daughter. That character draws out black crosses for the other titular characters, one of who is executed for stealing a cashbox from a regiment, and another who tries to warn a residents about an attack planned on their town. For 10 points, identify this play in which Anna Fierling loses Eilif, Swiss Cheese and Kattrin as she manages a canteen during the Thirty Years War, a work by Bertolt Brecht.;;Mother Courage and Her Children
Art;;Art historian Longhi argued that the creator of this painting may also have worked on Raising of Tabitha, and the building depicted in this painting belongs to a resident of Capernum. The right side of this painting features the four apostles standing in a line facing the central group. Another figure is seen addressing the central group and collecting the title object from a different figure, and its left most scene depicts St. Peter taking a coin from a fish. Housed in the Brancacci Chapel in Florence, for 10 points, identify this work by Masaccio which depicts three different scenes pertaining to Jesus paying the titular taxes.;;Tribute Money
American Literature;;The speaker of this poem wants to "Let be be finale of seem," and this work describes a dresser that is missing three glass knobs.  An object that the central figure of this poem once embroidered with fantails is now spread "as to cover her face," and her dumbness is proven by how her "horny feet protrude".  Beginning with an exaltation to "the muscular one" to "whip / in the kitchen cups concupiscent curds".  For 10 points, name this poem which begins "Call the roller of big cigars" about a ruler of a dairy item, by Wallace Stevens.;;(The) Emperor of Ice Cream
Math Theory;;His namesake algebra consists of bounded operators on a Hilbert space closed in the weak operator topology, and contains the identity operator. He was second man to win the Fermi prize, and identified quantum mechanical states with vectors and pioneered the use of operator theory in quantum mechanics. With Stanislaw Ulam, he designed the implosion mechanism for the atomic bomb at Los Alamos. He invented the field of cellular automata and the idea of a universal constructor; in a different field, his namesake architecture maps data and program memory to the same space. For 10 points, name this badass Hungarian polymath who invented the minimax theorem and, with Oskar Morgenstern, game theory.;;(John) (von) Neumann
American Literature;;One character in this work chides his manager with "you are a shithead" after another character chews out that manager by claiming "a child" would know that "You never open your mouth until you know what the shot is".  A plot to defect to Jerry Graff is hatched by Dave Moss, who first attempts to recruit Aaronow but whose eventual accomplice is nicknamed "The Machine".  A gullible character named James Lingk is fast-talked into making a purchase by Ricky Roma, and in the end Shelly Levene is nabbed for robbing the sales leads.  For 10 points, name this drama about Chicago real estate agents, by David Mamet.;;Glengarry Glen Ross
Biology;;Along with microtubules, these entities are recruited to facilitate the invasion of the host cell by the parasite T. Cruzi, and the protein hVam6p is responsible for the clustering of these entities in humans.  Glycogen buildup in these entities in muscle cells results in Pompe's disease, and the lack of fat-metabolizing enzymes in it is the cause of Tay-Sachs disease. Mannose-6-phospate is tagged to proteins bound for this organelle, which pumps protons into itself for maintaining an acidic environment.  For 10 points, identify these organelles that are important in the autolysis of cells.;;lysosome(s)
Sociology;;One chapter of this work briefly discusses the role of Marsyas who travels with Cybele to soothe her; that chapter quotes some verses from the Havamal where Odin hangs from a tree for nine nights. One section notes the placement of various effigies in order to deceive ghosts and evil spirits, while an earlier section describes an event whose winner is bestowed with the title Rex Nemorensis. It begins with a description of a J.M.W. Turner work of the title object, which is a branch presented to Sibyl by Aeneas before entering Hades. For 10 points, identify this "study in magic and religion," a work of Sir James Frazer.;;(The) Golden Bough
Music;;One work by this composer features a series of repetitive passages played against a persistent wood block before a trumpet fanfare alternating between measures of 6/8 time and 3/4 time. One of his other works contains a trumpet section which references Ives's The Unanswered Question. In another of his works, the titular figure attends a performance of Red Detachment of Women and some prominent political personalities perform the foxtrot in the "Chairman Dance". For 10 points, identify this composer of Short Ride in a Fast Machine, On the Transmigration of Souls, and Nixon in China.;;(John) (Coolidge) Adams
European Literature;;In one work by this man, a "Northerner" traveling through the desert is given a pair of rusty scissors with which to kill a caravan, while another work sees Rotpeter [ROTE-pay-ter] decide to cease being an ape. In addition to "Jackals and Arabs" and "Report to an Academy"¸ this man wrote such short stories as "Josephine the Singer," "The Judgement," and "The Hunger Artist". Unfinished novels by him include one about a land surveyor assigned to work as a janitor by bureaucrats and. one featuring the artist Titorelli and the bank manager Josef K. For 10 points, identify this Czech author of The Trial, The Castle, and a work about Gregor Samsa, "The Metamorphosis".;;(Franz) Kafka
United States History;;This president appointed Joseph McKenna as his attorney general and William Day as Secretary of State, after the brief tenure of John Sherman in that office His wife Ida suffered from epilepsy, and during state dinners he would cover her face during seizures. He supported the Dingley Tariff after taking office by way of a campaign funded by Mark Hanna. Following the death of his first vice president Garrett A. Hobart, the position remained vacant for two years. For 10 points , name this Republican in power during saw the explosion of the USS Maine and much of the Spanish-American War, before being assassinated by Leon Czolgosz.;;(William) McKinley
Art;;The sculptures Wave and The Age of Maturity were produced by this man's student and lover Camille Claudel. Other works by him include one in which a wounded soldier slumps against the shrieking winged spirit of war, The Call To Arms, and a highly criticized one which depicted an author wrapped in a robe, Honore de Balzac. Another work, inspired by Michelangelo's Dying Slave, drew accusations that this man cast it from a living model. In addition to The Age of Bronze, he memorialized a siege of the Hundred Years' War in The Burghers of Calais. For 10 points, identify this sculptor, whose never-used Gates of Hell were to have contained The Kiss and The Thinker.;;(Auguste) Rodin
Mythology;;This figure had a daughter Historis who helped Alcmena deliver Heracles and a daughter Manto who came to wed Rhacius of Caria. The son of the nymph Chariclo and the shepherd Everes, he died after drinking at the spring of Telphussa. In one story, he angers Hera by saying that women enjoy sex more than men, after he'd watched two snakes copulating with a stick, and spent seven years transformed into a woman. As a shade in the underworld, he told Odysseus not to steal the cattle of Helios, and earlier he informed Oedipus that he had murdered his father. For 10 points, name this blind Greek prophet.;;Tiresias
Biology;;The Abi class proteins are known to inhibit this process by reducing the efficiency of plaquing, and expression of MYB results in transativation of RTA, which is a promoter of this process in KSHV. The expression of BGLF5 was implicated in inducing host shutoff at the beginning of this process, which leads to reduced expression of antigen presenting complexes, which aids in evasion of T Cells. Its first stage involves penetration of the plasma membrane through receptors on its surface or mechanical force and its last stage liquid entering the cell until the cell bursts. For 10 points, identify this form of viral reproduction employed by the Epstein-Barr virus that typically results in the destruction of the host cell as opposed to the lysogenic cycle.;;lytic (cycle)
European History;;One treaty by this name included an alleged Secret clause to this agreement involved the transfered the provinces of Cholm and Podalia to the side that withdrew from the conflict. The more famous treaty by this name defined the boundary of Livonia to cross lakes Peipus, Pskow, and Luben, and also required withdrawal of all Russian troops from that region. This treaty was followed by a Treaty between the Central Powers and Romania negotiated at Bucharest, and the provisions of this agreement were reverted by the treaty of Rapallo. For 10 points, identify this treaty not attended by the remainder of the allied powers, which signaled the end of Russian involvement in the first World War.;;(Treaty of) Brest(-)Litovsk
World Literature;;One of this man's works describes a composer who frequently meets the titular being after his child's death, while another of his works describes a patient suffering from cancer who is fascinated with chrysanthemums. In addition to "Aghwee the Sky Monster" and "The Day He Himself Shall Wipe My Tears Away," he also wrote about a boy who helps an African American POW that parachuted into his village. This story, The Catch, won him the Akutagawa Award. He also wrote about Mitsuhiro and Takashi's adventures in the town of Okubo, while his later stories parallel the relationship between him and his autistic son, Hikari. For ten points, name this author of Nip the Bud, Shoot the Kids, The Silent Cry, and A Personal Matter.;;(Kenzaburo) Oe
Art;;This painting's counterpart depicts a central turbaned man on horseback, with several other figure lifting curved swords, and shows the charge of a mamluke cavalry. The right background of this painting consists of distant grey buildings against a nearly black sky, and the left background is dominated by a hill, presumably Principe Pio where the depicted action took place. A lantern on the ground illuminates the group on the left, leaving the French soldiers on the right mostly in shadow. For 10 points, name this work by Francisco Goya which depicts the execution of civilian prisoners on a certain date.;;3rd of May, 1808
Chemistry;;It can be viewed as a relation between the temperature and average kinetic energy of gas molecule because the latter is equal at the same temperature due to the ideal gas law. The mathematical expression of Knudsen's law is similar to this law, and the separation of Uranium isotopes through Uranium hexafluoride is often incorrectly explained as an application of it. Explaining a process that can also be described by Fick's law, For 10 points, identify this law named after its Scottish discoverer which states that the rate of diffusion for a gas is inversely proportional to the square root of its molar mass.;;Graham's (Law)
Philosophy;;This man argued in a thought experiment that private objects are "irrelevant," an idea reinterpreted upon in Saul Kripke's work about this man "On Rules and Private Language".  He introduced the concept of "familial relations" in a work that derided philosophy as a series of language games, and he attempted to set out a logically perfect language in another work that begins "The world is everything that is the case" and ends by claiming that what we cannot speak of, we must pass over in silence. For 10 points, name this Austrian philosopher, author of The Blue and Brown Books, Philosophical Investigations and Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus.;;(Ludwig) Wittgenstein
Physics;;One equation used to study the anisotropy in this process is called Green's function. This process and its converse can be observed in outer hair cells, and it is implemented in Scanning Tunneling microscopes. Materials exhibiting this effect also exhibit the Debye-Sears effect where they establish acoustic waves when vibrated at fixed frequencies if placed in liquid. Poling is necessary to induce this effect in ceramic materials, and Rochelle salts are exhibit this effect upon compression, which was discovered by Pierre and Paul-Jacques Curie. For ten points, name this effect the generation of electric potential in response to an applied mechanical strain.;;piezoelectric(ity) (effect)
Mythology;;The Argonauts' herald Aethalides, who had perfect memory, was the son of this character and Eupolemeia; another son of this character is Oenomaus' charioteer Myrtilus. This character's rape of Chione resulted in the birth of the father of Anticleia and the taker of Sisyphus' cattle, Autolycus. This character also appeared to give the herb moly to Odysseus on Circe's island and, with his father, visited Baucis and Philemon. He also used a tortoiseshell and the guts of a cow to invent the first lyre. The son of Zeus and Maia, for 10 points, name this Greek god of shepherds and thieves, awarded the caduceus for his service as the gods' wing-footed messenger.;;Hermes
World History;;One emperor of this dynasty was captured in the crisis at Tumu Fortress. Its founder expanded imperial power to the former kingdom of Dali, set up a secret service known as Jinyi Wei, and abolished imperial examinations. That founder ascended as a result of the Red Turban revolt. The Shaanxi earthquake happened during this dynasty, once ruled by the Yongle Emperor who built the fleets used by Zheng He. Founded by Chu Yuan-chang, it was plagued by famine and succeeded by the Manchus who set up the Ching Dynasty. For 10 points, name this Chinese dynasty also remembered for its pottery.;;Ming (dynasty)
European Literature;;One character in this work claims that she is twenty-nine when there are pink shades, and thirty when there are not.  In this work, Lord Berwick informs the title character that her husband has been giving large sums to another woman. The protagonist decides to leave her husband for an admirer, Lord Darlington, and throws a birthday party which is attended by a character whom Augustus is infatuated with. Cecil Graham discovers the titular object in Lord Darlington's room, when the title character's mother claims that she mistakenly takes that object from the protagonist. For ten points, name this play whose titular object is a birthday gift presented by Mrs. Erlynne, a work of Oscar Wilde.;;Lady Windermere's Fan
World History;;He founded the Rafi party in protest of the settlement to Operation Susannah, which revolved around defense minister Pinhas Lavon. He was the main architect of the Haganah, which he allowed to cooperate with Irgun as part of the anti-British Hebrew Resistance Movement, although they split after this man opposed the bombing of the King David Hotel. He appointed his successor to be Levi Eshkol, though he later resigned from the Mapai party. For 10 points, name this Zionist leader who was the first prime minister of Israel and is the namesake of its airport.;;(David) Ben(-)Gurion
Geography;;This region is bordered on the far northeast by the Kerulen River which empties into Hulun Lake. Parts of it once saw the breeding of wild horses known as takhi, while even farther north in the same country is the Selenge River and its tributary, the Orhon. This area is bordered by the Sayan mountains and the Yablonoi to the north, while the Greater Khingan mountains lay to the east. Its southernmost region is called the Ala Shan and the Tarim basin to its west lies across the Tien Shan mountains. Mostly composed of bare rock, for 10 points, name this huge desert which spans southern Mongolia and northern China.;;Gobi (Desert)
Geology;;Data collection in Ethiopia's Afar region suggests that this process may occur there, and some postulate that the evaporation inherent in the beginning of this process can create hydrocarbon reserves that may turn into fossil fuels.  This process begins at areas known as triple junctions, in rift valleys.  This idea postulated by Princeton's Harry Hess refutes Alfred Wegener's idea that continental plates "plow" through their oceanic counterparts; this theory centers on convection currents in the asthenosphere, and its namesake action is driven by the creation of oceanic crust.  For 10 points, name this theory that suggests that continental drift is driven by action at mid-ocean ridges.;;sea(-)floor spreading
Religion;;One of the three pilgrimage festivals, rituals performed during this holiday include the water libation ceremony and the shaking of branches from four different species of trees. Probably originating as a harvest festival, it is referred to in the Bible as the "feast of the ingathering", and it lasts for seven days beginning on the fifteenth day of Tishri, and is immediately followed by Shemini Atzeret. For 10 points, name this Jewish holiday, during which Jews are supposed to live in makeshift booths, also known as the Feast of Tabernacles.;;Sukkot
American Literature;;In one poem, this author asked "Who is the East?/The Yellow Man/Who may be Purple if He can," while another poem by this author that is shockingly not about playing NAQT questions opens with the line "BEE! I'm expecting you". This poet notes that "Diadems drop and Doges surrender" in "Safe in their alabaster chambers," while in another work, she claims to be "inebriate of air" and "debauchee of dew" after tasting "a liquor never brewed". Other poems saw her note that "Hope is the thing with feathers" and also will "her keepsakes" away before hearing a fly buzz and dying. For 10 points, identify this introverted Amherst native, the narrator and author of "Because I could not stop for Death".;;(Emily) Dickinson
Economics;;The presence of co-ops is shown to increase the rate of technological innovations in these markets in agricultural industries, and one behavior in this situation states that the minor firms will follow the lead of another firm's decisions on quantity in the Stackelberg model. Simultaneous determination of prices occurs in the Bertrand model for them, which suggests that firms may use marginal-cost pricing, while firms simultaneously determine output in the Cournot model for these markets. Kinked demand explains why lowering price from the equilibrium is unprofitable in this situation, and it is assumed to exist when four firms have greater than 40% of the market share. The beer and steel industries are examples of, for 10 points, what types of markets dominated by a few firms.;;oligopoly
American Literature;;One character in this work preaches the "Salvation and five percent" doctrine and the protagonist helps that character in increasing Sunday school attendance. After giving a speech at the SAREB convention, the protagonist supports the conservative candidate Prout for mayor, but for a short while is affected by the liberal Seneca Doane. When Zilla is shot by her husband Paul Riedling, the protagonist changes his outlook and has an affair with Tanis Judique, but breaks up with her and joins the Good Citizen's League after his wife Myra recovers from illness. For 10 points, identify this novel about a real estate agent from Zenith, a work by Sinclair Lewis.;;Babbitt
Chemistry;;The ISIS and SNS facilities produce these particles using spallation, and a nonzero electric dipole moment would imply the violation of CPT theorem. Certain objects composed of these particles obey the Tolman-Oppeheimer-Volkov limit, whose antiparticle having a mass of 940 MeV was discovered by Bruce Cork. When free, this particle has a lifetime of about 15 minutes and decays into an antineutrino, an electron and a proton, and it is a baryon made up of two down quarks and one up quark. Discovered by James Chadwick, for 10 points, identify this neutral subatomic particle.;;neutron(s)
Mythology;;The Vedic god Soma represented it, and in Hindu myth the god associated with it presides over Rohini and Shravana. In Aztec myth, it was formed after the head of Coyolxauhqui was cut off by Huitzilopochtli. The Mesopotamian representation of it was the husband of Ningal, and was born to Enlil and Ninlil, and is called Nanna or Sin. In Norse myth, Hati chases Mani, who is the god of this entity, while the Mayan goddess representing it sometimes holds a rabbit in her hands. For 10 points, identify this entity represented by Selene for the Greeks and Luna for the Romans.;;moon
United States History;;This man published the 11 essays in the collection "Letters of Publicola" which were critical of Paine's Rights of Man and he later became the ambassador to the court of Alexander I. During his re-election campaign he nominated his Treasury Secretary Richard Rush as his Vice-Presidential candidate, while he condemned the Mexican-American war when he was a representative and introduced several anti-slavery measures despite gag-rules. He also successfully represented the Amistad slaves and negotiated the treaty of Ghent and the annexation of Florida from Spain during his stint as Secretary of State under James Monroe. For 10 points, identify this man who won the 1824 election through the "corrupt bargain".;;(John) Q(unicy) Adams
European Literature;;In one of this man's works, Alyosha tells Belyaev about his father and is horrified to see the Belyaev break a promise, while in another work, Ivan narrates the delusion of Nikolai who dreamt of growing the titular fruit on his estate. In addition to writing A Trifling Occurrence and Gooseberries, he wrote of the ideological conflict between Gromov and Ragin in his Ward No. 6, and an affair between Gurov and Anna Diedritz is the focus of his The Lady with a Dog. In better known works, Madame Ranevskaya sells a titular estate to pay off debts and Konstantin Treplev kills himself after killing the titular bird. For 10 points, identify this Russian author of The Cherry Orchard and The Seagull.;;(Anton) Chekhov
Biology;;The TIR1 protein binds to the SCF complex and is then headed for degradation after binding to these entities. PGP and PIN are proteins involved in the transport of these molecules. Their transport also involves a decrease in the pH of the cell, which induces the activation of expansins. Excess concentration of these molecules can induce Ethylene synthesis, which causes leaf abscission. Indole-3-acetic acid is an important member of this class of molecules, which play a significant role in apical dominance. For 10 points, identify these plant hormones which are best known for their influence in phototropism and geotropism.;;auxin(s)
European History;;This man supported Caecilius Metellus' controversial legislation for which he was suspended. Earlier, he quit from the office of flamen Dialis when he was exiled by Sulla, and he ran for the office of Pontifex Maximus in opposition to Quintus Catulus. While sailing to Rhodes he was captured by pirates whom he later crucified, and he allegedly had a homosexual relationship with Nicomedes IV of Bithynia. He was the victor at Pharsalus, and he defeated Vercingetorix in Alesia, which is recounted in his Commentaries on the Gallic Wars. For 10 points, identify this man who crossed the Rubicon and was murdered by Brutus on the Ides of March.;;(Gaius) Julius Caesar
Art;;One of the figures in the background is Hughie, the janitor of the institution, while the artist painted himself in the center right painting the scene. The title character's son leans on to the ramp to the exit, and two people can also be seen observing the central event from the doorway. On the left, a person is writing in a book, while a woman dressed in black lies on the floor and cringes after viewing the central scene. Four people assist the titular figure who stands with a scalpel in his right hand, but the open gash on the thigh and the blood spewing out of a patient grabs the attention of the students observing the procedure. For 10 points, identify this depicting a physician from Jefferson Medical School performing a surgery, a work by Thomas Eakins.;;(The) Gross Clinic
World Literature;;In one poem, he says that those who are "slaves to habit" and "abandon a task before starting it" are condemned to the titular action, and the narrator of another poem reminds the subject that "Do not look for me, I shall already have forgotten you" when the titular event occurs. In addition to writing "Die Slowly" and "If You Forget Me" he wrote about A Large Tuna in the Market, a Chestnut on the Ground, and Celery, which are subjects of his Elemental Odes, while the narrator states that the subject "swallowed everything, like distance. Like the sea, like time" and laments "In you everything sank!" in A Song of Despair. For 10 points, identify this Chilean poet who wrote "20 Love Poems" and Canto General.;;(Pablo) Neruda
European History;;In this conflict's initial battles Catinat and Villeroi were defeated at Carpi and Chiari in northern Italy, while the attempt to seize a treasure ship resulted in a victory for George Rooke at Vigo Bay. This war began when the Second Partition treaty was broken when the United Provinces were attacked. Other battles in this conflict include one in which Marshall Villars clashed with Eugene of Savoy at Malplaquet, and Marlborough aided Prince Leopold's armies against Louis XIV at Blenheim. Its American phase is known as Queen Anne's War. For 10 points, identify this war which resulted from a Bourbon king taking power in a certain European nation, ended by the 1713 treaty of Utrecht.;;(War of the) Spanish Succession
Music;;One character in this work sings the aria "Parmi veder la lagrime" after learning about the abduction of a character whom he met earlier when disguised as Gualtier Maldè. That character is the subject of the aria "Caro Nome" and at the beginning of this work he sings "Quaesta o Quella" when he attempts to seduce Countess Ceprano. Based on Victor Hugo's play Le Roi s'amuse, the title character is cursed by Monterone for aiding the Duke of Mantua in his flings and unwittingly aids in the abduction of his daughter Gilda, who is killed by the assassin Sparafucile. Featuring the aria "La donna è mobile," for 10 points, identify this Giuseppe Verdi opera about a hunchbacked court jester.;;Rigoletto
European Literature;;One of these anomalously contains 29 sonnets of Estienne de la Boitie, while another one describes a story narrated by Jacques Amiot about the Duc de Guise. Yet another claims that "contemplation" withdraws the soul from ourselves. In addition to That to Study Philosophy is to Learn to Die, one of these notes that to die an old death is "rare" and is the "extremest sort of dying", while a more famous one asks the question "What do I know"? and is titled Apology for Raymond Sebond. For 10 points, identify this set of compositions including Of the Education of Children, Of Drunkenness, Of Experience, popularized as a namesake literary form by Michel de Montaigne.;;Essa(y)(i)s
American Literature;;He travels with Partridge when he is banished due to his affair with Molly Seagrim, and he meets Mrs. Waters who is harassed by some officers in Upton. During his stay with the Miller family, this character helps fix Nightingale's marriage to Nancy, and has an affair with Lady Bellaston, but is imprisoned for injuring Mr. Fitzpatrick in a duel. He was tutored in his childhood by Square and Thwackum and is antagonistic to Master Bilfil, but Jenny Jones reveals that he is the son of Bridget Waters, which facilitates his marriage to Sophia Western. For 10 points, identify this nephew of Squire Allworthy, a titular foundling created by Henry Fielding.;;Tom Jones
Chemistry;;The Ruzicka cyclization reaction can be used to produce cyclic versions of these compounds, and the Fries rearrangement converts a phenyl ester to a hydroxyl aryl version of these compounds. Methyl varieties of these and a related type of compounds can be detected using the haloform test, and they exhibit tautomerism with enols. These compounds are reduced to tertiary alcohols, and they do not form a silver mirror in the presence of the Tollens reagent, unlike the similar aldehydes. For 10 points, identify this class of compounds which contains two alkyl groups bound to a carbonyl atom, and whose best known member is acetone.;;ketone(s)
Geography;;The Buduma and Kuri people live near this body of water, and the area between it and a river to its West was studied by the Anglo-French Boundary Commission in 1904. Once believed to be the origin of the Bahr el-Ghazal River, it was first described in a map by Dixon Denham and Clapperton became the first European to sight it. One body studying it has proposed diverting the Ubangi River into the Chari River which feeds it, and it also receives water from the Logome River. An important source of water for the Kanem-Bornu Empire, it has significantly shrunk due to "overgrazing" of the land around it in the recent past. For 10 points, identify this lake located at the corner of Nigeria, Niger, Cameroon, and a namesake country.;;(Lake) Chad
Music;;Each one of these pieces features a violone or violone grosso which essentially mirrors the cello, and the tuning of said instruments for these pieces is debated. One of these requires the use of an "Echo flute," and only the first one of them has four movements, the last of which contains a polonaise and is notable for featuring hunting horns. A slow harpsichord movement is inserted into the third one of these, and its final piece features a viola de gamba which was to be played by Prince Leopold. For 10 points, identify this collection of six instrumental pieces by J. S. Bach named after a German duchy.;;Brandenburg Concertos
European History;;Members of this entity were executed by a rival group in the Amboyna massacre, and it was the benefactor of the Commutation act of 1784. Thomas Roe helped established an early base for it in Surat, and it established Fort William off the Hugli [Hoo-glee] river bank. It was divested of power after the Meerut Rebellion, and it rose to power after Robert Clive's victory of Plassey, but it is better known for perpetrating the Opium Wars and having its products vandalized at the Boston Tea Party. For 10 points, identify this corporation that was established to oversee trade between London and its Oriental colonies.;;British East India (Trading) Company
Physics;;A formula named for this man and Bonnet (bahn-ay) states that the surface integral for a namesake curvature over a Riemannian manifold is equal to 2 pi times the Euler characteristic, while an algorithm named for him and Legendre is used to compute the digits of pi. Complex numbers whose real and imaginary parts are both integers are known as this man's integers. A certain error function closely related to the normal distribution is also named after him, and he proved that an n-gon is constructible when n is divisible by a Fermat prime, but he is better known for a law which states that the net electric flux is proportional to the charge enclosed by the surface. For 10 points, identify this German mathematician who is the namesake of a unit of flux density.;;(Carl) (Friedrich) Gauss
American Literature;;One of this author's posthumously published stories describes the rendezvous between two characters who had previously met in Assumption, and in one of this author's novels, David Hosmer falls in love with Theresa Lafirme, who rejects the former's marriage proposal. In one of her more famous short stories, Mrs. Sommers unexpectedly finds fifteen dollars, with which she buys the titular apparel for herself, while another story sees Louise Mallard's happiness at the news of her husband's death. For 10 points, name this author of such works as "The Storm," At Fault, "A Pair of Silk Stockings", "The Story of an Hour" who also wrote about Edna Pontellier's boredom with New Orleans life in The Awakening.;;(Kate) Chopin
World History;;In November 2007, this country was suspended from the Commonwealth of Nations, and much controversy has been generated over the proposed IPI pipeline passing through this country. The leaders of this country's two major political parties announced a power sharing deal after a meeting in Muree, and this country's Fahmida Mirza was elected the first female speaker of Parliament. This country also saw the firing of Chief Justice Iftikhar Choudhury last year, and recent elections in this country saw the PPP led by Asif Zardari win a plurality of seats in Parliament. For 10 points, identify this country which also saw the assassination of Benazir Bhutto in December 2007.;;Pakistan
American Literature;;Wallace Stevens described this figure "singing and chanting the things that are part of him" in the poem "Like Decorations in a Nigger Cemetery". In the poem "A Pact," Ezra Pound writes that this figure "broke the new wood [and]/Now is a time for carving". In a 1930 ode to him, another poet describes this earlier writer moaning "like a bird/with its sex pierced by a needle" and a group of young men chasing his "beard full of butterflies"; that is a Garcia-Lorca homage citing this writer's putative homosexuality.  This poet described a carpenter measuring out a plank in I Hear America Singing.  For 10 points, name this nineteenth-century poet whose "barbaric yawp" was sounded in works like "Crossing Brooklyn Ferry" and "Song of Myself".;;(Walt)(er) Whitman
European History;;This man brutally suppressed the January Uprising occurred in the western part of this man's kingdom. A later unpopular decision was the appointment of Dmitri Tolstoy as Minister of Education, leading to a conservative revision of the gymnasia curriculum with emphasis on Greek and Latin. He created the system of local councils, or zemstvos, which gave greater administrative power to districts and towns, and he relaxed the Russification policies of his father, allowing the Finnish parliament to meet again. The Okhrana was created during his reign to monitor radicals, and he was on his way to a meeting to discuss the drafting of a new constitution when members of The People's Will succeeded in killing him with a bomb. For 10 points, name this son of Nicholas I best known for emancipating Russia's serfs.;;Alexander (II|the Second){1}? (Romanov);;Alexander (Romanov)
Biology;;A 1998 study by Dr. Peter Eriksson used the marker bromodeoxyuridine to demonstrate that neurogenesis takes place in the dentate gyrus region of this structure. The granule cells of the dentate gyrus project to the large pyramidal cells of this structure's Ammon's Horn via the mossy fiber system. Damage to this region may result in anterograde amnesia, and it is typically one of the first areas damaged by Alzheimer's disease. A recent study found that this region has grown larger in cab drivers who have navigated London for decades, since this area is involved in spatial navigation and memory formation. For 10 points, name this part of the brain which derives its name from the Greek for "seahorse".;;hippocampus
Art;;A persistent rumor contemporary with this painting's first exhibition in 1782 had it that the artist ate raw pork for inspiration. On the stand at the lower left are glass and clay jars which some critics suggest could contain laudanum, while the central figures are framed by a burgundy drape in the background which matches the sheet on which the prone female lies. The animal in the upper left has pale eyes with no iris or pupils visible, while the figure atop the woman looks at the viewer pensively with his left hand cradling his chin. Loaded with sexual overtones and featuring a horse looking on while an incubus sits on a sleeping woman's chest, for 10 points, name this work by Henry Fuseli depicting a bad dream.;;(The) Nightmare
United States History;;In 1992, Robert Abrams defeated this politician in the New York Democratic Senate primary for the seat that eventually stayed with incumbent Al D'Amato. Previously serving three terms in the House as the representative of New York's Ninth district, after a televised debate with this politician, George H.W. Bush was caught by an open microphone saying he "kicked a little ass". A revelation that this politician's real-estate broker spouse had not submitted tax returns caused controversy to the presidential ticket that included this Democrat. FTP, name this politician, who recently quit as an advisor to the Clinton campaign over comments that Obama got preferential treatment because of his race, best known for being Walter Mondale's running mate in the 1984 presidential election.;;(Geraldine) Ferraro
British Literature;;"Zeinab and Kathema" and "The Retrospect" are among the short poems of this author among the miscellany now called The Esdaile Notebook. His verse play satirizing George IV's attempts to bar his wife Caroline from her privilege to the throne, Oedipus Tyrannus, or Swellfoot the Tyrant, was suppressed, as was an 1811 pamphlet which got him and Thomas Hogg expelled from Oxford, The Necessity of Atheism. Better known is his elegy which concludes that his friend's soul "like a star,/Beacons from the abode where the Eternal are," and his avian ode that begins, "Hail to thee, Blithe Spirit!" Author of "Adonais" and "To a Skylark" was, for 10 points, what Romantic who also wrote "Ode to the West Wind"?;;(Percy) (Bysshe) Shelley
Chemistry;;Rhodium on carbon can be used as a catalyst in the hydrogenation of benzene to reduce benzene into this molecule. Substituent atoms on this molecule are given the designation "axial" or "equatorial" based on their orientation to this molecule's planar structure. Partial twisting relieves the steric hindrance between its flagpole hydrogen atoms, and it was Hermann Sachse who first suggested the reason for the lack of angle strain proposed by Adolf von Baeyer, a theory which was later expanded on by Ernst Mohr, who suggested that it has a chair conformation which relieves that strain. For 10 points, name this cycloalkane which contains six carbons.;;cyclohexane
Mythology;;Krishna was given the gem Syamantaka by the Hindu king of these animals, Jambavantha. Agrius and Oreus were half-human and half this creature before they were turned into birds, and another Greek myth has it that Atalanta was raised by one after being abandoned in the forest. Korean legend states that Tangun, founder of the nation, was born from a woman who had previously been one of these animals.  The daughter of Lycaon was turned into one of these animals after Zeus raped her and impregnated her with Arcas, who later almost killed her while hunting. For 10 points, what is this animal into which the nymph Callisto was changed, and is represented in the stars by Ursa Major.;;bear(s)
World History;;Modern knowledge of this group is partly derived from the Story of Wenamun which describes one example, the Tjeker. An inscription on a column at Karnak shows Ramses III standing on corpses of the Weshesh and Denyen, and some historians believe that Ramses II chose to come to terms quickly with the Hittites after Kadesh because of impending danger posed by this other group. Merneptah's sending of grain to some neighbors leads to speculation that famine might have led to their series of invasions, and the best known of the group, the Peleset, is known to have settled in the Levant and become the Philistines. For 10 points, name these naval immigrant-invaders of Egypt in the twelfth and eleventh centuries BCE?;;sea people(s)
Music;;The tenor aria "Dalla Sua Pace" and the soprano aria "Mi Tradi Quell'alma Ingrate" were both written into this opera after its first four performances, all of which were conducted by the composer himself. Only the protagonist of this opera can be said to live in the aesthetic sphere of existence, as he epitomizes "daemonic sensuousness," according to Kierkegaard's Either/Or. A prime example of dramma giocoso, which actually names its subtitle, the title character's servant gets two prime songs, "Notte et Giorno Faticar" describing his tireless work to protect his master and the famous "Catalogue" aria in which his lovers are listed. Ending with the title lover dragged into hell by the statue of the Commendatore, for 10 points, name this opera by Mozart.;;Don Giovanni
Biology;;Cryptasterina hystera is a rare example of a viviparous organism in this phylum. The skeletal plates of creatures in this phylum are made up of fine networks of calcium carbonate known as stereom. One member of this phylum, the Xyloplax [ZY-lo-plax], may represent a sixth class, but it may just be an unusual member of the Asteroidea class. Nearly all of its members are benthic, including sea lilies and sea cucumbers. They have a water vascular system, and many members move via tube feet. For 10 points, name this phylum of "spiny-skinned" creatures, including sand dollars, sea urchins, and starfish.;;echinoderm(ata)
Philosophy;;One mode of the title entity of this work is characterized as "de trop," or "superfluous for all eternity". The other mode is derived from the former through the process of neantisation, or nihilation, that causes it to lie "coiled in the heart of [the first title term]—like a worm". That first mode is the en-soi (ahn-swah), while the latter is pour-soi (poo-swah), the latter of which roughly corresponds to the existence of human consciousness. This work includes the famous formulation that man is "condemned to be free," and its second chapter examines a type of self-deception the author terms mauvais foi (mow-vay fwah), or bad faith. For 10 points, name this 1943 "Phenomenological Essay on Ontolog" by Jean-Paul Sartre.;;Being and Nothingness
Psychology;;Jacques Derrida argues that this resists itself in an essay examining "The History of Madness in the Age of [this method]" and it also finishes the title of Derrida's collection, Resistances of [it]. Its founder called this process the third and final blow to humanity's inflated view of its uniqueness, following the Copernican revolution and Darwin's evolutionary theory. Using this practice on children was documented by Melanie Klein. First practiced on the patient called Anna O, for 10 points, name this method of "depth psychology" during which a patient talks about his problems in order to understand himself better, a practice developed by Sigmund Freud.;;psychoanalysis
British History;;The narrator of one of his poems "thought it was the Judgment-day" when the title event "Shook all our coffins as we lay," and the speaker of another poem states that "every spirit upon earth Seemed fervourless as I". In addition to "Channel Firing" and "The Darkling Thrush," he wrote the novels Under the Greenwood Tree and The Woodlanders. Diggory and Thomasin get together after the death of Eustacia Vye and Wildeve, and Clym Yeobright becomes a preacher in a better known work, while the title character of another work commits suicide after his failed marriages to Arabella Donn and Sue Bridehead. For 10 points, identify this creator of the fictional Wessex County, who wrote The Return of the Native and Jude the Obscure.;;(Thomas) Hardy
United States History;;General John E. Wool resigned instead of leading this campaign, though he participated in similar work in North Carolina. This campaign proceeded along the Bell and Benge routes, as well as the Northern, while the most common water route began at Ross's Landing in Chattanooga. The complicity of Elias Boudinot and John Ridge in the agreement that led to this event got them killed by fellow tribesman long after John Ross appealed to Van Buren to allow tribal elders to lead smaller parties, greatly lessening the death toll. Taking place in 1838 and 39, for 10 points, name this forced removal of the Cherokee from Georgia to Oklahoma.;;Trail of Tears
Physics;;This process can be considered a form of semimartingale, especially in its applications to securities investment and gambling probability predictions. The mean-square displacement of a particle exhibiting this is shown by the equation r squared= 6k times T times Bt, where k is the Boltzmann constant, T is temperature, and B is the mobility of the particle. Having a fractal dimension of 2, it is a Wiener process and can also be approximated using the Langevin (lan-zhuh-van) equation, and Jean Perrin used it to determine Avogadro's constant. First observed by its namesake in pollen grains suspended in water, For 10 points, name this type of random movement, an analysis of which which was characterized in a 1905 paper by Albert Einstein.;;Brownian Motion
British Literature;;In Act IV of this work, the title character disguises himself as a French lute player and uses a flower to poison his own slave, along with the prostitute Bellamira and her pimp Pilia-Borza. Its title character feigns his own death at the same time, prompting the governor of the title locale, Farneze, to order the body thrown over the city walls "as prey for vultures," which works into the title character's schemes, as it gives him access to Calymath, whom he shows a passage allowing Turkish troops to take the city. However, his later plan to kill Calymath backfires as he himself plummets into a boiling cauldron and his daughter Abigail converts to the Christianity he hates. For 10 points, name this play about a Semite named Barabas, by Christopher Marlowe.;;(The) Jew of Malta
European Literature;;Sexual innuendo abounds in a poem by this writer in which he describes a perfume that the love gods have given him which will make Fabullus want to turn into "one big nose". That poem is one of his "Juventius" cycle, addressing a young male lover, while another cycle is the "Mentula," Latin slang meaning "dick," a term used to refer to Mamurra, an equestrian officer of Julius Caesar. These works survive due to the 1300 finding of the Codex Veronensis, which was being used plug up of a wine cask. He wrote "Ave atque vale" upon the death of his brother, and his Carmina are poems written to a woman described by Cicero as the Medea of the Palatine, the sister of Cloduis Pulcher. For 10 points, name this Roman poet who addressed Clodia as his erotic love-interest Lesbia.;;(Gaius) (Valerius) Catullus
Sociology;;What some considered abuses of this legal concept were seemingly halted by the decision in Wayne v. Hathcock in 2004, but a case just two years later allowed the substitution of the word "purpose" for "use" in one of its central requirements. The result of that ruling was greater likelihood that the Pfizer Corporation could build a research facility in Connecticut. That case, Kelo v. New London, involved a partial taking. In a complete taking, owners can be compensated for "loss of goodwill", but this is rarely the case with easements. For 10 points, name this legal principle that allows governments to assume ownership of private property for public use provided that the owner is justly compensated.;;eminent domain
Religion;;At the request of Barbara Heck, Philip Embury delivered the first American sermon of this denomination in America in 1766. In 1784 Richard Whatcoat and Thomas Vesey were installed as Elders of this denomination for America and sent there from Ireland, along with the author of "A Plan of the Society for the Establishment of Missions Among the Heathen," Thomas Coke, as Superintendent. Those three men then ordained Coke's fellow Superintendent, Francis Asbury. Beginning as a movement within the Church of England and retaining 25 of its 39 Articles, George Whitefield helped create, for 10 points, what church founded by Charles and John Wesley?;;Methodism
World Literature;;This author wrote about the false prophet Antonio Conselheiro (cone-sell-yeh-roe), who creates a self-aggrandizing cult in one novel, and in another work Bonifacia gives up the being a nun to become a prostitute at the title location.  In addition to The War of the End of the World and The Green House, he wrote about a group of cadets at the Leoncio Prado military School in Lima in his novel The Time of the Hero, and in his most famous work Pedro Camacho works on radio broadcasts with Mario Varguitas.  For 10 points, name this Peruvian novelist who wrote Aunt Julia and the Scriptwriter.;;(Mario) Vargas Llosa
Geography;;Among this river's tributaries are the Klickitat, Cowlitz (KOE-litz), Pend Oreille (pawn-doe-ray) and Okanogan (oak-uh-noggin), and it passes through the cities of Invermere and Golden in one country it flows through. Among the notable dams along this river include the Wanapum, Priest Rapids, and the Bonneville, and the Channeled Scablands are a series of coulees along this river, the most notable of which gives its name to this river's most notable dam. Flowing through Wenatchee, Kennewick, and Pasco, one of its most treacherous sections for gamers is The Dalles (dallz). The site of Grand Coulee Dam, and forming a large part of the Oregon-Washington border, FTP, name this river.;;Columbia (River)
Biology;;Sclerocytes and Spongocytes secrete substances that make up the central matrix of these creatures, and the outer layer of these creatures is made from pinacocytes.  These creatures are defended by silicate projections called spicules, and the central excretory structure is the osculum.  Members of this phylum appear in asconoid, synconoid, and leuconoid body types, and their digestive systems are composed of rings of microvilli with interspersed collar cells.  Made of a central matrix called the mesohyl, these creatures belong to the classification parazoa because they are thought to contain no tissues.  For 10 points, name these simple organisms, also known as sponges.;;porifera
Art;;King Midas is shown with donkey ears in this artist's painting Calumny, and he painted the panel entitled Fortitude in a seven part series illustrating the seven great virtues.  His early biblical scenes include The Return of Judith to Bethulia and The Discovery of the Body of Holofernes, and his works The Trials of Moses, The Trials of Jesus, and The Punishment of the Rebels are in the Sistine Chapel. In one of his more famous painting, a partially naked male god is resting, but is provoked by some satyrs as the other female deity watches the scene, and he inserted Chloris, Flora, and Zephyrus in one of his most famous works.  For 10 points, name this Florentine artist best known for Mars and Venus, Primavera and The Birth of Venus.;;(Sandro) Botticelli
American Literature;;The title character leaves Solomon to live with Cash McCord in this author's story "Livie". In one story Leota complains to Mrs. Fletcher in her beauty salon that Mrs. Pike got a reward for discovering a rapist hiding as an exhibit in a freak show, and in another story Phoenix Jackson takes a strenuous journey to get medicine for her grandson. In addition to writing "The Petrified Man," in this author's most famous story one character claims her sister wants her grandfather to shave his beard after she moves home with her two-year-old daughter, Shirley-T. For 10 points, name this author of "The Worn Path," who wrote about Stella-Rondo in "Why I Live at the P. O".;;(Eudora) Welty
United States History;;This man was present, but not killed, during the explosion on the USS Princeton that killed Abel P. Upshur, and after his retirement he published an autobiography entitled Thirty Years View.  Charles Lucas dueled this man on Bloody Island after accusing him of lying, and he was succeeded in his most famous post by Henry S. Geyer.  He authored a series of Homestead Acts, and he gained his nickname after introducing a version of the Specie Circular into the Senate.  He was almost shot by Henry Foote during a series of debates on the Compromise of 1850, and he supported his son-in-law John C. Fremont's expeditions to California.  Also notable for attacking Andrew Jackson in a Nashville Hotel in 1813, for 10 points, name this nineteenth-century Missouri Senator nicknamed "Old Bullion".;;(Thomas) (Hart) Benton
Chemistry;;It can be promoted with the use of potassium hydroxide, and Gerhard Ertl provided a detailed description of its mechanism. One of the raw materials for it is uses methane to produce a mixture called "synthesis gas" although the methane is recovered at the end, while the other reactant is obtained from the atmosphere. An iron oxide catalyst allows it to be used at lower temperatures, and the removal of the end product allows the reaction to run continually due to Le Chatelier's principle. For 10 points, identify this process used to produce ammonia from hydrogen and nitrogen.;;Haber(-)(Bosch) (process)
European Literature;;In this novel Garcia introduces one character to the smugglers Gonzales and Raoul. One character unsuccessfully attempts to hang himself at the beginning of the novel and the novel ends when that character goes on a homicidal rampage shooting people in the street. That character, Cottard, lives in the same building as another character who has spent years working on a novel yet he has only written one sentence—the writer Joseph Grand. Father Paneloux gives a sermon arguing that the death of the innocent child Jacques Othon is a test, and Raymond Rambert attempts to escape Oran. For 10 points, name this novel in which Dr. Rieux attempts to fight the titular epidemic, written by Albert Camus.;;(The) Plague
European History;;One of this man's acts was to reverse a 1953 law that allowed abortion, and he also demolished the old legislature to replace it with the People's House as part of his "systematization" program. He established a list of banned books after reading books on Kim Il Sung's Juche idea; this was part of the fallout from a speech given in front of the executive committee that advocated a quasi-Maoist version of socialist realism, commonly called the July Theses.  He originally came to power after the death of Gheorgiu-Dej, and is also notable for staying out of the 1968 invasion of Czechoslovakia.  Nicknamed "Genius of the Carpathians", he was killed alongside his wife Elena on December 25, 1989 after a show trial.  For 10 points, name this final communist dictator of Romania.;;(Nicolae) Ceausescu
Economics;;This dude founded the Mount Pelerin Society with Albert Hunold, and he criticized social scientists for what he dubbed "scientism," misusing natural scientific principles, in his Abuse of Reason.  He got into a review war with John Maynard Keynes after he reviewed that man's A Treatise on Money; Keynes then bashed this man's Prices and Production.  He advocated a cyclic theory of trade, and penned the influential Why I am Not a Conservative, which is generally appended to his The Constitution of Liberty.  He also argued that Nazi Germany and the USSR were examples of countries whose socialism led to tyranny.  For 10 points, name this economist who wrote The Road to Serfdom.;;(Friedrich) (August) (von) Hayek
World History;;The general Abu ‘Awn commanded an army for this dynasty which was victorious at the Battle of the Great Zaab. Al-Mahdi, a leader of this dynasty was responsible for the massacre at Fakhkh, and the most notable ruler of this dynasty began a period dominated by the Barmecides. The Buyids took their capital and Al-Mu'tasim employed the use of Turkish mercenaries. The last remaining member of the previous dynasty, Abdur-Rahman III, took power in Andalus, and early leaders of this dynasty included Abu Muslim, al-Ma'mun, and al-Mansur. Noted for the expansion of the "Round City" of Baghdad under such caliphs as Harun ar-Rashid, for 10 points, name this dynasty which succeeded the Umayyads.;;Abbasid(s)
Biology;;This organ is affected by CORD and Nyctalopia, while injury to it results in the de-differentiation of Muller cells.  The presence of white blood cells in the capillaries of this organ leads to Sheerer's phenomenon, and neutrophils are localized to its outer and inner plexiform layers.  Amacrine cells populate its inner nuclear layer, while bipolar cells are responsible for the center-surround inhibition that characterizes one group of cells here.  The choroid coat separates it from the sclera, while a small depression in its center is known as the fovea.  The site of cone and rod cells, for 10 points, name this organ enervated by the optic nerve and located in the back of the eye.;;retina
British Literature;;This poet wrote "The firefly wakens; waken thou with me" in his poem "Now Sleeps the Crimson Petal". The title objects of one poem are described as "Fresh as the first beam glittering on a sail / That brings our friends up from the underworld," and another poem starts with the line "the wood decays, and woods decay and fall". In addition to "Tears, Idle Tears" and "Tithonus," the title character of one poem comments "much have I seen ands known—cities of men" and later declares he needs "to strive, to seek to, and not to yield". and another poem includes the assertion "Theirs not to reason why / Theirs but to do and die". For 10 points, name this Victorian poet who wrote "Ulysses" and "The Charge of the Light Brigade".;;(Alfred) (Lord) Tennyson
Chemistry;;Klingelhoffer miniaturized the apparatus used in this technique in the MINOS apparatus, and one effect measured in this experiment is the splitting of spin states by a quadropole moment, which is used to characterize spin states.  Other quantities calculated include the magnetic splitting and the isomer shift, which can be used to measure covalency and electronegativity.  The apparatus is typically kept cold by liquid nitrogen, and is typically calibrated using the electron capture of Cobalt-57 to Iron-57, which gives a line at 14.4 kev.  The sample and source are moved relative to each other by a linear track, and the absorption of the sample is measured at various velocities.  For 10 points, name this form of spectroscopy that relies on the recoil-free emission or absorption of gamma rays by a sample, based on an effect named for a German.;;Mossbauer (spectroscopy)
Music;;This composer's operas were unpopular, with "The Uncle from Boston" and "the Two Pedagogues" mostly ignored. Wagner uses excerpts of one of this composer's works in Parsifal, repeating a passage from the "Dresden Hymn" from the original composer's Fifth Symphony, a work commemorating the 300th anniversary of the Augsburg Confession. This composer of the Reformation Symphony and Songs Without Words composed a third symphony which contains the Hebrides Overture. For 10 points, identify this composer of the Italian and Scottish Symphonies.;;(Felix) Mendelssohn(-)(Bartholdy)
Mythology;;This deity wields a knife known as Sultr, and sleeps in a bed are known as the Blikjandabol, or Gleaming Disaster. One of her subordinates guards a bridge and is named Modgud, while her other servants include Ganglot and Ganglati.  In one story this deity acquired the king Dyggvi as a spouse.  Fallandaforad is a pitfall in front of her hall Eljundnir, while her estate includes a creature bound at Gnipa's cave and the river Gjoll.  One notable story about this deity involves her telling Hermod that she will release one of her denizens if every creature on earth mourns for him, and this daughter of Angerboda and Loki is half-old and half-young.  The owner of Garm, for 10 points, name this Norse goddess who rules over the underworld.;;Hel(a)
Philosophy;;This man's autobiographies include one in the form of a letter to a doctor explaining his penchant for academia entitled A Kind of History of My Life.  His ideas were attacked in Essays on the Intellectual Powers of Man by Thomas Reid.  His Four Dissertations followed up on an earlier work.  Sections of one of this man's works include "Of the Reason of Animals" and "Of Miracles," and this author of Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion awoke Kant from his dogmatic slumber.  For 10 points, name this philosopher of An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding.;;(David) Hume
American Literature;;One character in this novel fathers the illegitimate child Adele Varens with an opera singer and that charatcter pretends to be engaged to Blanche Ingram, and Bessie Leaven nurses the title character back to health after taking a beating from Mrs. Reed at Gateshead House. The title character befriends Helen Burns and uncovers the embezzlement of Mr. Brocklehurst while at school. St. John Rivers' ends up being the title character's cousin and Bertha Mason burns down Thornfield Manor. For 10 points, name this novel in which the title character ultimately marries Mr. Rochester, written by Charlotte Bronte.;;(Jane) Eyre
Art;;On the upper left of this painting a silver crucifix can be seen in front a green curtain, and scholar Mary Hervey asserts that the floor of this painting is based on the pavement of Westminster Abbey. The inscription "aetatis svae 25" appears on the binding of a book one figure is leaning on, and a Lutheran hymn book a lute, and two globes are also seen. An anamorphic skull appears in the bottom of portrait of the Georges de Selve and Jean de Dinteville. For 10 points, name this Hans Holbein the Younger portrait of two politicians.;;(The) (French) Ambassadors
World History;;The Greek Constantine Phaulkon served as chief advisor to Narai, one ruler of a state in this country. The Russian ship Aurora was present in 1912 for a coronation during the rule of this country's sixth member of a still reigning dynasty. In 1913 one ruler of this country passed a law banning the chewing of betel, and the Phibun dictatorship drew upon the concept of wiratham to expand its territory in the twentieth century. In 1569, the Taungu wrought havoc upon a kingdom in this country, and in 1431 that kingdom sacked the Khmer capital of Angkor. Home to the Ayutthaya kingdom and the current Chakri dynasty, for 10 points, name this country most famously ruled by the sexually hyperactive Mongkut, depicted in The King and I.;;Thailand
American Literature;;This man claimed that "It is dreams that have destroyed us" but eventually concludes that "dreams are not a bad thing" in his "Libertad! Igualdad! Fraternidad!", and he described the seasons changing "by the road to the contagious hospital" in the titular poem of his collection Spring and All. 1955's Journey to Love contained a long poem written to his wife Flossie, Asphodel, That Greeny Flower. He noted that "the plums that were in the icebox" were "delicious/so sweet/and so cold" in "This is Just to Say" and also wrote the five-book epic Paterson. For 10 points, "so much depends upon" you telling me which physician and poet wrote "The Red Wheelbarrow".;;(William) (Carlos) Williams
Geography;;The city of Gwadar in this country was an exclave of Oman until 1958 and the language isolate of Burushaski is spoken in the northern valleys of Yasin, Nagar, and Hunza. Other former princely states here include Swat, and the ruins of Taxila were once an important trading center. Modern day cities include Chitral and Gilgit, bases for a current search, and Quetta (kwe-tuh) and Multan. The Sahiwal district recently refused to allow an amusement park to be built on the ruins of Harappa. With former capitals including Rawalpindi and Karachi, FTP, name this South Asian country led by Pervez Musharraf.;;Pakistan
Chemistry;;The Jahn-Teller Theorem states that if a molecule this kind of state, it will be unstable, and the independent particle model perturbation theory predicts an exchange version of this. Lambda-doubling destroys this in nonidentical diatomic molecules, and ordinary perturbation theory fails in quantum configurations that exhibit this. States with the same principle and azimuthal quantum numbers, but different magnetic quantum numbers no longer exhibit this under the Zeeman effect. For 10 points, name this situation, in which there is more than one level associated with a given energy.;;degeneracy
Music;;The minuet from Bizet's The Fair Maid of Perth features solos by a harp, a flute, and one of these, while Vaughan Williams' Symphony No. 6 notably features one of these among the woodwinds. Other solos for them can be found in the "Old Castle" section of Mussorgsky's Pictures at an Exhibition and Percy Grainger's Lincolnshire Posy. An orchestration of Gershwin's Rhapsody in Blue includes five different varieties of this instrument. Ravel's Bolero uses their sopranino variety, while other varieties include the B-flat tenor and the E-flat baritone and alto. FTP, name this family of transposing instruments, famously played by Charlie Parker and John Coltrane.;;saxophone(s)
European Literature;;Klapzuba's Eleven, about an invincible soccer team, was written by Eduard Bass, an author from this country. Another author from this country created a work in which Captain von Toch discovers its titular intelligent reptiles, as well as one which popularized a word invented by that author's brother Josef which ends with Primus and Helena developing feelings. Teresa, Sabina, and Franz interact with the Communist-criticizing surgeon Tomas in another work from this country. War With the Newts, R.U.R., and The Unbearable Lightness of Being are all works from, for 10 points, which country, home to Karel Capek [CHA-pek], Milan Kundera, and former president Vaclav Havel?;;(The) Czech (Republic)
United States History;;This event led to a sermon given by John Allen at the Second Baptist Church in Boston that became popular pamphlet material.  A man named John Brown was accused of being partly responsible for this action in an 1839 memoir by the last survivor of this incident, Ephraim Bowen.  This was sparked when incensed townsfolk gathered at Sabin's tavern upon the arrival of Captain Lindsey and the Hannah and Namquid Point.  A restaurant owner named Joseph Bucklin shot Captain Dudingston during this event, after which Abraham Whipple led a bunch of arsonists towards a schooner.  For 10 points, name this event in which some Rhode Islanders burned a vessel sent to enforce the Stamp Act.;;Gaspee (Affair)
Physics;;The constant kappa is sometimes known as this man's namesake constant, and that constant multiplied by the stress-energy tensor equals the Ricci tensor minus one-half the scalar curvature times the metric tensor, according to this man's namesake field equations.  This man's eponymous unit is equal to a mole of photons, and his namesake effect is also known as gravitational redshift.  His namesake ring is also called a Chwolson Ring and is observed around celestial bodies as a result of gravitational lensing.  For 10 points, name this physicist who lends his name to a state of matter along with Satyendra Nath Bose.;;(Albert) Einstein
European History;;Under this ruler's reign, the first printers in his country fled from his capital to Lithuania. This conqueror of Dorpat and Astrakhan gave up Narva in a treaty at Plussa with Sweden, and later  renounced his claims on Livonia at the treaty of Jam Zaploski.  He called the first Zemsky Sobor, and he had his private army of Oprichniks harass the boyars.  His son Fyodor was succeeded by Boris Godunov, and he ordered the construction of St. Basil's Cathedral.  For 10 points, name this first Russian to take the title of Tsar, whose brutal treatment of Novgorod led to his nickname.;;Ivan the Terrible
Art;;. One of this man's earliest works features a woman balancing a book on her head observing its titular action. Another early work features four circles in its corners with scenes representing Death, Judgement, Hell, and Glory, as well as a large circle divided into seven sections representing the titular transgressions. In addition to The Extraction of the Stone of Madness and The Seven Deadly Sins, he depicted the martyring of one of the patron saints of Corsica in The Crucifixion of Saint Julia. Two of his most famous works are triptychs depicting, from left to right, paradise, the Earth, and hell. FTP, name this Dutch artist of Haywain and The Garden of Earthly Delights.;;(Hieronymus) Bosch
Mythology;;One analogue of this character wins a wrestling match with an earthquake god to retain the right to cook. Another story has him gaining an epithet when his mother throws him into the water wrapped in her hair; he later follows that mother to the underworld as a wood pigeon. He dealt with people's complaints about the length of the day by gathering his brothers, snaring the Sun, and beating it with a jawbone until it slowed down. That jawbone was also used as a hook by this character to pull up the earth's land, including the islands of New Zealand. For 10 points, name this Polynesian and Maori trickster god.;;Maui
Biology;;The LATE type of this process is a special case of the Asymmetric version, and the product thus produced can be easily verified through SNP screening. The RACE process is an anchored version of this process, which relies on polyadenylated tails and employs a reverse transcriptase. An enzyme from Pyrococcus furiosus allows this process to be performed with high accuracy, while enzyme from Thermus aquaticus rectified the problem of denaturation at high temperatures. It involves separation of the DNA strands, annealing of primers, and the extension of the complementary strand. Invented by Kary Mullis, for 10 points, identify this procedure, which amplifies a sample of DNA.;;P(olymerase) C(hain) R(eaction)
European History;;This event arose out of the Richard Bissell-authored policy paper codenamed JMARC, and its early formulation was intended to bolster the War Against the Bandits.  Its shortcomings were investigated by General Maxwell Taylor, who cited Operation Puma's premature ending as a part of this failure.  Dubbed Operation Zapata, this plan was carried out by Brigade 2506, led by Grayston Lynch and comprised of 1500 CIA-trained exiles.  For 10 points, name this event whose failure led Allen Dulles to resign, a botched invasion of Cuba in 1961.;;Bay of Pigs (Invasion)
European Literature;;This man added such characters as a lemonade seller and a butterfly catcher to his adaptation of a Shakespeare play, Macbett. One play saw one of this man's recurring characters fight his impending death with the help of Queen Marie, while another work sees that character briefly fall in love with the Architect's secretary Dany in the Radiant City. In addition to Exit the King and The Killer, this man wrote a play that sees an old couple's tower room fill with invisible guests, The Chairs. Several of his plays feature Berenger, including one in which everyone he knows turn into the title creature. For 10 points, name this Romanian playwright of Rhinoceros.;;(Eugene) Ionesco
Chemistry;;A model developed by Kitaigorodskii that is used to predict the packing behavior of crystals is know by this term. Applying the more well known statement by this name to the Dirac-Fock has helped calculate the ionization potential of superheavy elements with 7p orbitals, and it is analogous to Maedlung's rule. Introduced by Bohr when only two quantum numbers were hypothesized, the shifting of a 4s electron to a 3d electron in copper is a notable violation of this rule. For 10 points, identify this principle which states that electrons fill in lower orbitals before they can use the higher orbitals, German for "building up" or "construction".;;Aufbau (Principle)
Linguistics;;Articles by Dwight Macdonald were the inspiration for this man's The Responsibility of Intellectuals. Papers including The Minimalist Program and Three Factors in Language Design showcase his development of "government and binding" theory, while he showed the inadequacy of the probabilistic grammar models with various permutations of the words "colorless green ideas sleep furiously". A student of Zelig Harris, this man developed his ideas of transformational generative grammars in 1957's Syntactic Structures.  For 10 points, identify this MIT linguist.;;(Avram) (Noam) Chomsky
World History;;This man's half-brother led a revolt eventually put down by a bishop named Pedro de la Gasca, but managed to kill viceroy Blanco Nunez at the Battle of Anaquito.  He joined up with a priest named Hernando de Luque and Diego de Almagro to search for gold near Darien.  He led a band dubbed the "Famous 13" and gained over twenty tons of precious metals after setting up the "Ransom Room".  He ambushed a leader at Cajamarca before strangling him and installing new head of state Manco Capac.  For 10 points, name this man who captured Atahualpa and conquered the Incan empire.;;(Francisco) Pizarro
European Literature;;In an early episode in this work, Moses is tricked into buying a gross of copper-rimmed green spectacles by the same man who later talks the main character into selling Blackberry, Ephraim Jenkinson. Chapter 8 sees one character recite a ballad after discussing Acis and Galatea with Sophia, who he later marries. That character, Mr. Burchell, is eventually revealed to be the father of the dastardly Squire Thornhill, who betrays the narrator's daughter Olivia and nearly prevents the marriage of George to Arabella Wilmot. Dr. Primrose is the long-suffering titular churchman of, for 10 points, which work, the only novel of Oliver Goldsmith?;;(The) Vicar of Wakefield
Mythology;;One of them holds a mace that represents knowledge; that one also bore a mountain on his back on which the gods rode. One of them defeated the demon Goldeneye to recover the Earth from the bottom of the cosmic ocean, while another avoided a boon given to the father of a devotee by jumping out of a pillar. The axe-wielding one will train the one that will appear riding a winged horse to end the Kali Yuga, and they include a fish, a tortoise, and a boar. For 10 points, give the name for this group of figures including Matsya, Kurma, Varaha, Parashurama, Krishna, and Buddha, the earthly representations of a certain Hindu preserver god.;;avatars (of Vishnu)
World Literature;;The speaker of this work notes that the truly fair shun politics, and that God doesn't permit worse men to harm better ones.  This work posits that its speaker isn't a skillful orator, unless skill and truth are the same thing.  The speaker claims to have a good character based on his refusal to bring in Leon for execution, and for serving in the military during the battles of Potidaea and Amphipolis. This work pins heretical astronomical beliefs on Anaxagorus during its speaker confrontation and interrogation of his accuser Meletus.  For 10 points, name this work in which Socrates fails to defend himself against charges of atheism and corrupting the youth of Athens.;;(The) Apology
Art;;Polygnotus of Thasos and Hegias are among those thought to be this man's teacher. He supposedly depicted one of his students and eromenoi near the throne in one of his most famous work, a work funded by Delian League money. Another student, Agoracritos, was likely responsible for the statue of Nemesis at Rhamnus; that student also assisted this man on many of the Elgin Marbles. For 10 points, identify this ancient Greek sculptor, the creator of the Athena Parthenos and the Olympian Zeus.;;Phidias
British Literature;;A minor character in this work, Eugenius, sees a more important character die, and that dying character's last words quote Sancho Panza, stating that should he recover, "Mitres be suffered to rain down from heaven thick as hail". In another episode of this novel, Le Fever falls ill during his a trip to Flanders, and is visited by the future suitor of Mrs. Bridget, Corporal Trim. This romance nearly parallels that of the Widow Wadman and the title character's uncle, but for a wound the latter suffers in the Battle of Namur, and the title character constantly refers to him as "My Uncle Toby". For 10 points, name this novel about the Life and Opinions of the title Gentleman, a work by Lawrence Sterne.;;Tristam Shandy
World History;;This man erected several pillars throughout his kingdom, and one of those located in Sarnath contained a namesake "Lion Capital". He ordered the construction of several stupas, the most notable of which is found in Sanchi. This man's "wheel" can also be seen on the flag of a modern day nation, and he also sent his son Mahinda as an envoy to Sri Lanka. He spread his message of the righteous way through several rock edicts. For 10 points, identify this grandson of Chandragupta, a "Great" Mauryan emperor, whose violence in his campaign of Kalinga prompted him to convert to Buddhism.;;Asoka (the Great)
Economics;;This original translator of Ferdinand Lasalle's Science and the Workingman wrote an early work on the "Barbarian Status of Women".  He railed against businessmen controlling higher educational institutions, and he theorized that the title class might revolt in a work that begins by defining sabotage, in The Higher Learning in America and The Engineers and the Price System, respectively.  Another of his works contains sections on "Devout Observances" and "The Belief in Luck". For 10 points, name this economist who posited "conspicuous consumption" in The Theory of the Leisure Class.;;(Thorstein) (Bunde) Veblen
Art;;A man in red pants reclines next to a three-columned ruin with a castle in the distance in this man's Sunrise in Syria, while another painting by this man depicts a mangled, broken tree on a cliff.  His Salzburg Castle contains no depictions of people, and a small wrecked ship with a red flag can be seen in another of his works.  In addition to Storm in the Mountains and Icebergs, this man painted a small rural house next to a volcano in Cotopaxi.  He depicted his snow-covered home in Winter Scene, Olana, while he is more famous for his depiction of waterfalls.  A student of Thomas Cole, FTP, name this artist of Niagra and Heart of the Andes, a notable member of the Hudson River School.;;(Frederick) (Edwin) Church
Astronomy;;This constellation gives its name to a large star stream interacting with the Milky Way galaxy, and its 70-star contains one of the first extrasolar planets observed.  This constellation contains the heart of the Local Supercluster, and this constellation's W star gives its name to a class of Population II pulsating variables also known as Type II Cepheus.  Another object in this constellation is Messier 104, known as the Sombrero Galaxy, which is not a part of the cluster found in this constellation. For ten points, name this constellation with alpha star Spica.;;Virgo
American Literature;;This playwright wrote a play detailing the selling of Victor and Walter Franz's dead parents' furniture to Gregory Solomon called The Price. This author's autobiography Timebends details his three marriages, the last of which is to Inge Morath, but he's more famous for a play about an event where Prince Von Berg gives up his white card to free Leduc from a Nazi interrogation camp, the title Incident at Vichy. He is more famous still for a play in which Steve Deever takes the blame for his partner's faulty cylinder heads, which leads to 21 pilots' deaths caused by Joe Keller, All My Sons. For 10 points, name this American playwright, best known for writing about John Proctor and Willy Loman in, respectively, The Crucible and Death of a Salesman.;;(Arthur) Miller
Anthropology;;A common belief of members of this group holds that life is "joyous" though it has a "maggoty" center.  One sect of these people believe that a vampire named Yara-Ma-Yha-Who jumped out of a fig tree and gobbled up people, spitting them out slightly shorter but no worse for wear.  A "Rainbow Serpent" that inhabits water holes is one creator god of this people, and is sometimes associated with the female snake Einaga.  Their tradition holds that the preceding age is known as the Alcheringa.  This group believes in fairies called Mimi from Arnhem land, and their tradition holds that the world was created during the Dreamtime.  For 10 points, name this group that holds Uluru, or Ayers Rock, to be sacred.;;Aborigines
Chemistry;;The Rayleigh-Ritz variational method relies on an upper bound calculation for the energy associated with this, and the Ritz correction for quantum defects of alkali metals is maximized in this configuration. Due to symmetry, it is the only state not affected by the Stark Effect in Hydrogen. For a quantum harmonic oscillator, the energy associated with this is one half Planck's Constant times the frequency, and this is the most populated state in a Bose-Einstein condensate. For ten points, name this quantum state, the state with the lowest available energy, often compared to excited states.;;ground (state)
American Literature;;This story's main character is shocked that he cannot recognize the constellations in the sky on his journey home, which culminates in this story's main character seeing a "blinding white light" and hearing "a stone sound like the shock of a cannon". A "grey-clad soldier" tricks the main character in this story to attempting to burn down a recently-repaired structure, but it was a trap which initiated the titular event. In the last line of this story main character's body "swung gently from side to side beneath the timbers", revealing that his escape from a Union patrol was imagined. Featuring main character Peyton Farquhar, for 10 points, name this short story by Ambrose Bierce.;;(An) Occurrence at Owl Creek Bridge
Music;;This man's operas The Devil's Palace of Desire and Fernando were flops.  He composed the lied "Die Forelle," which became the basis for his popular Trout Quintet.  He wrote incidental music to the play Rosamunde in addition to the Little C Major symphony.  Like Mahler, he did a Tragic symphony, and this composer's lieder include "Der Erlkonig," "Death and the Maiden," and "Gretchen at the Spinning Wheel".  For 10 points, name this composer whose work was catalogued by Otto Deutsch, the composer of the Unfinished Eighth symphony.;;(Franz) (Peter) Schubert
European Literature;;One character in this play insists that her real name is Sherlock Holmes, and that character eventually converses with a couple who discover that they both have a daughter with one red eye and one white eye, and convinces them that they are not married. The opening scene in this play sees two of the main characters talking about a group of friends all named Bobby Watson. The maid, Mary, later recites a poem called "The Fire", which precedes the Fire Chief referring to the title character. For ten points, name this play detailing the Martins and the Smiths, an absurdist work by Eugene Ionesco.;;(The) Bald Soprano
Chemistry;;These can be formed in a basic solution by alpha haloketones and can also be formed by reacting a nitrile and an alcohol in an acidic environment, known respectively as the Favorskii Rearrangement and the Pinner Reaction. The Baeyer-Villiger reaction can also produce these compounds from ketones in the presence of a peroxy-acid. The presence of two of these functional groups on a molecule allows for the formation of beta-keto ones via the Dieckmann condensation, which is a modification of the Claisen Condensation. For 10 points, name this functional group, a carboxylic acid whose terminal hydrogen is replaced with an alkyl group, which are useful for their various fragrant odors.;;ester(s)
World Literature;;one of this poet's poems, the speaker beseeches the title entity to save itself "Before my feet and vision fail me", and in another of this poet's poems, the speaker "Climb the mountain/ And never leave the meadow" to find the title object. Those poems, "Caribbean Sea" and "The Air Flower" appear in this poet's  collection, Tala; other collections include Desolation and Tenderness. This poet claims that "our worst crime is abandoning the children" and that "to him we cannot say 'Tomorrow'" in the poem "His Name is Today," or "Su Nombre es Hoy". For 10 points, name this Chilean poet, best known for her Sonnets of Death.;;(Gabriela) Mistral
Biology;;Resealed ghost erythrocytes are more susceptible to malarial infection in the presence of a magnesium complex of this compound, and the activity of this compound decreases with increasing sarcomere length. It acts as a signal for purigenic receptors, and it is converted into an important second messenger molecule via the adenylate cyclase enzyme. Oligomycin inhibits the FO unit of its namesake synthase which is powered by a proton gradient, and it is produced via substrate-level phosphorylation in glycolysis. For 10 points, identify this compound produced mainly in the electron transport system, which is known as the currency of energy.;;A(denosine) T(ri)P(hosphate)
World History;;One of this movement's leaders was slowly dismembered on the banks of the Dadu River; that leader had earlier plotted with the North King Wei Changhui to kill its military commander Yang Xiuqing. Areas it controlled saw even married couples separated by sex, as well as the banning of foot-binding. This conflict's Battle of Cixi saw the death of Frederick Ward, and Zeng Guofan's Xiang Army took its capital of Nanjing. It was led by the supposed younger brother of Jesus, Hong Xiuquan, but was not able to dislodge the Qing Dynasty from power. For 10 points, identify this Chinese rebellion, notably featuring Charles Gordon's Ever Victorious Army.;;Taiping (Rebellion)
Philosophy;;This designer of the Chresthomatic Day School used the penname Gamliel Smith to write a paper questioning the authority of a Biblical figure, "Not Paul but Jesus".  He published his first work "A Fragment on Government" in response to William Blackstone's love of the "rule of law".  This philosopher sent Adam Smith a letter arguing for free lending of money at interest, included in his Defense of Usury, and he introduced the central concept of his philosophy in Introduction to Principles of Morals.  For 10 points, name this theorizer of the Panopticon and founder of utilitarianism.;;(Jeremy) Bentham
European History;;He chaired the Putney debates where he supported Henry Ireton over groups which issued manifestos such as the Agreement of the People and Case of the Armie. Penruddock's uprising occurred during this man's reign, and his campaign in Ireland also saw massacres at Drogheda and Wexford. This man was given his most famous post through the Instrument of Government, and William Lenthall was the speaker of the first parliament during this man's reign. He acquired the nickname "Ironside" at the Battle of Marsten Moor but he is better known for a victory at Naseby as a commander of the New Model Army. For 10 points, identify this Lord Protector of England from 1653 to 1658.;;(Oliver) Cromwell
Music;;Act III of this opera contains the aria "En vain pour éviter" wherein the protagonist laments her fate as she attempts to read her future. One character competes with Zuniga for the love of the protagonist, and that character does not listen to Micaela's message the his mother is dying. The title character was played by Celestine Marie in this opera's premiere, while other notable arias include one which begins "Love is a rebellious bird," entitled "Habanera," and the "Toreador Song". Based on a novel by Prosper Merimee, for 10 points, identify this opera whose titular character is killed by Don José, a work of Georges Bizet.;;Carmen
European History;;The Nagodba was an 1869 agreement by which this country was governed and which was opposed by the Party of Right under Ante Starcevic. The arrest of a politician from this country, the leader of the People's Populist Party Stejpan Radic prompted revolt around its capital. During World War II, this country was ruled by Ante Pavlevic and his fascist Ustasa, which conducted a massive ethnic cleansing campaign in areas like Slavonia and Krajina. Under the leadership of the nationalist Franjo Tudman and along with Slovenia, this country declared independence from Yugoslavia in 1991. For 10 points, name this nation, vying for control of Bosnia with Serbia, with capital Zagreb.;;Croatia
Mythology;;One character of this name, a son of Agenor, helped his brothers Phineus, Cilix, Thasus, and Cadmus search for Europa. Another figure with this namen slept with his father Amyntor's mistress, and, as a Myrmidon, attempted to convince Achilles to reenter the fight. Analogues of the most famous holder of this name include the Russian Zhar-Ptitsa, the Persian Huma, and the Chinese Fenghuang. Its most famous incarnation is based on a figure that hung out on a sacred pillar and was known as the soul of Ra, the Egyptian Bennu. For 10 points, give this name, also given to a fiery-plumed bird which experienced a rebirth from its own ashes.;;Phoenix
Religion;;The texts known as the "Transmissions of the Lamp" or "Flame Records" refer to the lineages of practitioners of this faith, which cite Maha Kashyapa, who understood the significance of a flower on Vulture Peak, as the first adherent. The Five Mountain temples associated with this religion are also associated with the spread of Neo-Confucian metaphysics, while the teachings of Eisai, which sought to reform Tendai practice, were banned. Bodhidharma is credited with bringing it to China, from where it was brought to the country it is most associated with by Saicho and Dogen. For 10 points, name this sect of Buddhism, most associated with Japan and the use of meditational riddles, koans.;;Zen (Buddhism)
Physics;;This man lends his name to an equation, which, for a given temperature, relates supersaturation to droplet radius, in order to determine if that radius is increasing or decreasing. He also lends his name to a class of long, non-dispersive oceanic waves which flow parallel to a physical boundary in geostrophic balance. Atmospheric waves, which break due to increasing wind shear across a density interface, are named for Helmholtz and this man. Along with Joule, he is the namesake of an isenthalpic process, which sees temperature change in a real gas as pressure decreases. For 10 points, name this physicist, whose best-known contribution is his namesake absolute temperature scale.;;(Lord) Kelvin
American Literature;;One character in this work complains that another chews her ice "like a cocker spaniel" and at the end, that character repeats "Kyrie eleison" after reporting that a telegram has come. Another character spends much her time on the bathroom tiles, while her husband "plows" another character. One anecdote told in this work relates the story of a friend who accidentally killed his father in a wreck when he swerved to avoid a porcupine. In the final act, at the climax of the game "bringing up baby," Honey and Nick learn that George and Martha do not have a son. For 10 points, name this play, whose titular question references the author of To the Lighthouse, by Edward Albee.;;Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf
Music;;Strings and a bassoon arpeggio open this composer's Op. 53a, which ends abruptly and violently, presumably with the death of one title figure, Pan and Echo. Surusoitto, or Funeral Music, composed in 1931 is thought to be one of the few links to his destroyed Eighth Symphony, which was to follow his Seventh in C Major, which uniquely has a single movement and was originally called a "fantasia sinfonica". One of his most famous pieces is the third movement of a suite of Four Legends of Lemminkäinen, while another was written as a rousing call for his nation's independence. For 10 points, name this composer, best known for the tone and symphonic poems The Swan of Tuonela and Finlandia.;;(Jean) Sibelius
United States History;;One leader of this tribe was Black Bob, who led a band which separated from the Hathawekala and lived in Kansas until 1868. They signed the Treaty of Camp Charlotte after a conflict prompted by the murder of Mingos at Yellow Creek and saw this tribe defeated at Point Pleasant, Lord Dunmore's War. Under Bluejacket, they were later defeated by "Mad" Anthony Wayne at Fallen Timbers. A confederation led by their greatest leader was defeated by William Henry Harrison in Indiana, and that leader was allegedly killed by Richard M. Johnson. For 10 points, name this Native American tribe, whose leaders, The Prophet and Tecumseh, were defeated at Tippecanoe.;;Shawnee
World Literature;;One character in this work keeps his guns and ammunition widely separated after a servant accidentally caused a pistol to go off while shaking out a pillow. The nun Margot provides the protagonist with news of a woman who moved to Guajira, where she is eventually reunited with her love, who comes to her with a suitcase full of her unopened love letters. That character, Bayardo San Roman, had previously returned Angela to her family on their wedding night, causing her brothers Pedro and Pablo to murder Santiago Nasar the next morning. For 10 points, name this novel, whose title killing is known ahead of time but not stopped, by Gabriel Garcia Marquez.;;Chronicle of a Death Foretold
Geology;;Though the Gauss-Matuyama magnetostratagraphic event and the similarly timed Monte San Nicola stratum have been suggested as a lower bound for it, the Vrica stratum, which is associated with the top of the Olduvai event, is official. The Matuyama-Brunhes magnetic polarity shift took place during this epoch, thus producing the Earth's current polarity, while the end of this epoch is marked by the mass extinction of New World mammalian species and the end of the Younger Dryas. Best known for such events as the Nebraskan and Wisconsin glaciations, this is, for 10 points, what epoch which was dominated by the most recent ice age and which preceded the current Holocene epoch?;;Pleistocene (Epoch)
European History;;Fighting at Laodicea saw the annihilation of much of this movement's forces, which were meant to reinforce the armies of Joscelin II, and it was also routed at Dorylaeum. It spawned a companion Wendish campaign, and some of its members captured Lisbon. Eugenius III's papal bull Quantum praedecessores called this campaign, which failed to recapture Edessa and alienated former ally Damascus when it attacked that city. It was preached by St. Bernard of Clairveaux and led by Conrad III, Louis VII, and Eleanor of Aquitaine.  For 10 points, name this disastrous crusade that preceded the one led by Richard the Lionheart and followed the one called by Urban II at Clermont.;;Second (Crusade)
Mythology;;For the Koryak of eastern Siberia this figure is the chief deity and is known as Quikinnaqu. One set of myths claim that King Arthur lives on in the form of this creature, while another relates how the sight of one of these creatures drinking blood in the snow prompted Deidre's vow to commit suicide. For the Tlingit, Haida, and other peoples, this figure conducted a war against the South Wind, in order to win good weather for humanity, and also stole the sun, moon and stars to provide light and fertility to the Earth. The two companions of Odin, Hugin and Munin, are the most famous mythological examples of, for 10 points, what avian, a close relative of the crow?;;Raven
European Literature;;Shortly before his death, one character in this work deliriously imagines that someone is siccing red hounds at him, and in this work's epilogue, we learn that Piotr has gotten married because of his watch and patent-leather shoes. While sniffing roses, the protagonist steals a kiss from his host's young lover, resulting in a duel, in which Pavel is shot in the thigh. Though he kissed Nikolai's lover Feodosya, this novel's protagonist sees his world shaken when he falls for Odintsova, at whose house he spends several weeks with his friend and sometime acolyte, Arkady. For 10 points, name this novel about Yevgeny Bazarov, a young nihilist, by Ivan Turgenev.;;Fathers and Sons
Biology;;Corticosterone, in addition to regulating CRF, is the best-understood regulator of this hormone. The presence of the 1a class of receptors for this hormone in the brain has been linked to social recognition and affiliative behavior, while that of the 1b class is associated with aggression. It achieves its principal function by promoting the release of aquaporins and, like aldosterone, increase in its production is caused by angiotensin II. It is primarily produced in the supraoptic nucleus and, like the structurally similar oxytocin, released from the hypothalamus via the posterior pituitary gland. For 10 points, name this hormone, which constricts blood vessels and restricts water loss in the kidneys.;;A(nti)D(iuretic) H(ormone)
Art;;In one depiction by Luca Giordano, four old men view the titular event, as a fifth sits above them, possibly directing the action. In a version by Picasso, a man stands with his left foot atop a woman, poised to do battle against a nearby horseman. In the center of a version by Poussin, one man raises a knife to slay an old man holding his legs, as an old woman and two children lie crying to the left, while a depiction by Reubens sees the title event in the foreground and the battle it inspired in the back. FTP, name this pseudo-historical event, the aftermath of which was depicted by David with several nude Romans checked in their battle by the titular figures, who were captured to serve as wives.;;(The) Rape of the Sabine (Women)
World Literature;;One work by this poet sees a shipwrecked sailor address the tomb of a king which he has landed near, while another sees the poet curse a tree and the hand which planted it after it nearly falls on him. He called his first two books of poetry Sermones and he was responsible for a poem meant to be sung by a chorus of young children dedicating the Secular Games, the Carmen Saeculare. One of the most famous works by this poet was originally composed as a letter to the Pisos and introduced the phrase "in medias res". He wrote four books of Odes and the Ars Poetica. For 10 points, name this Latin poet, originator of the quotes "Dulce et decorum est pro patria mori" and "carpe diem".;;Horace
World History;;This empire absorbed territories formerly of the Dvaravati civilization, especially Phamai and Lopburi, which it conquered following a war with the Mon kingdom of Harinjaya. It grew out of the Chen-La in 802 and it was centered on the Khorat Plateau, extending as far south as Nakhon Si Thammarat. This empire met its end after its capital was invaded by Ayutthaya in 1431, but its height came three centuries earlier under rulers like Suryavarman II and Jayavarman VII. For 10 points, name this empire that constructed the temple complex at Angkor Wat, a Cambodian empire which lent its name to a Communist party led by Pol Pot.;;Khmer (Empire)
Chemistry;;When the Butler-Volmer equation is used to describe the charge transfer reaction rate, this equation is used to describe the open circuit potential, except in the case of intercalation electrodes, for which it does not hold. One variant of this equation calculates membrane potential provided membrane permeability and ion concentration, the Goldman-Hodgkin-Katz equation. The change in Gibbs free energy is directly proportional to this equation, which is used to find a cell's electric potential. For 10 points, identify this equation, named for a German chemist, which allows one to find either the electromotive force or standard electrode potential, provided the reaction quotient is known.;;Nernst (Equation)
British Literature;;This is the name of an actor and associate of Mr. Wolf introduced by Tigg Montague to Jonas in Martin Chuzzlewit. It names the title character of a novel shortlisted for the 2007 Booker Prize that features Matilda, growing up during the Bougainville civil war, by Lloyd Jones. One character by this name is a shipkeeper pressed into service on Stubb's boat in Moby-Dick, while a Sherlock Holmes story name after five orange ones contains a murder by the Ku Klux Klan. Another character with this name befriends Herbert Pocket and tries to woo Estella, the foster-daughter of Miss Havisham. For 10 points, give this name of the main character of Great Expectations, short for Philip Pirrip.;;Pip
Art;;The bare head of a young person, possibly a child, droops the back and right in this artist's bust Suffering, while this artist's The Prayer presents a dark woman, with a featureless face, leaning far forward. He executed several versions of La Négresse Blonde, and many of his works feature carefully carved, wooden bases, which he felt was important to their presentation. The Gate of the Kiss was constructed as a memorial to soldiers of World War I along with the more famous Table of Silence and Infinite Column. More famous works include a head laying on its side, Sleeping Muse, and the series The Kiss. FTP, name this Romanian artist best known for his series of sculptures Bird in Space.;;(Constantin) Brancusi
United States History;;In the decision to Steffel v. Thompson, William Brennan cited this case as reaffirmation of Zwickler v. Koota's ruling about declaratory and injunctive relief. In a dissent in County of Riverside v. McLaughlin, Antonin Scalia cites it in an argument that the court disregards some rights, while creating others. Section VI of this decision analyzes historical precedents, finding them lacking, while Eisenstadt v. Baird and Griswold v. Connecticut are cited for the penumbral right to privacy extended in this case. A plurality decision in 1992's Planned Parenthood v. Casey upheld, for 10 points, what 1973 Supreme Court decision which controversially declared the right to an abortion.;;Roe v Wade
Psychology;;This word completes the title of a work on psychology by Heinz Kohut, which shares its name with the branch of psychoanalysis that Kohut developed, while a work about this "unknown" concept was written by Georg Groddeck. A work subtitled "The Exercise of Control" by Albert Bandura discussed the "efficacy" of this concept, while a social theory of the development of this concept was posited by George Mead in a work entitled "Mind, [this word], and Society". Karen Horney's Neurosis and Human Growth has a central issue the realization of, for 10 points, what concept, which may be defined as an individual person's perception of his or her own personhood.;;self
Philosophy;;Nausiphanes's Tripod was reportedly a major influence on this philosophical school's epistemological treatise, On the Canon, while the Letter to Menoikeos preserved in the tenth Book of Diogenes Laertios's Lives of the Eminent Philosophers expressed this school's ethics. This school counted among its adherents, Cicero's friend Atticus, who heeded its call to avoid public life, and the poet Lucretius, who authored a didactic epic on it, De Rerum Natura. Named for its founder, who adopted the atomic theory of Leukippos and Demokritos, for 10 points, identify this philosophical school, which argued that ataraxia, or peace achieved to avoidance of pain, was the greatest good.;;Epicurean(ism)