British Literature;;Its theme of spiritual desolation is found in such lines as "There are no eyes here/In this valley of dying stars," and "This is the dead land/This is cactus land". The title figures are described as "Shape without form, shade without colour,/ Paralysed force, gesture without motion". They move "quiet and meaningless/As wind in dry grass". For 10 points, name this T.S. Eliot poem in which the reader learns that "This is the way the world ends/Not with a bang but a whimper".;;(The) Hollow Men;;
Religion;;In the Catholic Church, it is composed of four psalms, a capitulum, the Magnificat, a hymn, a versicle, a canticle, the Kyrie, a Pater noster, a prayer, and a dismissal. In its singular form, it names a bell used to call congregants to the service. It is named from the old French for "evening star," because it is held near sunset. For 10 points-name this liturgical service which forms the sixth of the seven canonical hours.;;vesper(s);;
Physics;;John Leslie first correctly explained this phenomenon in 1802, stating that the attraction on a thin stratum of a liquid is normal to another surface. Two years later, Thomas Young connected it to surface tension, observing that the angle of contact between a liquid surface and a solid was constant. Occurring when the forces between molecules of a solid and a liquid are more powerful than the cohesive forces of a liquid, it explains the formation of a meniscus. For 10 points--name this physical process utilized by plants in which water is drawn upward in a thin tube.;;capillary action;;
Music;;It was started in the home of the godson of Franz Liszt, Dr. Frank Damrosch. Using money bequeathed by a namesake textile merchant, William Schumann created the curriculum which now serves eight hundred students. For 10 points-name this elite New York school for the performing arts.;;Juilliard (School);;
Chemistry;;Usually found in ores such as pentlandite, cooperite, and braggite, purification of this metal requires aqueous processing. The malleable variety of this metal, which naturally occurs in six isotopes with masses between 190 and 198, was first produced by P. F. Chabaneau in 1789. For ten points, name this best known of the Group VI metals, a grey-white metal which is combined with iridium in the SI standard for the kilogram.;;platinum|Pt;;
Music;;In some modern productions, the Sorceress is portrayed by a bass and the Spirit is taken by a countertenor. Because it was first staged in a girls' school, the actor portraying one of title characters had to sneak into the performance. Remembrance Day observations in Britain often use the lament "When I am Laid in Earth" from this opera. Its second act sees a royal hunt interrupted by a magical storm. For 10 points-name this Nahum Tate and Henry Purcell opera about the queen of Carthage and a Roman patriarch.;;Dido and Aeneas;;
American Literature;;Asserting that "a tub had caught all," the narrator of this story invites three police officers to sit down, believing that no one will discover his reaction to the victim's vulture-like eye. Though the narrator asserts that he is not a madman, he describes the torment of a sound "much as a sound a watch makes when enveloped in cotton". For 10 points-name this story in which the narrator reveals himself by tearing up the planks and revealing the dead body of the old man, to end the beating of the title object.;;(The) Tell(-)Tale Heart;;
United States History;;The author of the book Call to Greatness, this man was one of the original organizers of the United Nations and served as U.S. ambassador to the body during the Cuban Missile Crisis. Though he was governor of Illinois from 1949 to 1953, he was not as electorally successful as his grandfather, who served as Vice President from 1893 to 1897 under Grover Cleveland. For 10 points-name this Democrat who lost the presidential elections of 1952 and 1956 to Eisenhower.;;(Adlai) (Ewing) Stevenson;;
British Literature;;The people of the planet are the Eloi, an attractive, childish race, and their distant cousins the Morlocks, a disgusting and hairy group of flesh-eating creatures. After the Morlocks steal the protagonist's means of transportation, he is trapped in the year 802,701 with Weena in, for 10 points-what 1895 science fiction classic by H.G. Wells?;;(The) Time Machine;;
Biology;;Its intermediate heptoses exist too briefly to be directly observed. In this process, each CO2 molecule combines with ribulose bisphosphate to form an unstable intermediate that then splits into two PGA molecules. Each PGA is then reduced by NADPre into PGAL, some of which eventually forms glucose. For 10 points-name this process, a part of the dark reactions also known as C3 photosynthesis.;;Calvin(-)(Benson) (cycle);;dark reactions
Art;;Instructions for this art were passed on by oral tradition until the 1797 publication of Senbazru Orikata. In the 1950's, Akira Yoshizawa and Sam Randlett devised a standard set of diagram symbols, and many of Yoshizawa's dogs, water lilies, owls and other birds have been exhibited since. For 10 points-name this Japanese art of paper folding.;;origami;;
Mythology;;The son of Glaucus from Corinth, he evidently killed an important Corinthian and was given refuge in Argos by King Proteus. When he refused the advances of Queen Stheneboea, he was accused of attempted rape and exiled. For 10 points-name this Greek legend who defeated the monster Chimaera while riding on his winged horse Pegasus.;;Bellerophon;;
American Literature;;After publishing her short story Cracker Chidlings in Scribner's Magazine, editor Maxwell Perkins encouraged her to write novels. She frequently placed her stories in environments similar to her beloved Cross Creek; her epitaph commemorates her writings as the way she endeared herself to the world. For 10 points-name this journalist who won the 1938 Pulitzer Prize for The Yearling.;;(Marjorie) (Kinnan) Rawlings;;
Geography;;Here, wave-carved granite cliffs reach sixty feet in height. Offshore are reefs and rocky islets, one of which hosts Longship's Lighthouse. Although one can sail from this place to the Isles of Scilly, this Cornwall promontory is an extremity of land travel. For 10 points-name this westernmost point on the British mainland.;;Land(')s End;;
Geography;;In the Old Testament it is called Chinneroth, while in the New Testament it is referred to as Genesaret, and its name in modern Arabic is Bahr Tabariyeh. Thirteen miles long and six miles wide, its eastern shores form part of the border with Syria. For 10 points-name this body of water whose seasonal droughts restrict Israel's water supply, a widening of the Jordan River.;;Sea of Galilee;;
Biology;;The term for this region was coined in 1936 by horticulturalist Cyril Dean Darlington, and research shows a surprising lack of conservation between organisms. In some organisms, its properties are diffused along the length of the chromosome, but in karyotypes, it appears as a narrow area. For 10 points-name this cytogenetic region where spindle fibers attach during cell division.;;centromere;;
Psychology;;It was represented as a cave located below a basement and containing two human skulls in a dream of the man who identified the concept. The theory regarding it is used to explain occurrences of synchronicity, such as the similarities that exist in the mythology and folklore of various cultures throughout history. Linked to the existence of archetypes, for 10 points-what is this concept that represents the cumulative experience of past generations, a term coined by Carl Jung?;;collective unconscious;;
Music;;The ninth section recalls a long conversation with August Jaeger, or "Nimrod". While the portraits of the men are relatively straightforward, the women are shown in a more complicated fashion, such as in the sections about the composer's future wife, Caroline Alice Roberts, and Dora Penny. For 10 points-name this composition dedicated to fourteen "mysterious" friends of Edward Elgar.;;Enigma Variations;;Variations on an Original Theme
Art;;Built as a fortress against Viking raides in 1190 by Philippe-Auguste, it was enlarged over several centuries and finally renovated by Pierre Lescot. Jean Goujon dedicated the Cour Carrée, and a restoration completed in 1998 upgraded the Napoleon Courtyard. For 10 points-an inverted glass pyramid designed by I.M. Pei is now the entrance to what French museum?;;(Musee) (du) Louvre;;
American Literature;;After studying art in Paris and London during the 1880s and covering the Boer War for the San Francisco Chronicle in 1895, he focused more on fiction and became increasingly influenced by the naturalism of Emile Zola. For 10 points-name this "Epic of the Wheat" author who penned Greed and The Octopus.;;(Benjamin) (Franklin) (Frank) Norris;;
Geography;;A new tax reform plan would force municipalities here to hold referenda for every tax or fee increase. The Conservative government of Ernie Eves is under attack, as Liberals are hoping new elections will undo much of what he and predecessor Mike Harris have wrought. At the federal level, Liberals hold 98 of its 103 seats in the House of Commons, but a surge by the New Democrats here may harm the national majority. For 10 points-name this most populous of Canada's provinces, where Ottawa and Toronto are found.;;Ontario;;
Biology;;A new three-dimensional model and fully sequenced genome have allowed the development of compounds such as AG7088, which block the proteinase site where this coronavirus acts. For 10 points-name the disease that has killed over fifty in Asia in 2003.;;S(evere) A(cute) R(espiratory) S(yndrome);;
British Literature;;Eleven revenge plots are resolved during the course of this play; in Act Five, three different marriages take place off-stage, although two of them are clearly invalid. Welsh parson Hugh Evans makes mincemeat of the English language, although not so badly as Doctor Caius, a French physician, whose wooing of Anne is foiled by both Mistress Quickly and the Host of the Garter Inn. For 10 points-in what play does the "old fat fellow" of a protagonist, Sir John Falstaff, fail to seduce Mistress Page or any of the other title characters?;;(The) Merry Wives of Windsor;;
United States History;;With Fania Mindell and Ethel Burne, she was jailed for a month for "maintaining a public nuisance" in 1916. In 1914, she wrote the novel The Woman Rebel, and she was arrested under the Comstock Act for sending the magazine of the same name through the mail. For 10 points-name this founder of the American Birth Control League, which later became Planned Parenthood.;;(Margaret) (Higgins) Sanger;;
European History;;It occurred after Emperor Matthias sent emissaries to explain why Rudolph II's Letter of Majesty was not being used to protect Heinrich von Thurn's band of Hussites. However, Matthias chose two councillors to Ferdinand II of Bohemia, Jaroslav Martinic and Vilém Slawata. Outraged at the choice of ambassadors and their message, the citizens attempted to kill the councillors. For 10 points-name this 1618 incident which sparked the Thirty Years War, in which the councillors were thrown from a window.;;Defenestration of Prague;;
Physics;;They're often stated in either differential or integral forms. One states that magnetic fields have no point sources, and thus all magnetic fields are caused by electric currents. Their formulator's inclusion of induction current in the fourth completed classical electrodynamics, and they became the cornerstone of the first Unified Field Theory. For 10 points-name these four equations that relate electricity and magnetism, formulated in 1860 by a namesake Scottish physicist.;;Maxwell(')(s) (Laws);;
World History;;As an adolescent, he was taught by Simón Rodriguez, who inspired him with the philosophy of Rousseau. Under the command of Francisco de Miranda, he lost Puerto Cabello PWER-to kah-BAY-yo to Royalist forces. In 1816, he captured Angostura, a city that is now named for him, and, with Jose de Sucre, he won the battle of Junín hoo-NEEN, freed Ecuador from Spanish control, and won the battle of Ayacucho. For 10 points-name this creator and first president of Gran Colombia, known as "El Libertador".;;(Simon) Bol(i|í){1}?var;;
European History;;An April 1987 speech outside of Pristna first garnered him public support, and he eventually succeeded his friend Ivan Stambolic, whom he is now accused of killing. His wife Mirjana is known as the "Red Witch" for her deep involvement in political purges. For 10 points-name this deposed communist dictator of Yugoslavia, currently on trial for war crimes.;;(Slobodan) Milosevic;;
American Literature;;He submitted Young Adventure, his third volume of poetry, in lieu of a thesis when he graduated from Yale at age 21. His poem "American Names" ends with the line "Bury my heart at Wounded Knee," while his other works include the novel John Shore's Daughter, the play The Headless Horseman, and the poetry collection Western Star, which won a posthumous Pultizer Prize. For 10 points-name this author of "The Devil and Daniel Webster" and John Brown's Body.;;(Stephen) (Vincent) Benet;;
Religion;;This book describes the line of Elimelech, which is at risk of extinction when Mahlon and Chilion die before their Moabite wives have any children. The title character accompanies Elimelech's wife, Naomi, to Bethlehem, converts to Judaism, and finds employment with Boaz. For 10 points-name this Old Testament story about the great-grandmother of David.;;(Book) (of) Ruth;;
European History;;Napoleon eliminated three and added the Archbishop of Salzburg and the princes of Hesse, Baden, and Wurtermburg. The Dukes of Bavaria and Hanover were the other additions to the roster established by Charles IV in the 1356 Golden Bull. Originally, they were: the archbishops of Cologne, Trier, and Mainz; the King of Bohemia; the Duke of Saxony; the Count Palatine of the Rhine; and the Margrave of Brandenburg. For 10 points-name this group which chose the Holy Roman Emperor.;;electors (of) (the) (Holy) (Roman) (Empire);;
World History;;Its foreign head, Khalid Meshal, escaped an assassination attempt in Jordan; while this group has been expelled from that country, the aftermath of the operation saw its leader, Ahmad Yassin, released from jail. Yassin predicts victory by 2025 for this group, which killed over sixty in a wave of 1996 bombings after its bomb-making chief, Yahya Ayyash, was killed. For 10 points-name this leading opponent of the Oslo accords which refused an offer to negotiate an end to terror attacks in June 2003.;;Hamas|Islamic Resistance Movement;;
Astronomy;;Owned by the National Astronomy and Ionosphere Center, this facility was opened by Cornell professor William Gordon on November 1, 1963. At this place, the orbital period of Mercury was calculated, the first planets outside our solar system were discovered, and Einstein's general theory of relativity was further confirmed with the discovery of a pulsar in a binary system. For 10 points-name this observatory in Puerto Rico, home to a 305-meter-in-diameter radio telescope.;;Arecibo (Observatory);;
Music;;He invented a device to keep his fourth finger rigid while playing the piano; the device eventually deformed his hand. He gave names to aspects of his personality such as the introspective Eusebius and, after a Beethoven character, the impulsive Florestan. His works include Papillons pah-pee-YOHN and Carnaval for piano as well as the opera Genoveva. His wife, the pianist Clara Wieck VEEK, had him institutionalized after a suicide attempt. For 10 points-name this German composer of the Spring Symphony.;;(Robert) (Alexander) Schumann;;
American Literature;;He wrote an opera, Le testament, and he helped to rehabilitate the reputations of both Antonio Vivaldi and Sextus Propertius, writing an "homage" to the latter. He was declared unfit to stand trial for anti-American broadcasts during World War II, thirty years after teaming with Amy Lowell to found the Imagist movement. For 10 points-identify this American author of the 800-page Cantos.;;(Ezra) (Loomis) Pound;;
Art;;Its name was coined in a manifesto which promised to to "glorify war" and praise the "beauty of speed". Striving to portray the dynamic character of modern life, it attacked academism and the establishment in paintings such as Dynamism of a Dog on a Leash and Riot in the Galleria. For 10 points-name this movement which included author Filippo Marinetti and artists Giacomo Belli and Umburto Boccioni.;;futurism;;
Geography;;At milepost 86 on it, one can view the four thousand foot-tall Peaks of Otter near Bedford. Its year-round Visitor Center is at the Folk Art Center in Asheville, while the campground at Mount Pisgah is almost five thousand feet above sea level. For 10 points-name this 469-mile scenic route that links the Shenandoah and Great Smoky National Parks.;;Blue Ridge (Parkway);;Skyline Drive
European History;;The writer of plays such as The Increased Difficulty of Concentration and The Garden Party, he founded the opposition groups Civic Freedom and Charter 77, which eventually spurred the peaceful "velvet revolution". For 10 points-name this founder and first president of the Czech Republic.;;(Vaclav) Havel;;
Anthropology;;From 1925 to 1940 she edited the Journal of American Folk-Lore and from her fieldwork she published Tales of the Cochiti Indians and Zuni Mythology. During World War II, she worked for the Office of War Information and derived her most famous work from an assignment to do a study on Japanese culture. For 10 points-name this anthropologist who wrote The Chrysanthemum and the Sword.;;(Ruth) Benedict;;
Geography;;Its counts formed a namesake dynasty which ruled Portugal from 1139 to 1383. Divided into the Jurane and Cisjurane regions in the ninth century, it became a Franche-Comté FRAHNSH kohm-TAY or "Free County" under the reign of John the Good. After two centuries of Hapsburg control, it was reincorporated into France in 1678 with its capital at Dijon. For 10 points-identify this wine-producing region of France.;;Burgundy|Bourgogne;;
Chemistry;;Often broken, it does not take into account paramagnetic compounds like nitrogen monoxide. Common counterexamples are halogenated phosphorus and sulfur. Also known as the Lewis-Langmuir theory-for 10 points-name this rule stating that the most stable electron valence shell contains eight electrons.;;octet (rule);;
Physics;;Millikan obtained an accurate value of Planck's constant in the course of experiments investigating this effect, first observed by Heinrich Hertz. It occurs when the energy of incident light is greater than a characteristic work function. This effect demonstrates the particle nature of light, and its explanation earned Einstein his Nobel. For 10 points-name this effect in which photons knock electrons loose from a metal.;;photoelectric (effect);;
European History;;This native of Ardea was the wife of Collatinus, and she impressed her husband's friends by spinning wool under lamplight instead of dining at a banquet with the other noblewomen. After she killed herself, Junius Brutus pulled the bloody dagger from her body and vowed to avenge her honor. For 10 points-name this woman whose rape at the hands of Sextus Tarquinius led to the fall of Tarquinus Superbus and the Roman monarchy.;;Lucretia|Lucrece;;
American Literature;;She contributed the libretto to Alvin Singleton's work Umoja: Each One of Us Counts, and she worked with John Williams for the song cycle Seven for Luck. For the bicentennial of the U. S. Capitol, she wrote Lady Freedom Among Us, and On the Bus with Rosa Parks came out in 1999. For 10 points-name this poet who won the 1987 Pulitzer for Thomas and Beulah and was appointed Poet Laureate by President Clinton.;;(Rita) Dove;;
Art;;While teaching at Oxford, he designed the chapel for Pembroke College in Cambridge. He won renown with that work and was asked to construct Greenwich Hospital and St. Clement Danes. For 10 points-name this architect who rebuilt much of London after the Great Fire and is buried in St. Paul's Cathedral under the epitaph, "If you seek his monument, look about you".;;(Sir) (Christopher) Wren;;
European History;;They were produced by Valerius and Horatius in 451 BCE to end the complaints which led to the Second Secession of the Plebians. The one containing the civil procedure stated that any judge who took a bribe would be punished with death. A section on torts said that anyone convicted of perjury would be "flung from the Tarpeian rock". The fourth concerned paternal rights over the family and permitted fathers to kill their deformed children. For 10 points-name this first written code of Roman law.;;Twelve Tables;;
Music;;Commissioned by André Kostelanetz of the Cincinnati Symphony, this 1942 work in C-major is roughly fourteen minutes long. In the first movement is a transformation of "Springfield Mountain," and a folk song similar to "Camptown Races" can be heard in the second movement. For 10 points-name this work for orchestra and a speaker who reads excerpts of letters by the namesake President, by Aaron Copland.;;Lincoln Portrait;;
British Literature;;This member of the primrose family, Anagallis arvensis, is used medicinally. A person by this name, a rival of Chauvelin, protected Lady Marguerite from the French Revolution. For 10 points-give the common name of the flower and the novel about Sir Percy Blakeney by Emmuska Orczy.;;(The) Scarlet Pimpernel;;
European History;;The Duke of Olivares secured a million-ducat loan from Pope Sixtus V to execute this plan crafted by the Marquess of Santa Cruz. It was delayed at Coruna, and thus it met Charles Howard at Plymouth. Commanded by the Duke of Medina Sidonia, it was smashed at Calais by Francis Drake, John Hawkins, and Martin Frobisher. For 10 points-name this fleet launched against England by Phillip II.;;Spanish Armada;;
Biology;;Located in the anterior of the neck, extending from the fifth cervical to the first thoracic vertebra, it consists of two elongated lobes separated by a median isthmus.  For 10 points-name this gland that produces hormones derived from the amino acid tyrosine and its iodine moiety, whose swelling as the result of iodine deficiency is called goiter.;;thyroid;;
Biology;;Also known as the "chapparal bird", it excretes excess salt through its nasal gland, rather than through the urine like most other birds. It acquires water by eating snakes and is usually brown-colored. A member of the cuckoo family, it is known formally as Geococcyx californianus. For 10 points-name the state bird of New Mexico, able to travel as fast as fifteen miles per hour.;;roadrunner;;Geococcyx californianus
Geography;;On November 19, 1824, hundreds of this city's residents were killed in its worst flood, which brought the Neva River more than a foot above normal. Its founding in 1703 as the "window on Europe" was met with equal sorrow, as the serfs used to build it suffered massive death and disease. For 10 points-name this home to the Hermitage, formerly known as Petrograd and Leningrad.;;St(.) Petersburg(,) (Russia);;Petrograd|Leningrad
Mythology;;Waterford, Monaghan, and Carlow are places where one can find wedge-shaped rocks known as its "chairs". Described as a small woman with long hair wearing white, grey, brown, or red clothes, it supposedly is a descendant of the mystical race Tuatha De'Dannan. For 10 points-name this creature whose "keening" wails foretell a death in the family for anyone who hears.;;banshee;;
United States History;;It was compiled by Lyn Nofziger and Gordon Strachan under the direction of Charles Colson. The original version was twenty in number and included Los Angeles Times editor Ed Guthman, actor Paul Newman, and National Education Association president Samuel Lambert. The final version contained fifty reporters, ten Senators, and all twelve black Representatives. For 10 points-name this multivolume document which cataloged opponents of a certain Republican administration.;;(Richard) (Milhous) (Nixon(')(s)) Enemies List|(Opponents) (List) (and) (Political) Enemies Project;;
Economics;;It is often cited as a contributor to the moral hazard problem, in which people behave more recklessly without consequences. Its suppliers are also subject to adverse selection, as consumers with the greatest liability are the most likely customers. Its economic definition can be supplied by government, in such forms as welfare and legal protection against creditors. For 10 points-name this commodity which provides financial protection against risks in exchange for the payment of premiums.;;insurance;;
Computer Science;;In Fortran 90, they can be explicit-shape, or they can be made assumed-shape using the allocatable keyword. C creates them dynamically with malloc, while C++ and Java use the new command. For 10 points-name this programming construct, consisting of any data structure with multiple elements.;;array(s);;
World History;;He once captured an attractive movie star and kept her and her husband under house arrest for eight years, and state television often reports on his multiple holes in one while golfing. He enjoys drinking Hennessey cognac and wears four-inch lifted heels in his shoes. His birthday celebrations claim that his birth on Mount Paektu was accompanied with thunder, lightning, and odd noises from a glacier. For 10 points-name this eccentric dictator who succeeded his father as the leader of North Korea in 1994.;;Kim (Jong)- (Il);;
Mythology;;One personage by this name was a Nereid, the daughter of Nereus and Doris, who loved the handsome Acis, prompting the jealous Polyphemus to crush Acis with a boulder. The other, as a reward for a man who rejected the immoral women of Cyprus, gave birth to Paphos after being animated by Aphrodite. For 10 points-name this woman, originally a statue created by Pygmalion.;;Galatea;;
Chemistry;;Their "skin depth", or range of penetration, is only as large as four inches in air and they can be stopped with a sheet of paper, making them relatively harmless unless somehow ingested or inhaled. With a mass of just under 4 GeV giga electron volts, for 10 points-name these nuclear particles composed of two protons and two neutrons, equivalent in composition to the helium nucleus.;;alpha (particle);;helium nucleus
Geography;;The eastern Koolau and western Waianae ranges divide it into the leeward, windward, and central sections. The Diamond Head crater lies located on its southeastern coast, while Kaneohe Bay is on its east. Kauai Channel separates it from the island of that name, and a trip south across Kaiwi Channel lands one on Molokai. Waipahu and Kailua are among its cities. For 10 points-name this most populous island of Hawaii, the location of Honolulu.;;Oahu;;
Religion;;He was one of seven deacons appointed by the Apostles to care for elderly women, widows, and orphans. As a Hellenized Jew, he was strongly opposed to the Temple cult of Judaism, and for expressing his opposition he was brought before the Sanhedrin. His defense of Christianity so outraged his hearers that he was condemned to be executed. For 10 points-what first Christian martyr was thus stoned to death?;;(Saint) Stephen (the) (Martyr);;
American Literature;;Born in 1932, he left home at age twelve, and he attended Patrick Henry University in Cleveland in the fall of 1951. He left graduate school on the advice of his philosophy professor, Robert Stadler, to work as a track laborer for Taggart International.  For 10 points-name this man who convinces many industrial giants to go on strike by disappearing to his namesake Gulch in Atlas Shrugged by Ayn Rand.;;(John) Galt;;
United States History;;Anthony Kennedy showed concern for the psychological pressures it creates in his majority opinion in Lee v. Weisman. In 2000, the Supreme Court ruled that the Santa Fe Independent School District in Texas could not allow it at high school football games. Often subject to a test established in Lemon v. Kurtzman, for 10 points-what is this practice that Engel v. Vitale ruled unconstitutional at institutions of public education?;;(school) prayer;;
American Literature;;Richard Henry Dana considered it a hoax and wrote, "No one, on this side of the Atlantic, is capable of writing such verses". In a bleak tone, this poem notes "All that breathe / Will share thy destiny," and that "Earth, that nourished thee, shall claim / Thy growth". Another line states "Yet not to thine eternal resting-place/Shalt thou retire alone," and the poem begins with the line "To him who in the love of nature holds/Communion with her visible forms". For 10 points-name this poem by William Cullen Bryant.;;Thanatopsis;;
World History;;His coronation was overshadowed by a catastrophe where over a thousand spectators were crushed to death. Married to Alix of Hessen, his reign was marked by two futile wars, the Bloody Sunday massacre of 1905, and the October Manifesto which established a Duma dominated by his minister, Peter Stolypin. For 10 points-name this person killed at Yekaterinburg with his family in 1917, the last tsar of Russia.;;Nicholas II;;Nicholas
Art;;After marrying Jetta Umiker, he moved to Rome where he painted the realistic landscape Atrani. After visiting the Alhambra, he became captivated by Moorish ornamentation and by visual depiction of mathematical concepts; he later created Ascending and Descending, the Transformation prints, and Reptiles. For 10 points-name this graphic artist whose works involve "mental imagery" of repeated patterns and paradoxical constructions.;;(Maurits) (Cornelis) Escher;;
United States History;;He admits that he is only in his current job to help secure his family financially and is, in his own words, "so fat" that he can't put on his wedding ring anymore. A government major at Harvard, he worked for several years as an investigative reporter at The Tennesseean and as a journalist in Vietnam. For 10 points-name this author of Earth in the Balance and former Democratic presidential candidate.;;(Al)(bert) Gore(,) (Jr.);;
World History;;Its decline began in the 1390s, when it lost the battles of Kondurcha and Terek to Tamerlane. Earlier, it expanded into Poland and Hungary by defeating the Teutonic Knights at the Battle of Liegnitz. Uzbeg converted it to Islam, less than a century after Batu established it. From its capital at Sarai Berke, it exacted regular tribute in a suzerainity arrangement. For 10 points-name this Mongol state which annihilated Moscow and Kiev to establish control over Russia.;;(Empire) (of) (the) Golden Horde|Kipchak (Khanate);;
World History;;In joining the Provisional Government, Fyodor Dan and Irakli Tsereteli ignored the advice of this group's leader, Julius Martov. Formed by Grigory Plekhanov in London in 1903, they believed that a liberal, capitalist regime must be put into place before socialism could arise, and they opposed limiting party membership to "professional revolutionaries". For 10 points-name this faction, with a name meaning "one of the minority," which opposed the Bolsheviks.;;Menshevik(s)|Mensheviki;;
Biology;;The link between it and the state of the hippocampus was determined when a patient known as H.M. experienced complications after having most of his hippocampus surgically removed to stop epileptic seizures. Often linked to Korsakoff's syndrome and other sources of frontal lobe damage, for 10 points-what is this condition that comes in anterograde and retrograde varieties, a severe loss of memory?;;amnesia;;
British Literature;;The poet makes a reference to a bronze statue of Neptune at the end of this poem. The center of the work is a painting of the eponymous figure by Fra Pandolf. The speaker laments that her heart was "too easily impressed" by a "bough of cherries" and not enough by the "gift of a nine-hundred-years-old name". For 10 points-name this 1842 poem in which the speaker, the Duke of Ferrera, speaks glowingly of his former wife in a dramatic monologue by Robert Browning.;;My Last Duchess;;
Music;;Its last movement contains a theme borrowed from The Creatures of Prometheus, while the second movement is a funeral march mostly in c-minor. The opening Allegro con brio is remarkably long, and the work is dedicated "to the memory of a great man". For 10 points-name this symphony originally dedicated to Napoleon Bonaparte.;;(Beethoven)(')(s) Third (Symphony)|Eroica (Symphony);;
Geography;;In this city, restaurant owner John Hickenlooper defeated City Auditor Don Mares, a favorite of the growing Latino community, in the race to succeed mayor Wellington Webb. Webb replaced Federico Pena when the latter joined the Clinton administration. Issues include a proposed public smoking ban, construction on Interstate 25, and the water quality in the South Platte River. For 10 points-name this large state capital in the Rockies.;;Denver;;
Math Theory;;His law of phosphorescence states if a solid is capable of absorbing light it may re-emit light.  His law of terminal speed states that the viscous drag force experienced by a sphere moving through a fluid is 6 pi times the product of the radius of the sphere, the speed of the sphere and the fluid's viscocity.  For 10 points-name this Scottish physicist better known to calculus students for his theorem that relates line integrals of vector fields to surface integrals of vector fields.;;(George) (Gabriel) Stokes;;
European History;;At the Battle of Ticinus, he mounted a horse and charged the Roman troops about to encircle his fallen father. This act of courage earned this then-eighteen-year-old the corona civica, the highest Roman military citation, but he refused. Later, he defeated Gisco at Great Plains and went on to conquer another foe at Ilipa and Baecula. For 10 points-name this victor at Zama, the Roman rival of Hannibal in the Second Punic War.;;(Publius) (Cornelius) Scipio Africanus (Major)|Scipio Africanus (the) (Elder);;Scipio
Astronomy;;First proposed by Belgian priest Georges Lemaitre in 1927, evidence supporting this concept includes the observation that the helium content of most stars, regardless of age, is around twenty-five percent. In 1965, Arno Penzias and Robert Wilson observed a faint glow of radiation surrounding the earth from no specific source, an "echo" of this event. For 10 points-name this paradigm which suggests that the universe has been expanding since a primordial explosion fifteen billion years ago.;;Big Bang (Theory);;(Cosmic) (Microwave) Background Radiation
World Literature;;He attended the University of Cambridge, receiving a master's degree in history before turning to writing full-time. His short story collections include East, West and Haroun and the Sea of Stories, written for his son, while his novels include Grimus, Shame, and The Moor's Last Sigh. For 10 points-name this Indian author, the 1981 Booker Prize winner for Midnight's Children and recipient of a fatwa for his Satanic Verses.;;(Ahmed) (Salman) Rushdie;;
Philosophy;;Aristotle refers to this man as the founder of dialectic. He supported the teachings of his mentor Parmenides, who believed that the senses deceive and that change is illusory. He attempted to prove these assertions with examples such as one in which the swiftest runner, Achilles, can never catch up with a tortoise whom he allows a head start. For 10 points-name this Eleatic philosopher known for his paradoxes.;;Zeno (of) (Elea);;
Religion;;Because many characters' names are similar to those of Babylonian deities, and because it does not mention the monotheist God, some consider it an allegory on the political ascent of Babylon. A scheming Amalekite councilor is eventually hanged on gallows intended for one of the heroic figures after a chain of events beginning with the death of Vashti. For 10 points-identify this book, read on Purim, which explains how the murder of the Jews at the hands of Haman was averted by Mordecai and the titular wife of Ahaseurus.;;(Book) (of) Esther;;Megillah
Music;;Gaspar Vargas and his son Sylvestre are both considered primary influences upon this genre of music. Most ensembles usually perform renditions of Cielito Lindo and Jalisco, with characteristic gritos interspersed. For 10 points-name this band of four to nine musicians who perform songs from the heritage of Mexico, usually while wearing sombreros.;;mariachi;;
United States History;;Statues of this man, born at Mallorca in 1713, now stand both in Golden Gate Park and at the US Capitol. Beatified by Pope John Paul II in 1987, his final resting place is at San Carlos Borromeo in California. Known as the Apostle of California, he is recognized as the founder of San Diego. For 10 points-name this Franciscan who maintained twenty-one missions along the Camino Real cah-mee-no reh-ALL.;;(Miguel) (Jose) (Junipero) Serra;;
Astronomy;;Four crystals grown on it for students in Utah were found in a parking lot and will be used to complete experiments. While the ants used in an experiment for a high school in New York did not survive, worms contributed by researchers at Stanford did. Other experiments included observations by Ilya Ramon about the effect of dust storms on weather patterns. For 10 points-such tests were part of the mission of what vessel, which disintegrated upon re-entering the atmosphere on February 1, 2003?;;(Space) (Shuttle) Columbia;;
American Literature;;After studying under Robert Lowell in 1959, this author wrote the poems published as The Colossus, Crossing the Water, and Winter Trees. Her famous works include "Daddy," "Lady Lazarus," and "Edge," which has been dated to a week before her death. Using the pseudonym Victoria Lucas, she published her only novel the same year she died by putting her head in an oven. For 10 points-name this wife of Ted Hughes and author of The Bell Jar.;;(Sylvia) Plath;;
Biology;;Obstructive sleep apnea can be related to abnormally large size of these tissues. Generally applied to the palatine, lingual, and pharyngeal masses of lymphatic tissue found in most mammals, the pharyngeal pair is commonly known as the "adenoids". For 10 points-name these oval-shaped tissues that doctors are now more hesitant to remove surgically, found in the throat.;;tonsil(s);;
Music;;It first appeared in a 1917 collection entitled Saltbush Bill, J.P., and Other Verses. This poem describes a hobo who drowns himself after being accosted by a Trooper inquiring about the jumbuck in a Tucker bag. It starts when a jolly swagman sits beside a billabong under the shade of a coolibah tree. For 10 points-name this unofficial national anthem of Australia.;;Waltzing Matilda;;
United States History;;Directed by Robert Fechner, it paid twenty-five dollars a month to three million recipients. Its projects included planting trees, building flood barriers, laying telephone lines, fighting forest fires, and maintaining forest roads and trails. For 10 points-name this "makework" agency of the New Deal.;;C(ivilian) C(onservation) C(orps) (E)(mergency) (C)(onservation) (W)(ork) (Act);;
Art;;From his early works in Russia to landscapes he created in Munich during the 1910's, many of his paintings feature a horse-and-rider motif that symbolized his defiance of the conservative aesthetic values of the Neue Kunstlervereinigung KOONST-ler-vair-AYE-ni-gung. The motif also appeared on the cover of his manifesto, On the Spiritual in Art. For 10 points-name this painter of the Composition and Impression series who joined with Franz Marc to found Der Blau Reiter.;;(Vassily) Kandinsky;;
World Literature;;His first novel, Mockery of the Fates, was written in 1939 when he was first working at the Ministry of Islamic Affairs. The Children of Gebelawi has been banned throughout most of the Arab world, and the book may have inspired the man who stabbed him in the neck. For 10 points-name this writer of Palace Walk, Palace of Desire, and Sugar Street, the Cairo Trilogy.;;(Naghib) Mahfouz;;
Physics;;This phenomenon was first observed in mercury cooled to 4.2 Kelvin by Heike Kammerlingh Onnes, and its basic physics are described by the theory of John Bardeen, Robert Schrieffer, and Leon Cooper, in which electrons move in pairs. Modern ones involve ceramics containing rare earths, and the search for a room-temperature one is ongoing. For 10 points-name this property of materials that exhibit no resistance to the flow of electrons.;;superconductivity;;
United States History;;In ruling on these documents, the Court held that the "heavy presumption" against prior restraint was not overcome. Justices Black and Douglas opined that the vague word "security" should not be used to supersede the First Amendment. Thus, the Nixon administration's attempt to suppress their publication was overturned in New York Times v. United States. For 10 points-name these documents obtained by Daniel Ellsberg which expressed Defense Department concerns about the Vietnam War.;;Pentagon Papers;;
Architecture;;Adjacent to St. James's Park, it was built in 1703 by its namesake duke before being remodeled by John Nash in 1825. The eastern facade was added in 1847, the great ballroom was added in 1856, and in 1913 Sir Aston Webb designed a new front. For 10 points-name this 600-room residence purchased by George III in 1761.;;Buckingham Palace;;
Mythology;;His ship, Hringhorn, was the largest in the world, and upon his death it was set afire and pushed into the sea bearing his body and the body of his wife, Nanna, who died of a broken heart. After he died, Hel offered to resurrect him if every creature on earth mourned for him, though this effort failed because Loki disguised himself as a giantess and refused to mourn. For 10 points-name this Norse god who was killed when his blind brother Hodur hit him with a dart made of mistletoe.;;Baldur;;
Art;;It was formed by four Philadelphia Press staffers who later created the Society of Independent Artists. This group had no particular program but was held together by a common opposition to academicism, as seen in the works of Arthur B. Davies, Maurice Prendergast, Ernest Lawson, and John Sloan, which depicted urban life realistically. For 10 points-name this group, also called "the eight," led by Robert Henri.;;Ashcan (School);;(The) Eight
Biology;;Also called chronic adrenocortical insufficiency, deterioration of tissue in its sufferers causes a decrease in the secretion of steroid hormones, many of which are necessary for the maintenance of life. Visible symptoms include weight loss and abnormal pigmentation of the skin and mucous membranes. For 10 points-what is this progressive disease brought about by atrophy of the outer layer, or cortex, of the adrenal gland, a disease that most famously afflicted John F. Kennedy?;;Addison(')(s) (Disease);;
United States History;;It was conceived by John McConnell, who persuaded the San Francisco Board of Supervisors to pass a resolution in observance of it. It was first celebrated by the United Nations on March 21, 1971, with the ringing of the Peace Bell at the moment of the vernal equinox. That same year, Senator Gaylord Nelson declared a week-long celebration in April. For 10 points-name this environmental holiday.;;Earth Day;;
European History;;In September 2002, he defeated Edmund Stoiber of the Conservative Social Union to retain his job. Since then, he has had to apologize for comments made by Joschka Fischer, his foreign minister, who took this man's own anti-war line to extremes by calling George W. Bush "Adolf Nazi". For 10 points-name this leader of the Social Democrats and Chancellor of Germany.;;(Gerhard) Schroder;;
European History;;After he deposed the powerful Praetorian Guard commander Perennis for conspiring against him, he installed Cleander, whose corruption outraged the people to riot. He banished his wife Crispina for another conspiracy and executed his sister Lucilla for a third. Coins and busts of him often depict him with a club and a lion skin wrapped around his shoulders, for he thought himself a reincarnation of Hercules. For 10 points-name this successor of Marcus Aurelius who actually was killed in a gladiatorial fight.;;(Lucius) (Aelius) (Aurelius) Commodus;;
American Literature;;Tom grows up at Offal Court, where his drunken father punishes him whenever he comes home empty after a day of begging on the streets. When opportunity presents itself, he pardons the Duke of Norfolk and many prisoners to the adulation of the public. He is just about to be crowned when Edward storms in and declares his identity. For 10 points-name this story about switching places between social classes by Mark Twain.;;(The) Prince and the Pauper;;
American Literature;;The author stated that this poem "takes up the theme where A Tuft of Flower's…laid it down". The speaker comments that "Spring is the mischief in me, and I wonder / If I could put a notion in his head". The speaker's conversant "moves in darkness as it seems to me, / Not of woods only and the shade of trees". For 10 points-identify this Robert Frost poem that ends with the statement "Good fences make good neighbours".;;Mending Wall;;
United States History;;As of May 2003, any city official in Arcata, California, could be fined fifty-seven dollars for voluntarily complying with it. Passing 357 to 66 in the House and 98 to 1 in the Senate, it expands the "pen register" statute to allow the equivalent of wiretapping in Internet-based and cell-phone-based communications. For 10 points-name this legislation which expanded federal powers after the September 11 attacks.;;(U(niting)) (and) (S(trengthening)) (A(merica)) (by) P(roviding) A(ppropriate) T(ools) R(equired) (to) I(ntercept) (and) O(bstruct) T(errorism) (Act);;
American Literature;;The narrator laments, "I should have been a pair of ragged claws / Scuttling across the floors of silent seas". Earlier, he comments he has "known the arms already, / known them all - / Arms that are braceleted and white and bare". Later in this poem, the narrator and title character asserts he is "not Prince Hamlet, nor was meant to be", and asks "Do I dare / Disturb the universe"? Beginning with the line "Let us go then, you and I," for 10 points-identify this poem by T. S. Eliot about the women coming and going and talking of Michelangelo.;;(The) Lovesong of J(.) Alfred Prufrock;;
European History;;He angered many by making his lover George Villiers the Earl of Buckingham. Despite his affair with Villiers, he had eight children with Anne of Denmark, but only three survived past the age of two. A prolific author, he wrote a treatise against the use of tobacco and a defense of the divine right of kings. For 10 points-name this son of Mary Queen of Scots and father of Charles I, the first Stuart king of England and the patron of a namesake translation of the Bible.;;James I|James VI (of) (Scotland);;James
Philosophy;;Modern proponents of this general school include Richard Hare, Henry Sidgwick, and Peter Singer. This idea was propounded by the chemist Joseph Priestley in the political tract, Essay on the First Principles of Government. Other advocates included William Paley and Jeremy Bentham, as well John Stuart Mill in a namesake book. For 10 points-name this philosophy which believes that the measure of right is actions which serve "the greatest good for the greatest number".;;utilitarianism;;
Biology;;Comprised of repeating motifs, they range from a few hundred to several thousand base pairs in length. Because they're symmetrical, they easily invert during meiosis. For 10 points-identify these segments of "junk" DNA or "switching genes" which, like transposons, were discovered by Barbara McClintock.;;intron(s);;
Art;;Under the tutelage of Bayeu, he painted the frescoes in the Church of the Virgin in El Pilar. He mocked social customs with his series of prints, Los Caprichios and returned to that medium for a somber commentary on the Napoleonic period, The Disasters of War. As court painter, he made a harshly realistic portrait of The Family of Charles IV and produced both the Naked Maja and the Clothed Maja. For 10 points-name this painter of the horrific Saturn Devouring One of His Sons and The Third of May, 1808.;;(Francisco) (Jose) (de) Goya (y) (Lucientes);;
World Literature;;Though he was known by the name of Kinsaku while working in the service of Todo Yoshitada, he changed his name in the 1680s to that of his home, the "Cottage of the Plantain Tree". A traveler for much of his life, he penned the travelogues The Records of a Travel Worn Satchel and The Narrow Road to the Deep North. For 10 points-name this Japanese author, the developer and master of haiku.;;(Matsuo) Basho (Matsuo)|Munefusa;;
European Literature;;The first play in this trilogy details the murder of the title character and his slave Cassandra by his treacherous wife and her lover Aegisthus. The second play shows the vengeance wrought by Agamemmnon's son against Clytemnestra. The son is promptly chased to Athens by the title characters of the third play, where he is absolved by Athena and the Areopagus. For 10 points-Agamemmnon, The Libation Bearers and The Eumenides make up what trilogy by Aeschylus?;;Oresteia;;
Biology;;Patients treated with penicillin often exhibit the Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction, which is an immediate general worsening of symptoms like anxiety, malaise, and exacerbated lesions. Caused by the spirochete Treponema palladium, some believe it was transmitted to European colonists by long-immune Native Americans. For 10 points-name this sexually-transmitted disease that was investigated in the infamous Tuskegee Study.;;syphilis;;
World History;;This onetime country was weakened after France and the U.S. attempted to invade to reverse the outlawing of Christianity. Emperor Taewongun countered the invasions but the country was left too weak to repel a 1910 annexation. After the death of Kojong, a 1919 Declaration of Independence began a year of mass demonstration and triggered over seven thousand deaths at the hands of the Japanese military. For 10 points-name this country which regained its independence after World War II but was split in two in 1948.;;Korea;;
Geography;;In May 2003, the European Union announced plans to send a multinational force to supplant the French troops in the Ituri region, in the eastern part of this country, which has seen the worst of its five-year civil war. Invasions by Uganda and Rwanda and ethnic clashes between the Hema and Lendu have caused thousands of deaths and several incidents of cannibalism. For 10 points-name this central African country in which fighting continued past the assassination of Laurent Kabila in 2001.;;D(emocratic) (Republic) (of) (the) Congo|DRC;;Congo|Zaire
United States History;;Because Grant chose to drill his men rather than fortify the positions here, the Army of the Mississippi initially routed several units. However, reinforcements from Don Carlos Buell's Army of the Ohio and the mortal wounding of Albert Sidney Johnston, which forced P.T. Beauregard to take full command mid-battle, spelled defeat for the southern forces. For 10 points-name this battle of April 6th and 7th, 1862, in Tennessee.;;(Battle) (of) Shiloh|(Battle) (of) Pittsburg Landing;;
Linguistics;;As an adjective, it describes an "uncle" who is stern and reproving. People who are intoxicated are prime examples of this kind of "courage". It also describe the half-doors one can see in barns. For 10 points-what adjective also describes an "auction" in which bid prices drop and a "treat" in which everyone pays his own share?;;Dutch;;
Astronomy;;Now remembered by a monument in Star City, she sent data to a television camera and various life function monitors for four days, until her cabin overheated in November 1957. Her sacrifice provided crucial data on the conditions necessary for manned spaceflight. For 10 points-name this passenger on Sputnik 2, the first dog in space.;;Laika|Kudryavka;;
Biology;;Among the varieties of this animal species are Tatersall's Sifaka, a particularly acrobatic and colorful version, the much larger indri, the avahi, and the hairy-eared pygmy variety. A research center at Duke University examines these slim-bodied prosimians related to the loris and the potto. For 10 points-what are these primates, living mainly on the island of Madagascar?;;lemur;;
Religion;;Followers believe that every living thing has a soul, or jiva, and that it can be freed from the body to live in eternal bliss by avoiding worldly pursuits. The holy sadhus and sadhvis try to live ideal lives, refraining from killing any living thing, holding almost no property, and begging for food. Divisions include the "white clad" and naked or "sky clad". For 10 points-name this religion founded by Mahavira.;;Jainism;;
British Literature;;The title character suffers such indignities as being flung over the city walls and dying by falling into a boiling cauldron which he had prepared. Earlier, he murders an entire convent of nuns, including his daughter Abigail, with a poisoned gift of porridge. For 10 points-Barrabas is the title character of what Christopher Marlowe play?;;(The) Jew of Malta;;
Economics;;Under the Cournot model of this structure, firms simultaneously determine their output, while under the Bertrand model firms make simultaneous decisions about price. Real world examples include the automobile industry for differentiated products and the steel and oil industries for non-differentiated products. For 10 points-name this market system where the production and distribution of a good is dominated by a few large firms.;;oligopoly;;
United States History;;Under the command of Raphael Semmes, it won seventy engagements before it was sunk off the coast of Cherbourg, France by the U.S.S. Kearsarge. Its namesake "claims" awarded over fifteen million dollars, ruling that the country which built it was responsible for its actions. For 10 points-name this British-built Confederate ship which targeted Union commerce.;;(C(.)S(.)A(.)) Alabama;;
Music;;Don Magnifico, the Baron of Montefiascone, provides fine clothes for Clorinda and Tisbe while the title character, the servant Angelina, watches. The valet Dandini switches places with his master to test the character of the girls. Ferretti's libretto shows Angelina rewarded for kindness to Dandini and Alidoro, the tutor of Prince Ramiro. For 10 points-name this Rossini opera.;;Cinderella|(La) Cenerentola;;
Geography;;The western branch extends around 700 miles and has barrancas that compare with the dimensions of the Grand Canyon in the United States, while the southern branch is home to the Valley of Oaxaca. In it, one can find Pico de Orizaba, also called Citlaltépetl, the highest peak in its country. For 10 points-name this extension of the Cordillera, a large mountain range in Mexico.;;Sierra Madre (Mountains);;
Art;;The line translating as "Look, if I loved you it was because of your hair. Now that you are without hair, I don't love you anymore" is shown on the top of her 1940 Self-Portrait with Cropped Hair, in which she wears a man's shirt, shoes, and an oversized suit. Her Self-Portrait With Monkeys and The Dream are among many other works showing the consquences of a 1925 accident. For 10 points-name the artist whose unfortunate encounter with a bus came before she married Diego Rivera.;;(Frida) Kahlo (Self)(-)(Portrait) (with) (Cropped) (Hair);;
Geography;;Silver was discovered here in 1877 by prospector Ed Schieffelin, who planned the city two years later. Its newspaper, The Epitaph, was first published in 1880, and this city was the seat of Cochise County from 1881 to 1929. Its violent past is reenacted each year at the Helldorado celebrations, located near the Dragoon Mountains, the Bird Cage Theater, and Boot Hill Graveyard. For 10 points-name this Arizona town where Billy Clanton and Wyatt Earp had a showdown at the O.K. Corral.;;Tombstone;;
United States History;;In his 1898 speech to the Chicago Peace Jubilee, "Imperialism: Its Dangers and Wrongs," he denounced the "hordes of savage races" about to enter the U.S. via annexed territory. After attending an 1879 lecture from the Christian socialist Thomas Hughes, he began using peaceful pressure tactics, although he went to prison in 1908 for violating an anti-boycott order during his feud with Buck's Stove and Range Company. For 10 points-name this New York cigar maker who founded the American Federation of Labor.;;(Samuel) Gompers;;
Astronomy;;Known by many Persian astronomers as "Isfahan," it was called a "little cloud" by Abd-al-Rahman Al-Sufi in his Book of Fixed Stars. In 1912, Vesto Melvin Silpher measured its radial velocity to be around 300 kilometers per second, and Edwin Hubble found the first Cepheid variable in it in 1923. Its brightest star cloud was discovered by William Hershel and is named NGC 206, and the Hubble Space Telescope showed it had a double nucleus. For 10 points-name this galaxy, Messier object 31 and the closest galaxy to the Milky Way.;;Andromeda (Galaxy);;M31
United States History;;Brian Stafford resigned as its leader in December 2002, and new director Ralph Basham will attempt to prevent a fourth appearance of Rich Weaver, the "Handshake Man" who has slipped past its agents three times in order to deliver letters he claims are written by Jesus. For 10 points-what agency, formerly under the Treasury department but now part of the Homeland Security department, provides bodyguards to the highest federal officials, including the President?;;Secret Service;;
Music;;Prince Siegfried receives a crossbow for his twenty-first birthday and is to attend a party to choose a bride. However, Siegfried becomes captivated by Odette, who is under a spell cast by the sorcerer von Rothbart. For 10 points-name this ballet in which Siegfried must prevent Odette from being forever transformed into a bird, scored by Tchaikovsky.;;Swan Lake|Lebedinoye Ozero|(Le) Lac des Cygnes;;
World Literature;;A village schoolteacher, she turned to poetry after a short-lived affair with a railroad worker who killed himself. Her volumes included Ternura and Desolacion, while she gained immediate praise for her first collection, Sonnets of Death. For 10 points-name this Chilean-born poet, the first Latin American winner of the Nobel in Literature.;;(Gabriela) Mistral|(Lucila) Godoy (y) (Alcayaga);;
United States History;;First emerging under the leadership of Wodziwob in the Paiute, it had beliefs similar to the cargo cults of Melanesia, foretelling the return of ancestors on a train and a great explosion which would destroy other races. Revived by Wovoka, its popularity with the Sioux led to the Wounded Knee massacre. Its practice lasted for five days every six weeks, from dusk to dawn each day. For 10 points-name this late ninteenth century religious movement among Native Americans of the Plains.;;Ghost Dance;;
World History;;Preceded by the Taft-Katsura armistice, news of it caused the Hibiya Riot. Article III called for a simultaneous evacuation of Manchuria with the exception of the Liaodong Peninsula, which contained the cities of Talien and Port Arthur. Article IX gave the winner Sakhalin island, while Article XI transferred fishing rights in the Sea of Okhotsk. For 10 points-name this treaty, signed in New Hampshire, which earned Theodore Roosevelt the 1906 Nobel Peace prize for ending the Russo-Japanese War.;;(Treaty) (of) Portsmouth;;
Biology;;This practice is described in the Ling Shu section of the Nei Jing. Updated techniques for it were later given by Huang Fu Mi and Yang Jizhou, who wrote Zhenjin Dacheng, which was influential to Soulie de Mourant. Modern medicine considers its idea of manipulating "meridian lines" of energy an effective treatment when phrased in terms of of endorphins. For 10 points-name this practice in which yin-yang imbalances are controlled through precise insertion of moxibustion sticks and pins in the body.;;acupuncture;;zhen jiu|moxibustion
United States History;;In 1976, he was involved in a fight over a card game at La Amapola Bar and stabbed to death. Nine years earlier, his common-law wife, Twila Hoffman, testified against him in a second trial on the charge of sexually assaulting a movie theater attendant in 1963. His original conviction had been overturned when he sued the state of Arizona and won in the Supreme Court. For 10 points-identify this namesake of the short speech, including the right to attorney and the right to remain silent, which must be read to arrested defendants.;;(Ernesto) Miranda;;
Music;;First used by Stravinsky in the 1958 cantata Threni, this technique's features include the Hauptstimme howpt shtim me and Nebenstimme nay bun shtim me, or primary and secondary musical voices. For 10 points-name this dominant academic musical style of the second half of the twentieth century, marked by its use of twelve-tone rows.;;serialism|serialist;;dodecaphonic|twelve(-)tone
Biology;;It consists of a framework of cartilage and its surrounding soft tissue. Just superior to it is a U-shaped bone called the hyoid, which is an important attachment point for the strap muscles which raise this structure during swallowing. For 10 points- name this structure in the neck that modulates air to assist in the production of speech.;;larynx|voice box;;
World History;;It ended in 1085 BCE when Smendes began a rival government at Tanis following the establishment of theocracy at Thebes and the death of Ramses XI. It began with the accession of Ahmose I and included the battles of Meggido and Kadesh, the reigns of Thutmose III, Akhenaton, and Hatsepshut, and the establishment of the Valley of the Kings. For 10 points-name this period including the eighteenth through twentieth Egyptian dynasties.;;New Kingdom;;Twentieth Dynasty|20th Dynasty
World History;;Established just after the Uruguay Round negotiations, which lasted from 1986 to 1994, it is currently headed by director-general Supachai Panitchpakdi. Intended to provide an international forum for economic disputes and provide technical assistance and training in developing nations, it has been criticized by leftist groups as a threat to the environment and a front for corporate interests. For 10 points-name this international organization targeted by protests during its 1999 summit in Seattle.;;W(orld) T(rade) O(rganization);;
Mythology;;He died when the daughters of King Cocalus poured boiling water over him as he was bathing. The son of Zeus and Europa, he had the help of Poseidon in gaining control over the Aegean Islands, but after he failed to sacrifice a bull, Poseidon took revenge by implanting an "unnatural passion" in his daughter Phaedra. For 10 points-name this ruler of Crete who sacrificed Athenian youths to the resultant Minotaur.;;(King) Minos;;
United States History;;He became executive of Baltimore County in 1962 on a graduated-tax platform and was elected governor of Maryland five years later. Fond of alliteration, his speeches denounced "pusillanimous pussyfooting" and "the nattering nabobs of negativism". For 10 points-name this man who, after pleading no contest to accepting bribes, resigned from his position as Richard Nixon's first Vice-President.;;(Spiro) (Theodore) Agnew|(Spiro) Anagnostopoulos;;
American Literature;;Thelma, his former mistress, is diagnosed with lupus in his last appearance. In his introduction to the reader at age twenty-six, he muses about his horrible job selling the MagiPeeler, sees his pregnant wife Janice get drunk again, and dominates a pickup basketball game. For 10 points-name this title character of four John Updike novels.;;(Rabbit|Harry){1}? (Angstrom);;
Chemistry;;Originally named "niton" when isolated by William Ramsay in 1908, and also known as "thoron," it was originally discovered by Frederich Dorn in 1898. Its most stable isotope, 222, has a half-life of almost four days and decays into alpha particles and polonium, thus making it useful in chemotherapy and a dangerous carcinogen. Produced naturally by the underground decay of radium-for 10 points-name this heaviest noble gas.;;radon;;
Art;;A student of its painter's work, Sarah Crank, created a sculpture of this painting's central figure entirely out of wooden shingles, in homage to the critic who referred to it as "an explosion in a shingle factory". Fusing futurism and cubism, it sparked controversy at the 1913 Armory Show. For 10 points-name this somewhat abstract painting by Marcel Duchamp.;;Nude Descending a Staircase(,) (Number) (2);;
Math Theory;;It was most recently awarded in 2002, when Laurent Lafforgue and Vladimir Voevodsky won. In 1966 it was expanded to as many as four winners per year by an international congress in Toronto. At its inception, nominations were limited to those under forty years of age. For 10 points-name this prize considered the "Nobel of mathematics".;;Fields (Medal);;
Physics;;At any junction in a circuit, conservation of charge must be maintained, so the sum of current entering a circuit junction must equal the sum of currents exiting the junction. In addition, the algebraic sum of the increases or decreases of electrical potential around a given closed circuit loop must be zero. For 10 points-those are whose rules for determining voltage drops in a DC?;;(Gustav) (Robert) Kirchhoff(')(s) (rules);;
Philosophy;;He disliked being called an existentialist, and he often coined new terms such as "dasein" in his works, making his prose somewhat difficulty to read. Although he had a lengthy affair with anti-Nazi Hannah Arendt, he had to retire from Freiburg after World War II because of his support for Hitler's regime. For 10 points-name this author of Being and Time.;;(Martin) Heidegger;;
United States History;;Its chief justice was John Nash and its governor was William B. Ide. It began on June 14 with the seizure of Sonoma and the hasty painting of the namesake object by William Todd, a nephew of Lincoln. Taking advantage of the Mexican-American War, it existed for only a few months in 1846 under the de facto leadership of John C. Fremont. For 10 points-name this country in present-day California.;;Bear Flag (Republic);;
Geography;;A national park since 1986, it boasts such varied scenery as the summit of Wheeler Peak, the sagebrush of its alluvial base, and the depths of the Lehman Caves. It is bordered by the Sierra Nevada on the west, the Columbia Plateau on the north, the Rockies on the northeast, the Colorado Plateau on the east, and the Mojave Desert on the south. For 10 points-name this topographic feature covering parts of six states and containing Death Valley.;;Great Basin;;
Biology;;The last Comanche chief, Quanah Parker, was allegedly cured of illness by ingesting a tea made from this, and he introduced it to numerous tribes in Oklahoma. In 1990's Employment Division v. Smith, the Supreme Court ruled that Oregon state laws prohibiting its use did not violate First Amendment rights to religion freedom. For 10 points-name this hallucinogenic drug that contains mescaline and comes from a cactus.;;peyote;;
United States History;;He is buried under a willow tree which he planted from a cutting taken at the tomb of Napoleon. He remained in his Senate seat after Tennessee seceeded, leading the War Democrats, and he became military governor of Tennessee before he was nominated as Vice-President. For 10 points-name this unpopular President whose violation of the Tenure of Office Act sparked his impeachment.;;(Andrew) Johnson;;
Art;;A backlash against subjectivity and lack of form in art, this movement applied modern theories of color to painting, as in Port of St. Tropez by Paul Signac and The Wicked Mothers by Giovanni Segantini. Felix Feneon coined the term after viewing Bathing at Asnieres in 1886. For 10 points-name this movement which painted with small dots of primary colors, as in the works of George Seurat.;;neoimpressionism|pointillism||divisionism;;
American Literature;;He enlisted in the Air Force after serving thirty days in juvenile detention before his high school graduation, but he did not like the military rules or electronics school. After the sports editor of the base's newspaper the Command Courier was arrested, he found his calling filling the shoes, and he eventually hung around the Hell's Angels to write a chronicle and inspired the character of Uncle Duke in Doonesvbury. For 10 points-name this "gonzo journalist" of Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas.;;(Hunter) (S.) Thompson;;
Mythology;;According to Ovid, she said, "Why should Latona be honored with worship, and none be paid to me? My father was Tantalus … My husband built and rules this city, Thebes, and Phrygia is my paternal inheritance. … Will you prefer to me this Latona, the Titan's daughter, with her two children? I have seven times as many". For 10 points-name this queen of Thebes whose husband Amphion and children were killed by Apollo and Diana for her boasting.;;Niobe;;
British Literature;;Frank Churchill saves her from an attacking group of gypsies after she was snubbed by Mr. Elton at the Crown Inn, but she becomes heartbroken when Frank becomes engaged to Jane Fairfax. Fortunately she marries Robert Martin after she finds out she's the daughter of a tradesman. For 10 points-name this seventeen-year-old orphan and protégé of Emma Woodhouse.;;(Harriet) Smith Harriet;;
European History;;A bust of alumnus Lord Byron is on display at its Wren Library, which also contains an eigth-century copy of the Epistles of St. Paul. Thirty-one Nobel prize-winners are among this college's distinguished scientific alumni, including Isaac Newton and James Maxwell. For 10 points-name this college founded by Henry VIII in 1546, now the largest at the University of Cambridge.;;Trinity (College);;(University) (of) Cambridge
United States History;;His wake was held at the rotunda of the state capitol when he died in 1980. In 1964, he sold his company to John Brown and Jack Massey, twenty-five years after opening his first restaurant in Corbin. He began cooking at age seven and was eventually appointed to the state's order of ambassadors by Governor Ruby Laffoon. For 10 points-name this man who created a secret blend of eleven herbs and spices, the founder and mascot of Kentucky Fried Chicken.;;(Colonel) (Harland) Sanders;;
European History;;Contemporary legend held that they were descended from the rulers of Atlantis or an affair between Jesus and Mary Magdalene. Noted for their long hair, they were founded by a Salian who fought Attila the Hun alongside the Romans, Clovis I. For 10 points-name this dynasty which reunited the Frankish lands under Clothar II and was succeeded by the Carolingians.;;Merovingian(s);;
American Literature;;He believes that the concept of wanting to go to the movies is depressing, and he fights with his roommate on the suspicion that the latter seduced Jane Gallagher. His older brother, D.B., is a writer in Hollywood, and his sister Phoebe composes stories about "Hazle Weatherfield, Girl Detective". His younger brother, Allie, died of leukemia, leaving this character to eulogize him in an essay at Pencey Prep. For 10 points-name this phony-hating sixteen-year-old, the protagonist of J.D. Salinger's Catcher in the Rye.;;Holden (Caulfield);;
World Literature;;During his literary career, he worked as a volunteer census taker and medical inspector during cholera epidemics. At his estate in Melikhove, he wrote short stories such as "The Black Monk" and "Ward Number Six". His plays tell of such characters as the writer Konstantin Trepliov, the wannabe actress Nina Zarechnaya, the declining Ranevsky family, and the group Olga, Irina, and Masha. For 10 points-name this author of "The Cherry Orchard," "The Seagull," and "Three Sisters".;;(Anton) (Pavlovich) Chek(h)ov;;
World History;;While serving as a congressman, he became a millionaire by taking a ten percent cut of license applications as chairman of his country's import board. Elected president in 1965, he declared martial law in 1972, and he sparked widespread protest by arranging the assassination of opposition leader Benigno Aquino in 1983. In 1986, he fled to Hawaii after attempting to block the installation of Benigno's widow Corazon as the new president. For 10 points-name this longtime dictator of the Philippines.;;(Ferdinand) (Edralin) Marcos;;
Geography;;This country's largest car manufacturer is Perusahaan Otomobil Nasional, or Proton, which was set up in 1985 by Mahathir bin Mohammed, who will step down as Prime Minister this year. Other large companies include the oil firm Petronas, housed in namesake enormous towers. For 10 points-name this nation with territory on Borneo and a namesake peninsula.;;(Federation) (of) Malaysia|(Persekutuan) (Tanah) Malaysia;;
Chemistry;;This geometry is present in covalent network compounds, such as silicon and gallium-arsenic mixtures. It is also the geometry of choice for organic compounds. The central atom of this molecular bonding geometry exhibits sp3 hybridization and a bond angle of 109.5 degrees. For 10 points-name this molecular bonding geometry exhibited most famously by methane.;;tetrahedral;;
European Literature;;As a member of the circle called Le Petit Cénacle, he wrote Peter Camenzind, about an urbanite who moves to the country to emulate Francis of Assisi. He discussed the marriages of artists in Rosshalde and used the name of narrator Emil Sinclair as a pseudonym to publish Demian. His other characters include Josef Knecht, the master of the futuristic Glass Bead Game, and the lonely Harry Haller. For 10 points-name this author of Steppenwolf and Siddhartha.;;(Hermann) Hesse;;
British Literature;;It included economist Gerald Shove, sculptor Stephen Tomlin, critics Raymond Mortimer and Roger Fry, and, variously, Aldous Huxley, Alfred North Whitehead, Bertrand Russell, T.S. Eliot, Lytton Strachey, G.E. Moore, and Vanessa Bell. For 10 points-name this London intellectual circle that also included E.M. Forster, John Maynard Keynes, and Virginia Woolf.;;Bloomsbury (Group);;
United States History;;This policy was created in reaction to Britain's announcement that foreign aid would cease in March 1947. In a speech over radio and to a joint session of Congress, it was introduced with the promise that "It must be the policy of the United States to support free peoples who are resisting attempted subjugation by armed minorities or by outside pressures". For 10 points-name this policy which sent economic aid in hopes of keeping communism out of Greece and Turkey.;;Truman (doctrine);;
Economics;;It was introduced on March 4, 1957 and first broke a thousand points in 1998. Inclusion is determined by a committee of analysts who examine market value, trading activity, and industry group classification. In 1988, the fixed representation of industrial firms was removed in order to create a more precise model of the stock market. For 10 points-name this benchmark measure of the equity market which relies on the performance of a fixed number of stocks.;;S(tandard) (and) P(oor's) 500;;
British Literature;;He lived on the banks of the Gladden River with the Stoor tribe in the sixteenth century. His life took a dramatic turn on his twenty-fifth birthday, when, during a swim in the River Anduin, he killed his cousin Deagol. For the next five hundred years, he lurked under the Misty Mountains, capturing fish with the aid of his "precious". For 10 points-name this loser of the Riddle Game who vacillated between helping and killing Frodo in an attempt to regain the One Ring.;;Gollum|Sméagol;;
Music;;In 1832, Georg Kopprasch published a series of technical etudes for this instrument. The crooked version was abandoned in the mid-nineteenth century in favor of the present valved type. Around 1750, Dresden musician Anton Joseph Hampel codified the technique for altering the tone by inserting the right hand into the bell. For 10 points-name this instrument, developed in the country of its name.;;French horn;;horn
Religion;;He was conceived by a ray of light hitting the virgin Dughdova, and when he was born, he laughed. After reaching age 30, he received many revelations from the Holy Immortals and was thus able to resist the temptations of Ahriman. For 10 points-name this religious leader who wrote the Avesta to explain his Persian monotheistic faith.;;Zoroaster|Zarathustra;;
World History;;Instruments for its use include the Kaiten, the Peggy, and the Sally, and the missiles developed for it were known as baka, or "fool". Deriving its name from a fortuitous event which dispersed a Mongol invasion fleet in 1281, it was most prevalent at the Battle of Leyte Gulf. For 10 points-name this practice which killed five thousand shipmen at Okinawa, a Japanese suicide tactic of World War II.;;kamikaze|inoguchi xi;;divine wind|good wind
Biology;;In the eighteenth century, John Needham and Lazzaro Spallanzani performed experiments involving microbes and soups to verify or disprove this theory and the existence of a "life force". Although Francisco Redi had disproved the theory for animals in the seventeenth century with an experiment involving meat and maggots, it was not until 1864 that Louis Pasteur disproved it for microbes by using swan-neck flasks. For 10 points-name this since theory that states living things arise without outside intervention from non-living things.;;spontaneous generation|abiogenesis;;
Psychology;;It was expected he would become a rabbi like his father, grandfather, and great-grandfather; but the death of his father before entering college eventually made him more secular. The founder of the first social science scholarly journal in France, the death of his son Andre in 1916 was devastating. The uncle of fellow sociologist Marcel MAuss, his works include The Division of Labor in Society.  For 10 points-name this creator of the concept of "anomie" and author of the study Le Suicide.;;(Emile) Durkheim;;
American Literature;;Its authentic feeling results from the stay of the author, a great niece of Harriet Beecher Stowe, in the sanatorium of Dr. S. Weir Mitchell. The narrator is confined to her bedroom in a summer house as part of the rest cure for her "nervousness". The narrator's husband John insists that she remain completely inactive, not even picking up a pen to write. For 10 points-name this short story by Charlotte Perkins Gilman.;;(The) Yellow Wallpaper;;
Art;;Breton Riviere's painting on this theme shows the human subject from the back, while Henry Ossawa Tanner's painting covers the same man's face with shadows. In contrast, Peter Paul Rubens's painting shows a fully lighted man looking towards the heavens as the titular beasts squint at the morning light. For 10 points-give the common title of these works about a prophet and confidant of King Darius who is saved from being eaten.;;Daniel in the Lions(') Den;;
Geography;;It was originally the residence of Sir Thomas Knyvet, the Justice of the Peace who arrested Guy Fawkes. Its last private tenant was one Mr. Chicken, who moved out in 1735. Attacked by a mortar bomb in 1991, it stands on Thorney Island between two branches of the River Tyburn. For 10 points-name this building in which the Prime Minister of England resides.;;10 Downing (Street);;
Biology;;Its medial preoptic area, which is 2.5 times larger in men than in women, partially controls sexual behavior. The nucleus of the solitary tract relays information such as blood pressure from the vagus nerve to this organ, and its nigrostriatal feeding and paraventricular satiety systems control are among the parts which secrete somatostatin, thyrotropin-releasing hormone, and gonadotropin-releasing hormone to stimulate the pituitary gland. For 10 points-name this endocrine organ responsible for hunger, thirst, and other homeostatic functions, located beneath the thalamus.;;hypothalamus;;
European History;;The original namesake of modern Cologne, she was killed at Antium after opposing the marriage of Poppaea Sabina and favoring her younger son Britannicus. She first married Gnaeus Domitius Ahenobarbus, while her third husband was Emperor Claudius, whom she may have fed poisoned mushrooms in her plot to put her son on the throne. For 10 points-name this sister of Caligula and mother and victim of Nero.;;Agrippina (the) (Younger);;
European Literature;;According to the Persian, he was the son of a master mason near Rouen. Exhibited as a freak in touring shows across Asia and Europe, he became a master architect who practiced ventriloquism and legerdemain. He demands 20,000 francs a month  from Debienne and Poligny. For 10 points-name this composer of  Don Juan Triumphant who tutors Christine Daae in a novel by Gaston Leroux.;;Phantom (of) (the) (Opera)|Opera Ghost||Erik;;
Geography;;The names given to the four rooms inside of it were Camp Unity, Las Vegas Area, Heartbreak Hotel, and New Guy Village. Though in its native language it is named Hoa Lu, meaning "portable earthen stove," the French soldiers who built it in 1901 named it "rue de la Prison". For 10 points-name this complex which, from August 1964 to March 1973, house U.S. POWs in the North Vietnamese capital.;;Hanoi Hilton;;
American Literature;;It opens with John T. Unger leaving the small Mississippi town of Hades. Unger arrives in St. Midas' School, an exclusive prep institution, where he meets wealthy scion Percy Washington, whose father possesses the title object, upon which a chateau sits in the Montana Rockies. For 10 points-name this F. Scott Fitzgerald short story about a gem "bigger than a walnut".;;(A) Diamond as Big as the Ritz;;
Geography;;At its narrowest point, it is only fifty-five miles wide between Cape Dezhnyov and Cape Prince of Wales. Parts are as shallow as one hundred feet, and during the winter, ice fields cover its entirety, connecting the Diomede Islands to the Chukchi and Seward Peninsulas. For 10 points-name this waterway which separates Alaska and Siberia and may have been the entryway for Native American immigration.;;Bering Strait;;
Biology;;It contains the tectorial membrane, which runs across hair cells numbering nearly 25,000 and lining most of the basilar membrane. After the stapes acts on the oval window, the traveling wave results in a shearing force affecting the organ of Corti and consequently transduction of sound. Coming from the Latin for "seashell" due to its shape-for 10 points-name this structure of the inner ear that converts sound pressure into neural impulses.;;cochlea;;
European Literature;;He often utilized the literary alter ego of Herr Keuner COIN-er to illustrate his views on morality.  In 1943, he adapted Jaroslav Hasek's The Good Soldier Schweik for stage, while his historical plays in the "epic theater" included The Trial of Lucullus and The Life of Galileo. For 10 points-name this German dramatist of The Caucasian Chalk Circle and Mother Courage and Her Children.;;(Bertolt) Brecht;;
Art;;The figures in this painting are believed to be Jean de Dinteville and Georges de Selve. Set against a green-curtained background, the figure on the right wears a brown, patterned robe while the figure on the right wears a red shirt, black vest and fur coat. Between them lies a mantle and table furnished with, among other worldly objects, globes and a stringed instrument. For 10 points-name this 1533 painting with an anamorphous skull at the bottom, a masterpiece of Hans Holbein the Younger.;;(The) (French) Ambassadors;;
Chemistry;;It was first observed in 1899 during the autodecomposition of diazomethane in ether. Karl Ziegler won the 1963 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for synthesizing a high-density linear version of this material. The low-density variety is produced at pressures of 350 megapascals in the presence of peroxide initiators, leading to a partly crystalline material. For 10 points-what compound used in agricultural mulch, grocery bags, and milk bottles is the simplest and most ubiquitous of polymers?;;polyethylene;;polymethylene|PE|polymer(s)
World History;;After returning from exile in New Orleans, he began to travel in his trademark black carriage. He oversaw the writing of the Plan of Ayutla which outlined the principles of the rebellion against Santa Anna. As minister of justice under Igancio Comonfort, he issued a namesake law which restricted the roles of the church and army in government. He fled Mexico City in 1858 to establish a rival government at Veracruz. For 10 points-name this man who was president of Mexico before and after the empire of Maximillian.;;(Benito) (Pablo) Juarez;;
Astronomy;;It is estimated that there are three trillion with a diameter greater than one meter. In 1994, the Clementine discovered the largest one yet, now named Aitken, which may contain ice. Varieties include volcanic caldera, maar, summit, drainage, and impact. One of the most prominently visible from Earth is Clavius. For 10 points-identify these surface features of the Earth's moon.;;(lunar) crater(s);;
Geography;;Isle au Haut, one of the more than one thousand islands off this state's coast, sits at the entrance to Penobscot Bay. The bay's namesake river flows from Chamberlain Lake, while Moosehead Lake is the source of the Kennebeck. Cities include Caribou, Millinocket, Waterville, Auburn, Lewiston, and Bangor. For 10 points-name this state at the extreme northeast of the U.S.;;Maine;;
United States History;;Held at George Mann's Tavern, this meeting was convened to discuss problems in maritime commerce. Chairman John Dickinson found the task difficult with only five states sending delegations, so the topic turned to the creation of a more effective national government. For 10 points-name this September 1786 convention that concluded with a call to meet in Philadelphia the following year to amend the Articles of Confederation.;;Annapolis (Convention);;
American Literature;;In 1930, he won the Harmon gold medal for literature for the novel Not Without Laughter. He worked as a sailor and a waiter, slipping poems onto Vachel Lindsay's plate in the latter job to get his break. While he also wrote popular plays such as Mulatto, he is probably best known for poetry collections such as Shakespeare in Harlem and The Weary Blues. For 10 points-name this Harlem Renaissance poet.;;(James) (Langston) Hughes;;
Geography;;It was a river-crossing discovered by Roman legionaries in the first century BCE. In the 1200s, it became the seat of the Electorate of Cologne. Occupied by the French during the Napoleonic Wars, it was ceded to Prussia at the Congress of Vienna. It is the birthplace of Ludwig van Beethoven and is now it located in the German Land of North Rhein-Westphalia on the Rhine River. Perhaps its greatest prominence was from 1949 to 1990. For 10 points-identify this capital of the former country of West Germany.;;Bonn;;
United States History;;This policy is at the center of the recent twin cases of Gratz v. Bollinger and Grutter v. Bollinger, both of which were argued by attorneys for the plaintiffs and the University of Michigan at the most recent Supreme Court session. The phrase was coined in Executive Order 11246, issued by Lyndon Johnson in 1964. For 10 points-name this broad policy for amending racial discrimination, which cannot depend on specific quotas as of 1978's Bakke v. UC-Davis.;;affirmative action;;
European History;;Along with the Béguins and Beghards, it was one of the groups abolished at the General Council of Vienne in 1311. Philip IV of France urged its dissolution and burned its grandmaster, Jacques de Molay, at the stake in 1314. Founded in 1119 by Hugh de Payens in order to protect pilgrims to holy sites, it became a wealthy banking power from its base on Cyprus. For 10 points-name this order of French and German knights.;;Knights Templar(s);;
Art;;In response to his 1875 painting subtitled The Falling Rocket, John Ruskin called this artist a "coxcomb" who was "flinging a pot of paint in the public's face". He won a libel suit against Ruskin for one farthing, explaining during the trial why he called many of his paintings "nocturnes" or "symphonies". For 10 points-name this painter of Arrangement in Black and Grey: Portrait of the Painter's Mother.;;(James) (Abbot) (McNeill) Whistler;;
Miscellaneous;;Mary Sunshine publishes a sympathetic account of the alleged murderer of Fred Casely, and "We Both Reached for the Gun" describes a different interpretation of the truth. When a faked pregnancy is publicized, Amos proudly claims paternity but is mostly ignored, as noted in "Mr. Cellophane". Velma, who allegedly killed her sister and husband, is is furious that Billy Flynn is taking on Roxie's case. For 10 points-identify this musical by Bob Fosse, Fred Ebb, and John Kander, named for the Midwestern city in which the action takes place.;;Chicago;;
Biology;;The 1975 discovery of a skull of this species at Koobi Fora next to remants of an Australopithecus boisei disproved the "single species hypothesis". Living from 1.8 million to three hundred thousand years ago, they are thought to be the first species to control fire and engage in seafaring. For 10 points-name this ancestor of humans, examples of which include Java Man and Peking Man.;;homo erectus;;
Religion;;An agreement in 638 between the Muslim caliph Omar ibn al-Khattab and the patriarch of the Greek Orthodox church made the Nuseibeh family the custodians of this site. First built in 335 by Constantine over the former site of a temple to Venus, it was rebuilt by Crusaders in 1099 around the rock believed to be Golgotha. For 10 points-identify this Jerusalem church which marks the place that Christians believe is the empty tomb of Jesus.;;(Church) (of) (the) Holy Sepulchre;;
United States History;;He was arrested and confined to Standing Rock after his return from Canada on the promise of amnesty in 1881. He was able to win his freedom after an invitation to become an entertainer from William Cody. Also known as Tatanka Yotanka, he headed the Sioux war council in 1875, but was shot in 1890. For 10 points-name this Hunkpapa who led the defeat of Custer's army at Little Big Horn.;;Sitting Bull (Tatanka);;Yotanka
Biology;;Ready examples of it include the overwhelming presence of Type O blood in Native Americans and the frequent occurrence of Ellis-van Crevel syndrome, which causes extra fingers and toes, in the Old Order Amish of Pennsylvania, a population that generally marries within its own community. For 10 points-name this loss of genetic variation occurring when a new colony is formed by a very small number of individuals from a larger population.;;founder effect;;
United States History;;In 1855, it took 155 ballots to elect Nathaniel Banks to this position. Theodore Pomeroy held the office for one day, while Joseph Martin and Sam Rayburn held it for quite a bit longer. The only first-term holders were William Pennington of New Jersey and Henry Clay of Kentucky. For 10 points-name this leadership position, currently held by Dennis Hastert and third in line for the Presidency.;;Speaker of the House;;
American Literature;;Based on the life of the author's brother Danny, this play was rewritten in 2002 to reflect current pop culture trends, while the 1985 script was written with a female-dominated cast. The action takes place during the summer in an apartment on Riverside Drive, as Oscar's poker game is interrupted by a brooding Felix, who just divorced his wife. For 10 points-name this Neil Simon play in which Oscar and Felix decide to be roommates and begin to annoy each other.;;(The) Odd Couple;;
Chemistry;;Lindlar's catalyst saturates them with hydrogen. In their formation, one sp orbital overlaps the s orbital of a hydrogen, and the other overlaps an sp orbital of another carbon. For 10 points-acetylene is the simplest example of what class of organic compounds with general formula C-sub-n H-sub-2n minus 2?;;alkyne(s)
Art;;Michelangelo observed its 1506 discovery in Rome and imitated its features in his works, an example being the contrapposto in the Rebellious Slave. Attributed to Agesander, Athenodorus, and Polydorus of Rhodes, its most notable features are the writhing muscles and pained facial expressions of the title character and his children. For 10 points-name this Greek sculpture of a man and his sons struggling violently as they are killed by snakes.;;Laocoon (group);;
Music;;As part of his effort to popularize music, he founded the Festival of Two Worlds at Spoleto. He wrote his first opera, The Death of Pierrot, as a teenager, following that with the ballet Sebastian, the short operas The Medium and The Telephone, and his first full-length work, The Consul. In addition to writing original works, he was a librettist for other composers, writing for Samuel Barber's Vanessa. For 10 points-name this Italian-American composer of Amelia Goes to the Ball and Amahl and the Night Visitors.;;(Gian) (Carlo) Menotti;;
European Literature;;After the main character's execution, his mistress buries his head in a cave. The protagonist refuses to join the lumber business of his bourgeois friend Fouque. While studying at the seminary at Bensançon, the protagonist is supported by the Abbé Chélan and the Abbé Pirard, though he is done in by the machinations of Valenod, who reveals his affair with Madame de Rênal. For 10 points-identify this novel centering on Julien Sorel, by Stendahl.;;(The) Red and the Black|(Le) Rouge et le Noir;;
World History;;It remained unknown to the American public until a group of letters from Ron Ridenhour were brought to light by Seymour Hersh. Although some claim Ernest Medina gave the orders, William Calley was the only soldier convicted of murder for the events of March 1968. For 10 points-name this site of a massacre in Vietnam, where hundreds of unarmed civilians were killed by an Army division.;;My Lai (Massacre);;
Gegoraphy;;The Store Baeljt Bridge links the city to the mainland, and its inner harbor divides Sjaelland and Amager islands. The city hall and the Church of Our Lady sit along Amailienbourg Square. Christiansborg Palace sits on the island of Slotsholmen, and near Langelinie Promenade sits an oft-beheaded statue. For 10 points-name this home of Tivoli Gardens, the Little Mermaid, and the governmental apparatus of Denmark.;;Copenhagen|Kobenhavn;;
European Literature;;Though eventually a devoted mother, she was known earlier in her life for her open liaisons with such figures as Jules Sandeau and Alfred Musset. Her novels, including The Haunted Pool, Fanchon the Cricket, A Winter in Majorca, and Indiana, are marked by moral idealism and a respect for nature. For 10 points-name this woman, born Aurore Dupin, who had a lengthy affair with Frederic Chopin.;;(George) Sand;;(Aurore) Dupin(,) (baronne) (Dudevant)
European History;;The Peterloo Massacre of 1819 occurred at a protest directed at them. A League formed by Richard Cobden and John Bright advocated their repeal. David Ricardo published a treatise blaming them for the decrease in stock market profits. Passed by the government of Lord Liverpool in 1815, they set a price floor of eighty shillings per eight bushels; if prices fell below that mark, no imports were permitted. For 10 points-name these laws designed to protect the British grain market.;;Corn (Laws);;
Biology;;They are the causative agent of URE-3, which kills yeast cells by reducing their nitrogen intake. Stemming from the PrP protein in mammals, they can "cluster," forming randomly distributed amyloid fibers which resemble those found in Alzheimer's patients. They were first hypothesized by Stanley Prusiner to explain scrapie in sheep. For 10 points-name these self-replicating infectious proteins which cause kuru, Creutzfeld-Jakob YAH-kub syndrome, and mad cow disease.;;prion(s);;
European Literature;;Initially supporting Mussolini, he gave his 1934 Nobel medal to the Italian government to be melted down for use against Abyssinia, but he later expressed his worries about fascism in The Mountain Giants. In his play Tonight We Improvise, the action takes place entirely within the audience, and his wife's insanity inspired Henry IV. For 10 points-name this Italian playwright who wrote of a confused family of actors wandering into the wrong play in Six Characters in Search of an Author.;;(Luigi) Pirandello;;
European History;;By 1833, only two years after its founding in Marseille, it had over fifty thousand members, and Austria declared participation in it treason punishable by death. Parallel organizations later arose in Poland and Germany and were linked to it by its founder's 1834 attempt to turn it into a pan-European movement. For 10 points-name this group which attempted to seize Sardinia in 1833, created as a replacement for the Carbonari by Giuseppe Mazzini.;;Young Italy|Giovine Italia;;
British Literature;;It reveals the crux of its allegory by referring to the "Sea of Faith," which emits a "melancholy, long, withdrawing roar". The sound of a "distant northern sea" and the Aegean, heard by Sophocles, brings in the "eternal note of sadness" even though "the tide is full, the moon lies fair". For 10 points-name this location "where ignorant armies clash by night" in a Matthew Arnold poem.;;Dover Beach;;
Art;;As a painter, he created the altarpiece at Paumgärtner and an imitation of Bellini, Feast of the Rose-Garlands. As an engraver, his works include St. Jerome in His Study and Melancholia I. As an instructive writer, he penned Treatise on Measurement and Four Books on Human Proportions. However, he is likely most associated with another medium in which he portrayed the Great Passion, Life of the Virgin, and the four horsemen of the Apocalypse. For 10 points-name this German master of woodcuts.;;(Albrecht) Durer;;
Chemistry;;The cheapest of all the metals on a volume basis, its flame-test spectrum has a doublet at 589 nanometers which can be blocked by cobalt blue glass. Discovered by the electrolysis of caustic soda, it is a soft, silvery-white metal which ignites in water. For 10 points-name this element found in baking soda and halite.;;sodium;;
Geography;;It is home to the Vatna Glacier, Europe's largest, as well as both the Vatnajökull tundra region and and more hot springs than any other nation. It is also the site of over two hundred volcanoes, including Heimaey, which destroyed an island in 1973, and Surtsey, which created an island in 1963. For 10 points-name this northerly country with its capital at Reykjavik.;;(Republic) (of) Iceland|(Lyoveldio) Island;;
Biology;;Evidence of this event can be found in a two-inch layer of glass beads near the Bass River in New Jersey. Analysis of the same geologic stratum in Denmark, New Zealand, and Italy also reveal an abnormal abundance of iridium and other heavy siderophilic elements, suggesting an extraterrestrial source. For 10 points-name this catastrophic event discovered by Luis Alvarez, denoted biologically by the extinction of the dinosaurs.;;K-T (Extinction)|Cretaceous-Tertiary (Extinction);;
Geography;;Despite later years under the dictatorship of Getúlio Vargas, this country was a progressive force in the nineteenth century, issuing the Golden Law abolishing slavery in 1888 and becoming a federal republic the following year. Independent since the Pernambuco revolt, when the colonial regent Pedro sided with nationalists, it was first dubbed Tierra de Vera Cruz when Pedro Cabral landed here in 1500. For 10 points-name this former Portuguese colony.;;(Federative) (Republic) (of) Brazil|(Repuica) (Federativa) (do) Brasil;;
European History;;The last one is scheduled to be retired from operation in October of 2003. Painted white to dissipate heat, it was built as a result of a 1962 treaty. It uses "vortex lift" to achieve a sixty thousand foot altitude, when it's not crashing into a Paris suburb because of rubber on the runway. For 10 points-name this joint British Airways-Air France vehicle, able to achieve speeds near Mach 2.;;Concorde(s);;
Anthropology;;The "fateful hoaxing" of this work's author was the subject of a book by Derek Freeman, who criticized the book for confusing the sexual jokes of natives with actual conduct and promoting an illegitimate theory of cultural determinism. For 10 points-what anthropological study of passage rites on a South Pacific island was the first work of Margaret Mead?;;Coming of Age in Samoa;;
Biology;;It is made from the hexa-, hepta- and octa- esters of sucrose, which are not digestible by humans. It prevents the absorption of vitamins A, D, E, and K, as well as carotenoids, and it has been blamed for abdominal cramping and other intestinal distress. For 10 points-name this substance approved in 1998 as a synthetic fat substitute.;;Olestra|Olean;;
Mythology;;He protected the innocent from the jaws of Ammut but allowed her to devour the guilty. When Osiris died, he embalmed the body and wrapped it in a linen cloth to prevent decay, thus inventing the process of mummification. For 10 points-name this Egyptian god who weighed the hearts of the dead and led them to the afterlife, often depicted with the head of a jackal.;;Anubis;;
United States History;;Its founders included John Lester, James Crowe, John D. Kennedy, and Frank McCord. In 1915, William J. Simmons revived it. The case of Bradenburg v. Ohio ruled that its members had the right to advocate violence as a means of effecting political change. Famous members included Harry Truman, Hugo Black, Robert Byrd, David Duke, and Nathan Bedford Forrest. For 10 points-name this white supremacist organization known for burning crosses.;;K(u) K(lux) K(lan);;
Biology;;An example of it takes place when epiphytes, such as orchids, live perched on sturdier plants; those epiphytes do not take any nourishment from their host and simply benefit from being better exposed to sunlight. Other examples include certain bacteria that live in the human large intestine, barnacles on the jaws of whales, and the classic remora and the shark. For 10 points-name the type of symbiotic relationship in which one individual is slightly benefited, while the other is not affected at all.;;commensalism;;
United States History;;This magazine was launched in Boston's Old Corner Bookstore under the direction of writer and publisher James Fields. Now largely a political journal and seeking a new editor after the death of Michael Kelly, it was originally edited by James Russell Lowell, although Oliver Wendell Holmes gave it its name. For 10 points-name this longest-running literary journal in the United States.;;(The) Atlantic Monthly;;
Music;;Premiering in October 1942 with a performance by the Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo, its songs include "Saturday Night Waltz," "Buckaroo Holiday," and "Hoedown". Subtitled "The Courting at Burnt Ranch," it was choreographed by Agnes de Mille, who starred in its first performances. For 10 points-name this ballet with music by Aaron Copland, a love story set in the American Southwest.;;Rodeo;;
Music;;In 1871 he helped to found the Société Nationale de Musique after studying under Benoist and Halévy. He went to England in 1902 to write Edward VII's coronation march. His operas include Les Barbares, Etienne Marcel, Proserpine, and Samson et Delila. For 10 points-name this composer of Carnaval des animaux and La Danse Macabre.;;(Charles) (Camille) Saint-Saens;;
European Literature;;His poetry has been used in over three thousand musical compositions. "Harzreise" and "Resisebilder" combine poetry and prose, and lyric cycles "Nordsee" and "Lyrisches Intermezzo" are found in his Book of Songs. For 10 points-name this Young Germany Movement poet of Lorelei and "Germany, A Winter Tale".;;(Heinrich) Heine;;
Anthropology;;His research techniques and insistence on the study of different cultures in terms of their own particular internal dynamics caused him to be regarded as the founder of "functionalism" in social anthropology. His pivotal works include The Dynamics of Culture Change and Magic, Science and Religion. For 10 points-name this cultural scientist whose studies of the indigenous peoples of the Trobriand Islands formed the basis for his monumental Argonauts of the Western Pacific.;;(Bronislaw) Malinowski;;
British Literature;;At the end of the novel, his refusal of watercress offered by Pumblechook stirs in him sentiments of guilt for having spurned his former caretaker, the blacksmith Joe Gargery. He rooms with Bentley Drummle, Startop, and Herbert Pocket, who always refers to him as "Handel". For 10 points-name this protégé of Abel Magwitch and admirer of Estella, the narrator of Charles Dickens' Great Expectations.;;Pip (either)|(both) (names) (in) (Philip) (Pirrip);;
Geography;;Haikou is the largest city on this island, whose indigenous residents are the Li people, speaking the Minnan dialect. It is separated from the mainland's Lizhou Peninsula by its namesake thirty mile wide strait and is the eastern boundary of the Gulf of Tonkin. For 10 points-name this island, the largest under the actual control of the People's Republic of China.;;Hainan (Island);;
Mythology;;When he contradicted the verdict of Tmolus, asserting that the pipes of Pan were superior to the lyre of Apollo, the latter afflicted him with a fitting punishment. He began wearing tall, pointed caps, a fashion that all Phrygians soon followed. However, his secret was revealed when his barber dug a hole in the ground and spoke into it. For 10 points-what donkey-eared king apparently didn't learn to stay away from capricious deities after being granted the ability to turn all he touched into gold?;;Midas;;
World History;;He succeeded his father, Omar Sheik, as king of Ferghana at the age of twelve. After losing both that kingdom and the remnants of Tamerlane's capital at Samarkand, he crossed the Hindu Kush and occupied Kabul. The enemy of both Shaibani Khan and Ibrahim Lodi, the emperor of Delhi, he allied with Hussain Mirz of Herat and won his empire at the Battle of Panipat. For 10 points-name this father of Humayun and grandfather of Akbar who founded India's Mughal empire.;;Babur|Zahir (ud-din-Mohammed);;
United States History;;Because of his opposition to the Vietnam War, he was twice denied his seat in the Georgia state legislature until the Supreme Court intervened. In 1968, he chaired a "challenge delegation" to the Democratic National Convention. He was the convention's first choice for Vice-President, but he had to decline the nomination due to his age. For 10 points-name this founder of the Atlanta branch of the Student Non-Violent Coordinating Committee who, in February 1998, was elected chairman of the NAACP.;;(Julian) Bond;;
Art;;A popular anecdote says that the title woman is an idealized composite with the body of a prostitute hired by the artist's friend Pietro Aretino and the face of a wealthy duke's wife. Also in the painting are a young girl in a white dress kneeling with her back to the viewer, an older woman in a red dress staring down at her, and a little white dog curled up at the feet of the title woman. For 10 points-name this 1538 Titian painting which puts a Roman nude into a contemporary Italian bedroom.;;Venus of Urbino;;
European History;;After he defeated the supposedly invincible Swiss mercenaries of Duke Sforza and Pope Leo X at Marignano, he was knighted by the chevalier Bayard. He was spurned on the Field of the Cloth of Gold and later be taken prisoner at Pavia in 1525. He was forced to sign the Treaty of Madrid and give up two of his sons as hostages, after which he grew insane from syphilis. For 10 points-identify this patriotically named French king, a backer of Leonardo who warred with the Holy Roman Empire four times.;;Francis I|Francois I| Francois D(')Angouleme;;Francis|Francois
Astronomy;;Swedish astronomer Bengt Edlen surmised its average temperature as one million Kelvin with some areas peaking at three million Kelvin. Helium was first identified in it, and it transitions smoothly into the solar wind. For 10 points-name this rarefied outer layer of the sun, that can be observed during solar eclipses.;;corona;;
United States History;;The current members of this group are Kathleen Abernathy, Michael Copps, Kevin Martin, and Jonathan Adelstein, as well as chairman Michael Powell. Its May 2003 rulings allowed a single company to reach forty-five percent of the American public rather than the old thirty-five percent cap and ended the prohibition on owning multiple newspapers and television stations in the same market. For 10 points-name this federal body which regulates the media.;;F(ederal) C(ommunications) C(ommission);;
World History;;He was tutored by the poet Vasily Zhukovsky at the insistence of his mother, the former Princess Charlotte of Prussia. During his reign, he expanded Russia's railroad mileage from 600 to 14,000 track miles, instituted a French-based judicial system, and created the local zemstvos. For 10 points-despite freeing the serfs, what tsar was assassinated by The People's Will in in 1881?;;Alexander II;;Alexander
British Literature;;He became a devotee of the spiritualist Madame Blavatsky in 1887, and, in 1891, he founded the Rhymer's Club. His melancholic early poems include "The Lake Isle of Winnisfree," while his poems after 1898 often featured the actress Maud Gonne. Still later, he wrote "Lapis Lazuli" and "Leda and the Swan". For 10 points-name this Irish poet of "The Wild Swans at Coole" and "Sailing to Byzantium".;;(William) (Butler) Yeats;;
Geography;;They include Graubunden, Solothurn, Ticino, Aargau, Thurgau, and Neuchatel. Chur and Sion are two of the largest. They are listed in an official order which has Glarus, Uri, and Lucerne near the top. Each sends between two and thirty-four members to the Nationalrat and has its own heraldric shield to represent the voluntary confederacy formed by once-independent states. For 10 points-give the name for these divisions of Switzerland.;;canton(s);;
United States History;;Its members published the weekly periodical The Harbinger. Elizabeth Peabody originally said that at this place, "Everyone prescribes his own hours of labor, controlled only by his conscience," but eventually a three hundred day per year minimum became mandatory. Equality in education and labor were guaranteed here, and voting rights were granted to all who owned at least one five hundred dollar share. For 10 points-name this utopian community founded by George Ripley near Boston.;;Brook Farm (Institute) (of) (Agriculture) (and) (Education);;
Religion;;He began his work as a prophet during King Josiah's reign. With the help of his assistant Baruch, he wrote a book imploring the Jews to repent from wickedness, warning that the city of Jerusalem would fall to Nebuchadnezzar. In addition to his own book, also called the Masoretic Text, he is credited with Lamentations. For 10 points-name this Old Testament prophet who described the "New Covenant" by which Judaism could be practiced away form the Temple.;;Jeremiah;;
Chemistry;;Somewhat stable ones include Fremys salt and various nitroxides. They are produced when chlorofluorocarbons react with the sun's ultraviolet radiation, and in turn they destroy the atmosphere's ozone. Unlike ions, they generally do not carry charge, but they are very reactive, and some effects of aging are thought to be caused by oxidation they induce. For 10 points-name these atoms or groups of atoms that have at least one unpaired electron.;;(free) radicals;;
Art;;A contrast between the Madonna Enthroned With Angels painted by him and his teacher Cimabue chee-MAH-boo-ay shows his role in sparking the Renaissance. Murals of the life of St. Francis in the Church of Santa Groce in Assisi are representative of his late work, while earlier, he created thirty-eight frescoes at the Arena Chapel. For 10 points-name this painter and architect who built the Florence Cathedral.;;Giotto (di) (Bondone);;
European History;;The Pope excommunicated him and his entire country through the interdict of 1208 because he refused to accept Stephen Langton's appointment as archbishop. He became unpopular after a tax program to support his war with Phillip II for control of France. His throne was all the more untenable because he usurped the title in 1199 on the death of Richard I. For 10 points-identify this British monarch who was thus left with no choice at Runnymede but to sign the Magna Carta.;;(King) John (Lackland);;
Math Theory;;To use it, first note that if one factor of a number other than a perfect square is greater than its square root, then the other factor will be less than its square root. Hence all multiples of primes greater than the square root of n need not be considered. Make a list of all the integers less than or equal to n and greater than one. Strike out the multiples of all primes less than or equal to the square root of n. Then the numbers that are left are the primes. For 10 points-this describes what "strainer" that identifies prime numbers?;;sieve of Eratosthenes;;
European History;;Formed in 1900, it was first led by Keir Hardie. After a disappointing performance in the 1992 elections, it elected its youngest leader in 1994, updated Clause IV of the party constitution, and issued a manifesto establishing a new "Third Way" platform. Current members include Gordon Brown, Robin Cook, and Jack Straw. For 10 points-name this British political party currently led by Tony Blair.;;Labour (Party);;
Religion;;In its pantheon, Lei Gong is the god of thunder, and Guan Di is the patron deity of soldiers and policemen. Ling Zhi, the plant of immortality, grows on the mythical island of Xian, which is inhabited by immortals and sought in vain by man. For 10 points-name this religion based on The Book of the Way and Its Power by Lao-Zu.;;Dao(ism)|Tao(ism);;
Music;;Although he lived until age 93, he did not compose anything in the last three decades of his life, and it is believed he destroyed the manuscript of his Eighth Symphony around 1945 in the fire of his dining-room stove. His surviving works include the Songs of Runeberg, the Kullervo symphony, and The Swan of Tuonela. For 10 points-identify this composer whose second symphony in D major has become a national anthem under the name Finlandia.;;(Jean) Sibelius;;
World Literature;;Long sections of this novel focus on Juvenal Urbino, his disillusionment about the quality of medical care of his home country upon returning from study abroad and his affair with a patient. His marriage to Fermina lasts fifty years and through a civil war, but he does not survive a fall as he attempts to catch a runaway pet. For 10 points-name this novel which also discusses the delayed love between Fermina Daza and Florentino Ariza, written by Gabriel Garcia Marquez.;;Love in the Time of Cholera|(El) Amor en Los Tiempos de Colera;;
Art;;A man in a blue shirt and black pants is hopping the fence that separates the foreground from the village and red tree lined hills in the background. At the front, three nuns are kneeling around the title figure of this painting, marked by unnatural colors and a primitive style. For 10 points-name this 1889 Paul Gauguin painting of a crucified Jesus.;;(The) Yellow Christ|(Le) Christ Jaune;;
British Literature;;Samuel Johnson coined the name in his The Lives of the Poets, where he criticized this group for excessive use of "learning" in their work. Members included John Cleveland and Abraham Cowley. Largely a reaction against the Elizabethan sonnet sequence, most of their poetry uses unconventional meter for dramatic effect. For 10 points-name this group of seventeenth-century poets, which also included Andrew Marvell and John Donne.;;Metaphysical (Poets);;
European History;;Pivotal events included the Battle of Almansa, which turned the tide until Malplaquet. Secondary peace treaties included Rastatt and Baden, which ended Austria's involvement after that country was expelled by England from a group which also included Portugal, Denmark, and the Netherlands. It was sparked by the nomination of Philip of Anjou to succeed Charles II. For 10 points-name this war between the Grand Alliance and Louis XIV, ended by the Battle of Blenheim and the Peace of Utrecht.;;(War) (of) (the) Spanish Succession;;
Biology;;Between point five and one percent of all American women suffer from this disorder, which is fatal in up to one fifth of cases. In some sufferers, a downy layer of hair known as lanugo grows all over the body, including the face, as a physiological response to keep the body warm, while the patient also has an abnormally slow heart rate and low blood pressure. For 10 points-name this serious eating disorder characterized by a compulsion to lose weight to the point of self-starvation.;;anorexia (nervosa);;
European History;;Intended to facilitate Catholic emancipation, its first version was vetoed by George III and caused the resignation of Prime Minister William Pitt. In an attempt to provide a unified front against France and prevent a repeat of the 1798 uprising, it added one hundred seats in the House of Commons. For 10 points-name this act which eliminated the Irish parliament and created the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland.;;(Irish) Act of Union;;
World Literature;;A popular soccer commentator, two of his more recent novels are The War at the End of the World and A Fish in the Water. His first novel, 1962's The Time of the Hero, so outraged his nation's authorities that a thousand copies were publicly burned. For 10 points-name this 1990 Thatcherite candidate for the Peruvian presidency and author of Aunt Julia and the Scriptwriter.;;(Mario) (Vargas) Llosa;;
Geography;;Named for a Georgia congressman who promoted exploration in its surrounding region, it is neighbored by Mount Shinn and Mount Gardner. Located in the Ellsworth range, it was first conquered by a group of four led by Nicholas Clinch in 1966 as part of a joint expedition by the National Science Foundation and the American Alpine Club. For 10 points-name this mountain, the highest peak in Antarctica.;;Vinson (Massif);;
European Literature;;For the first time in four years, the protagonist misses his train to work, causing his office manager to bang on his bedroom door. The young Anna runs to fetch a locksmith, and the protagonist's other sister, Grete, gives him food, while his long-retired father reassumes a role of authority, pelting him with an apple that leads to his death. For 10 points-name this short story about the salesman Gregor Samsa by Franz Kafka.;;(The) Metamorphosis|(Die) Verwandlung;;
Music;;In Act III of this opera, Wenzel becomes entranced with Esmeralda the tight-rope performer while bemoaning the fact that his betrothed, Marie, will poison him. The contract brokered by Kezal has to be followed, until it is found that Hans, Marie's sweetheart, is actually Wenzel's half-brother. For 10 points-Marenka and Jenik marry in what comic opera by Bedrich Smetana?;;(The) Bartered Bride|Prodana Nevesta;;
World History;;Ironically, the only surviving depiction of him is a statue less than half a foot tall. Described by Herodotus as "cruel and impious," he led raids into Libya, Nubia, and the Sinai during his reign, which lasted from 2589 to 2566 BCE. His son Khafre tried to outdo him by building on a higher section of the plateau than this son of Hetepheres and Snefru. For 10 points-name this fourth dynasty Pharaoh, the builder of the Great Pyramid of Giza.;;Khufu (Cheops)|Khnum|Khufwy|Suphis;;
Geography;;Founded in 636 by caliph Umar I, it was occupied by the British during World War I. After the British left in 1930, oil refineries were built in this city, which lies 75 miles from the Persian Gulf on the Shatt al-Arab. Largely populated by Shiites who are not allied with Saddam Hussein, it was the site of sporadic resistance when British troops entered in April. For 10 points-name this strategically important city, the most populous city south of Baghdad in Iraq.;;Basra;;
Geology;;Compression stresses accomodated on reverse and thrust faults are usually the dominant tectonic stresses in these regions. One subtype can experience deep-focus earthquakes and is associated with island arc and oceanic trench systems. The Tibetan Plateau and the Himalayas were produced by one between India and Eurasia. For 10 points-subduction zones are a kind of what boundary type, where two tectonic plates collide?;;convergent (plate) (boundary);;consuming (plate) (boundary)|destructive (plate) (boundary)|subduction (zone)
Economics;;Because the desire to hold money is dependent on nominal GDP but can never reach zero, monetarists believe that this value is constant in the long run. According to Irving Fisher, it is equal to the price level times the quantity of goods divided by the money supply. For 10 points-identify this value which represents the number of times a particular dollar is spent within a given length of time and is designated "V" in the monetarist equation of exchange.;;velocity (of) (money);;V
United States History;;He wrote fiction and poetry such as Pike County Ballads and Castilian Days, and he won a Pulitzer for his ten-volume biography of Lincoln. In another career, he negotiated a series of treaties over the proposed Panama Canal with Lord Pauncefote, Tomás Herrán, and Phillipe Bunau-Varilla. For 10 points-name this man who formulated the Open Door Policy as Secretary of State under McKinley and Theodore Roosevelt.;;(John) (Milton) Hay;;
Biology;;Used in the eighteenth century for the treatment of edema by the botanist William Withering, the active steroids in this substance are cardiac glycosides. For 10 points-name this drug that strengthens the contractions of the heart muscle and is obtained from the foxglove plant.;;digitalis;;
Geography;;Contained within its boundaries are Deer Island, Black Island, and Hecla Island, and its surrounding lowlands have been the subject of an intense preservation campaign. Named for the Cree word for "muddy water," it is fed by the Red River and drains through the Nelson River into Hudson Bay. For 10 points-name this Canadian lake that shares its name with the capital of Manitoba.;;(Lake) Winnipeg;;
Astronomy;;The Kerr metric applies to ones that rotate, and the most likely candidate for one can be found in Sagittarius. They were given their name by John Wheeler in 1967, and light can form a region known as the photosphere by rotating around them at about 1.5 times the Schwarzchild radius. Only Hawking radiation can escape from-for 10 points-what dense celestial bodies?;;black hole(s);;
British Literature;;One of his novels begins in the titular Edinburgh jail during the Porteous riots and goes on to describe the pardoning of Effie Deans for killing her child with George Staunton. In addition to that work, The Heart of Midlothian, he wrote such works as The Antiquary, Quentin Durward, The Bride of Lamermoor, and Rob Roy in his "Waverly" series. For 10 points-name this Scottish author of "The Lady of the Lake" and Ivanhoe.;;(Sir) (Walter) Scott;;
European History;;Under the terms of the Peace of Crépy, this line would have joined with the Hapsburgs had not Charles of Orléans died unexpectedly. It was named for the duchy ruled by a count who installed his son as Philip VI after the death without heir of Charles IV. For 10 points-name this house which supplanted the Capetians in 1328 and ruled France until the death of Henry III in 1589.;;Valois;;
United States History;;Often counted among their ranks are Ray Baker, Chicago Tribune editor Henry Lloyd, and Anne Royall. Named in a 1906 speech at the Gridiron Club by Theodore Roosevelt after a phrase in Pilgrim's Progress, more prominent ones included Shame of the Cities author Lincoln Steffens and Standard Oil denouncer Ida Tarbell. For 10 points-give the name for these turn-of-the-twentieth-century investigative writers who exposed unseemly social and business conditions.;;muckraker(s);;
Philosophy;;This philosophy, which derives its name from the Greek for "deed," was popularized in a series of lectures delivered at the Lowell Institute and Columbia University from 1906 to 1907, entitled A New Name for Some Old Ways of Thinking. For 10 points-name this philosophy founded by C.S. Pearce and William James, which claims that the only test of cognizance and principles is their practical application.;;pragmatism;;
Biology;;When a dolphin uses it, the melon acts as a lens to focus the signals towards an object while the panbone in the lower jaw receives the reflections. It is used for orientation, social interactions, avoidance of obstacles, and acquisition of prey; birds and whales use it as well. For 10 points-name this process in which sound waves are reflected back to an organism.;;echolocation;;
European Literature;;This novel inspired two sequels, "The Heart of" the title character by Paulo Lorenzini, and the title character "in Africa" by Eugenio Cherubini. Towards the end, the title character learns his "mama" is ill and starving, which prompts him to become concerned about the well-being of others. Previously, the title character ignores the preachy talking cricket that serves as his conscience. For 10 points-identify this story by Carlo Collodi about a puppet who becomes a real boy.;;(The) (Adventures) (of) Pinocchio|(Le) (Avventure) (di) Pinocchio;;
Art;;Among the costumes used are the bedleh, the choli, and the thobe al Nasha'ar or Khaleegy dress. Accompanying the dancers are traditional instruments such as the kanoun, the ney, and the dumbek, which keeps the 8/4 timing of the maksoom rhythm. For 10 points-name this style of dance where performers, generally women, shake their hips and abdomens in rhythm.;;belly dancing;;
United States History;;Located on Mount Davidson in the Virginia Range, it was discovered by Ethan and Hosea Grosh, who died before making a claim. Its namesake was a shepherd known as "Old Pancake" who took the brothers' cabin and set out for riches. For 10 points-name this deposit discovered in 1859, the source of the nickname "The Silver State".;;Comstock (Lode);;
Biology;;It can withstand up to one thousand pounds of force, and it is inserted between the subcutaneous calcaneal and retrocalcaneal bursae. The Thompson test is commonly used to diagnose its rupture, which is often accompanied by a loud popping sound and extreme pain. For 10 points-name this tendon that attaches to the soleus muscle and the gastrocnemius muscle, named for a Greek hero whose only mortal part was his heel.;;Achilles (tendon);;
American Literature;;This work begins with a discourse on the superiority of whist to chess for the analytical mind. After the narrator meets the main character in a bookstore, the two decide to live together on the Faubourg St. Germain. The bank clerk Le Bon is wrongfully imprisoned, but the main character solves the problem of entry and exit by examining the rusted head of a nail near a window. A Maltese sailor recently returned from Borneo provides the details of the crime when he answers an ad for a lost orangutan. For 10 points-identify this Edgar Allen Poe tale about C. Auguste Dupin and his solving of a crime on the title street.;;(The) Murders in the Rue Morgue;;
Physics;;The associated coefficient is approximately given by the mobility times the resistivity. This effect can be demonstrated by applying a voltage to a conducting plate in a magnetic field. The Lorentz force on charges in the plate will cause charges to drift towards one side, producing a transverse voltage. For 10 points-name this effect which can be used to determine whether a current consists of positive or negative charge carriers.;;Hall (effect);;
Geography;;This unlucky city was completely leveled by an earthquake in 1647, and it has been inundated several times by the Mapocho River. In 1863 the Campañía Church, with doors that opened inward, caught fire from a falling lamp, and two thousand worshipers perished. It was laid out according to Pedro de Valdivia's plan for a gridiron pattern on the hill of Santa Lucía. For 10 points-name this city of the Andes, the capital of Chile.;;Santiago;;
Physics;;This process occurs above a critical value of the Rayleigh number. The mode is characterized by the ratio of the kinematic viscosity and the thermal diffusivity. This process tends to establish an adiabatic profile, and is the dominant mechanism of heat transfer in the Earth's mantle and in the Sun between the radiative zone and the atmosphere. For 10 points-name this process that transfers heat by bulk fluid motion.;;convection;;
British Literature;;Many critics did not like the ending, in which the virtuous attendant Paulina reveals all along that she had been pretending  Queen Hermione was dead. Paulina arrived at the court of Sicily with Camillo, who had fled to Bohemia long before. All except one were given a happy end with the wedding of Perdita and Florizel: even the jealous King Leontes and his old friend Polixenes. For 10 points-in what play does the sole unfortunate resolution come for Antigonus, who is given the stage direction "Exit, pursued by a bear"?;;(The) Winter's Tale|(A) Winter's Tale;;
United States History;;It was used to dismiss an age discrimination suit in the 2000 case of Kimel v. Florida Board of Regents and in the 1996 case Seminole Tribe of Florida v. Florida, which voided parts of the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act. Such cases are a return to the expansive interpretation of it found in Hans v. Louisiana, in which sovereign immunity was construed broadly. Passed in reaction to Chisholm v. Georgia, it limits the rights of foreigners or citizens of another state to sue a state in federal court. For 10 points-name this constitutional Amendment, the first to follow the Bill of Rights.;;Eleventh (Amendment) (sovereign) (immunity) (before) (it) (is) (read);;
European History;;It was the last naval battle fought entirely with galleys and had little lasting impact because Alessandro Farnese could not secure land victories to complement it. Fought at the mouth of the Gulf of Patras, its opposing sides were commanded by Uluç Ali Pasha and Don John of Austria. Although aspring author Miguel Cervantes lost his left hand, a psychological victory was secured by ending a string of losses in the Mediterranean. For 10 points-name this 1571 battle between the Holy League and the Ottoman Empire.;;(Battle) (of) Lepanto;;
European History;;In 1306, he quarreled with his political rival John Comyn, stabbing the latter to death in Dumfries. He fled to Ireland after breaking the oath of fealty to Edward I sworn as the Earl of Carrick, but he returned in 1307 to defeat the English at Loudoun Hill. His patience, which he supposedly learned from watching a spider, paid off in 1328 with the recognition of the Treaty of Northampton. For 10 points-name this king, the victor at Bannockburn and a hero of the Scottish War of Independence.;;Robert I (of) (Scotland)|Robert the Bruce|;;Robert (of) (Scotland)
Geography;;Now known as Black Creek, it was owned by the Hooker Chemical Company, which sold it for a dollar to the school board of Niagara Falls, New York. In 1976, heavy rains caused groundwater seepage and over four hundred chemicals, including dioxin, were discovered in the landfill that had been covered. For 10 points-name this notorious Superfund site.;;Love Canal;;
Art;;He was commissioned to create a series of murals for the Four Seasons Restaurant in the Seagram Building, but because the paintings, including Maroon on Black, were so dark, he withheld them. Fourteen of his paintings can be found in a Houston chapel commissioned by John and Dominique de Menil. For 10 points-name this Russian-born American artists whose paintings usually feature a contrast between two large regions of color.;;(Mark) Rothko;;
American Literature;;At the end of the short story, the narrator, after having sent the title character to the Tombs, learns that his former employee had been a subordinate clerk in the Dead Letter Office at Washington. The narrator, encouraged by Turkey, Nippers and Ginger Nut, had earlier wished to violently dismiss the title character from his office, but would just as soon have turned his bust of Cicero out of doors. For 10 points-name this titular clerk of a Herman Melville short story, who responds to most every request with "I would prefer not to".;;Bartleby (the) (Scrivener");;
Biology;;Very high levels of this chemical in the bloodstream can cause brain damage in one form of cerebral palsy or in the disease kernicterus, which is Rh incompatibility disease. Babies can be treated by being placed under bright fluorescent lights at wavelengths that help break this product and prevent jaundice. For 10 points-name this waste product of red blood cells that is the chief component of bile.;;bilirubin;;
British Literature;;This author of prose works such as Epistolae Familiares, Prolusiones Oratoriae, and A Brief History of Moscovia also wrote a Latin dictionary. Usually dictating to his daughters, he wrote many works in Italian, including L'Allegro and Il Penseroso. For 10 points-name this blind British poet who defended the free press in Areopagitica and also wrote Samson Agonistes, Lycidas, and Paradise Lost.;;(John) Milton;;
Geography;;Its namesake island was discovered in 1528 when Cabeza de Vaca was shipwrecked there. In 1817, Jean Lafitte established a base on the island, calling it Campeche and living in the "Maison Rouge". Named for a former Spanish governor, it currently has a sixteen-mile seawall to protect against a repeat of the events of September 8, 1900, when a hurricane killed a sixth of its population. For 10 points-name this Texas city south of Houston.;;Galveston;;
Biology;;Fossils from this oldest class of vertebrates found in central Australia date the earliest presence of these animals to five hundred million years ago. Their evolution was significant in the development of the inner ear, complex eye muscles, paired limbs, and cellular bone. For 10 points-name this class of fish, now represented by lampreys and hagfishes, known for the lack of a jawbone.;;Agnatha;;
Biology;;Hunter's Syndrome and Hurler's Syndrome appear to be genetic defects in targeting enzymes to this cellular compartment, while a deficiency of hydrolase here is the cause of Tay-Sachs disease. The mannose-6-phosphate receptor is targeted to this compartment from the Golgi body and subsequently recycled. For 10 points-name this cellular vesicle where enzymes break down nutrients or foreign particles.;;lysosome;;
United States History;;While serving in the state senate, he spent time teaching a civics course for a local high school and spent one workday handling baggage for U.S. Airways. After spending two terms as governor, he was elected to the U.S. Senate, where he became Chairman of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence. The primary author of the Patriot Act, he is now vying for the 2004 Democratic Presidential nomination. For 10 points-name this senator from Florida.;;(Daniel) (Robert) (Bob) Graham;;
Astronomy;;Its outermost Adams ring is comprised of the Liberty, Equality, and Fraternity arcs. Transient "great dark spots" are observed, including one spot known as "The Scooter". It has been visited only by Voyager 2, which confirmed surface gravity roughly comparable to Earth's. For 10 points-name this planet that lies four and a half billion kilometers away from the sun, with moons including Naiad and Proteus.;;Neptune;;
Euopean History;;Their holiest site, the Marta River, was where Tages revealed their pantheon, which also included Turan, Fufluns, and Tinia. This civilization's known history begins with the twelve-city religious confederation established by two Lydian emigrants. Its leaders met annually at Fanum Voltumnae in Volsinii. For 10 points-name this Italian civilization with an undeciphered language which ruled Rome during the late kingdom period.;;Etruscan(s)|Rasenna;;
Art;;It traced its roots to the line of poetry, "Beauty is the chance encounter of a sewing machine and an umbrella on an operating table". As a literary style, it was practiced by Andre Breton, who wrote its "manifesto". Its three branches included the unconscious frottages of André Masson and the juxtapatory assemblages of Jean Dubuffet. For 10 points-name this movement whose most prominent branch produced dreamlike paintings, as in the works of Joan Miro and Salvador Dali.;;surrealism;;
Geography;;It was first populated in 1836 when the Spanish built a lighthouse. Fort Mills became the seat of government by 1912. It was the last island captured during the first wave of Japanese attacks in 1942, but it was recaptured by Allied forces in March 1945. For 10 points-name this tadpole-shaped island that guards the entrance to Manila Bay.;;Corregidor (Island);;
World History;;He employed the Muslim architect al-Sahili in the building of mosques.  He also brought his empire to the zenith of its territorial expansion, conquering much of Taghaza, Wangara, and Gao. He laid the foundations for the future glory of Timbuktu and once destabilized the economy of Cairo by injecting large amounts of gold during a pilgrimage. For 10 points-name this Mali emperor.;;(Mansa) Musa;;
Mythology;;The braying of his pet donkey was a major factor in the war against the Giants, and he helped Ammon reconquer his throne in Libya, though this god was not generally warlike.  In fact, he looked so effeminate that the Kings of Thrace and Thebes, Lycurgus and Pentheus, refused to acknowledge his divinity, with tragic results. For 10 points-name this Greek god of wine.;;Dionysus;;Bacchus
United States History;;He was the second Taft appointee to the Supreme Court, serving as an associate justice for six years. Prior to joining the Court, he had served as Governor of New York and as Harding's Secretary of State. Yet another Republican, Herbert Hoover, brought him back to the court, where he made his mark by writing the opinion in Schechter Poultry Corp. v. United States, which voided the National Recovery Act. For 10 points-name this onetime Chief Justice and 1916 Republican Presidential candidate.;;(Charles) (Evans) Hughes;;
World History;;J.H. Little published a 1915 article about the "questionable veracity" of this incident, attributting it to "misguided negligence" rather than the barbarism of the Nawab. The questioned account was given by John Holwell and outraged the British public, leading to the removal of Siraj-ud-Dawlah. For 10 points-name this incident in which dozens of East India Company soldiers died after being imprisoned for a day in a tiny, windowless cell.;;Black Hole of Calcutta;;
United States History;;It occurred at the Wesleyan Methodist Church, where one hundred attendees responded to the April passage of the Married Woman's Property Act and exclusion from the World Anti-Slavery Convention by signing the Declaration of Sentiments. For 10 points-name this meeting organized by Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Lucretia Mott in 1848.;;Seneca Falls (Convention);;
World History;;In Mexico City, he met his first wife, Hilda Gadea, and he sketched out a plan that started with the 1956 landing of the Granma. His remains were discovered in 1997, ending speculation that he escaped a firing squad in Bolivia thirty years prior. For 10 points-name this Argentine-born doctor who served as an influential advisor and Minister for Industry in Fidel Castro's Cuba.;;(Ernesto) (Che) Guevara;;
American Literature;;In its twenty chapters, the last of which is titled a "Six Part Ricercare," a turtle and a Trojan hero conduct a dialogue with the aid of a crab, an anteater, and an ant colony. Strange loops, three-part harmonies, and inconsistency litter the pages. For 10 points-name this book about "an eternal golden braid," by Douglas Hofstadter.;;Godel, Escher, Bach(,) (an) (Eternal) (Golden) (Braid);;
American Literature;;During his brief stint as an oyster pirate he won a newspaper award for his account of a typhoon off Japan.  His first published work of fiction was the short story "To The Man on the Trail," while his socialist leanings are evident in The People of the Abyss. Among his autobiographical novels were Martin Eden and John Barleycorn, while The Iron Heel discusses fascism.  For 10 points-name this author of The Sea-Wolf, White Fang, and Call of the Wild.;;(Jack) London;;
Physics;;The molar masses of unknown substances can be determined through measurements of two of these properties, which are based on Raoult's law. The phenomenon of osmotic pressure does not depend on the nature of the solute, only on the number of solute molecules present, so it qualifies as one of these properties. For 10 points-name this group of properties which includes vapor pressure depression and boiling point elevation.;;colligative (properties);;
Geography;;Found in South Glamorgan, this city lies on the mouths of the Severn, Taff, and Ely near the Bristol Channel. Docks built by the Marquess of Bute and the Glamorganshire Canal helped the city become a major coal port, and it now has the largest covered stadium in Europe, Millenium Stadium. For 10 points-name this capital and largest city of Wales.;;Cardiff;;
Physics;;In environmental chemistry, this law predicts the distribution of pollutants between water and the atmosphere. It also explains why bubbles come out of solution when a carbonated beverage is opened. It holds whenever Raoult's law holds for a solvent. For 10 points-name this law which states that the vapor pressure of a solute is proportional to the solute's mole fraction.;;Henry(')s (law);;
Astronomy;;Typically, the core consists of a mixture of carbon and oxygen surrounded by a thin layer of helium and hydrogen. Supported against their own gravitation by electron degeneracy pressure, they can only be observed within a few hundred parsecs from earth. For 10 points-name this class of faint stars in which fusion has ceased.;;white dwarf;;
Mythology;;In addition to the earth, sun, and moon and the constellations of the Pleiades, Hyades, Orion, and Ursa Major, it depicts a fallow field being tilled, a harvest in a vineyard, a field in which sheep and cattle graze, and two cities, one at war and one at peace. The Stream of Ocean surrounds the engravings. For 10 points-name this item created by Hephaestos on the request of Thetis, given after the death of Patroclus to a key figure in the Iliad.;;(the) shield of Achilles (equivalents);;
Geography;;Used primarily for irrigation, its numerous hydroelectric plants include one on the Hume Reservoir. Flowing southwest through the lagoon of Lake Alexandrina, it runs into the Indian Ocean after receiving its main tributary, the Darling, at Wentworth. For 10 points-name this longest river and water source of almost all arable land in Australia.;;Murray (River);;
Art;;It is hydrated by the Marley Machine. Francois Lemoyne's gigantic painting Apotheosis of Hercules is exhibited in its Grand Apartment. Next door stands the village of Trianon, while the Hall of Mirrors overlooks Andre Le Notre's sprawling garden. For 10 points-name this castle complex built for Louis XIV.;;Versailles;;
Geography;;Only five countries recognized this state, which had capitals at Enugu and Umuahia. Formed by Chukwuemeka Odumegwu-Ojukwu after the Hausa and Fulani massacred the Ibo, it lasted from May 1967 to January 1970. When it lost control of the oil fields which constituted its entire economy, over a million citizens died of malnutrition, as the opposing forces in the war it fought refused to allow Red Cross access. For 10 points-name this area which attempted to secede from Nigeria.;;(Republic) (of) Biafra;;
United States History;;A partial reversal of Colegrove v. Green, this case served to define the borders of the "political question" doctrine and affirmed that cases brought under the "guaranty" clause in Article IV are not justiciable. It was later refined by Reynolds v. Sims, which furthered outlined the "one man, one vote" principle. For 10 points-name this 1962 Supreme Court case which dealt with apportionment of seats in the legislature of Tennessee.;;Baker (v)(.) (Carr)|Carr (v)(.) (Baker);;
World Literature;;After graduating from the College de Genève in 1915, this author spent time in Spain, where he became closely affiliated with the Ultraist movement. Returning to his home country, he wrote perplexing lines such as "Anyone who has read a word of Don Quixote is Miguel Cervantes" in works including The Library of Babel. For 10 points-name this blind Argentinean author of "El Aleph" and Ficciones.;;(Jorge) (Luis) Borges;;
World Literature;;His first work, the 1829 narrative poem Hanz Keuchelgarten, was a tremendous failure.  He found success when Pushkin supported his Dikanka Tales, and he went on to publish the collection Arabesques, featuring "The Portrait," "Nevsky Prospect" and a story about the lunatic Poprishchin, "Diary of a Madman". For 10 poionts-name this author of  "The Nose," Taras Bulba, "The Overcoat,"and Dead Souls.;;(Nikolai) (Vasilyevich) Gogol;;
European History;;He defeated King Aistulf's army of Lombards in a victory at Pavia, thus protecting Pope Stephen II. He then gave Ravenna and other lands to the Church, forming the Papal States, in his namesake "donation". After he deposed Childeric III, received Neustria from his brother, and conquered Aquitaine, he became the ruler of all Frankish territory. For 10 points-name this man who succeeded his father Charles Martel as mayor of the Austrasian palace and left his own lands to his sons Carloman II and Charlemagne.;;Pepin (the) (Short)|Pepin (III|)|Pepin (le) (Bref);;
Astronomy;;Thought to be in a constant state of agitation due to convection waves that reach hundreds of thousand of miles below, it represents the transition boundary above which photons can move almost freely. For 10 points-name this luminous, opaque layer of the sun that lies between the dense interior gases and the more attenuated gases of the chromosphere, the sun's visible "surface".;;photosphere;;
Geography;;To obtain water from this desert, the town of Cgungungo uses a renowned system of plastic sheets to capture fog. A leading source of sodium nitrate and copper, it lies two thousand feet above sea level and is over seven hundred miles long. Flanked by the Pacific Coastal Range and the Andes, it is considered the driest hot desert on earth. For 10 points-name this desert in Peru, Argentina, and Chile.;;Atacama (Desert);;
European Literature;;The protagonist of this novel pays a visit to a painter of portraits named Titorelli, watches a law student carry off an usher's wife, and takes an Italian client to visit a cathedral. The same character walks in on two men being whipped in a lumber-room and meets a tradesman named Block at the home of the lawyer Huld. For 10 points-name this work featuring the unexplained prosecution and eventual murder at a quarry of bank clerk Joseph K, written by Franz Kafka.;;(The) Trial|(Der) Prozess;;
Physics;;According to superstring theory, which mathematically requires their existence, they are closed strings with the least possible energy. Their lack of energy explains why these spin-two bosons are nearly impossible to detect. For 10 points-name these theoretical fundamental particles that carry the force which attracts two particles as a function of mass.;;graviton(s);;
Geography;;Pemba Dorije set the record for doing this the quickest at twelve hours forty-five minutes on May 23, 2003, only to see his record beaten three days later in just under eleven hours. The youngest to do it was fifteen, while the oldest was seventy-year-old Yuichiro Miura. In May 2003, former New Mexico governor Gary Johnson did it. For 10 points-name the feat accomplished by eight hundred people since it was first done fifty years ago by Tenzig Norgay and Edmund Hilary.;;(climb) (Mount) Everest|(climb) Sagarmatha;;
World History;;It was planned with the assistance of the Quaker activist Reginald Reynolds and announced in a letter to Lord Irwin. In disobedience of an 1882 monopoly act, seventy-eight volunteers from Ashram began it on March 12 in Ahmedabad. Christians and Muslims joined at Bareja and it concluded on April 6, two hundred miles to the west, in Dandi. For 10 points-name this 1930 tax protest which ended with a symbolic touching of the namesake seasoning by Mohandas Ghandi.;;Salt March;;
World History;;Former Peace Corps director Carol Bellamy serves as this organization's fourth executive director since 1995. The winner of the 1965 Nobel Peace Prize, it collected the proceeds of George Harrison's Concert for Bangladesh. Its mission is carried out through an international network which raises money during Halloween and by selling Christmas cards. For 10 points-name this United Nations organization which oversees emergency aid to women and children.;;Uni(ted) (Nations) C(hildr)e(n's) F(und);;
Physics;;Debye improved on Einstein's model for this quantity, accurately reproducing its values at low temperatures. The Dulong-Petit law states that it is approximately constant at high temperatures, with a value of three times the universal gas constant per mole. It is defined as the derivative of the internal energy with respect to the temperature. For 10 points-name this quantity equal to the molecular mass times the specific heat.;;heat capacity;;
Music;;In 2001, Luciano Berio completed a new ending for this work, left unfinished at its composer's death in 1924. Some conductors use one of Franco Alfano's endings, while others end the work shortly after the death of Liu, at the moment where the prince Calaf kisses the title character. The fourth and final riddle, the mystery of the suitor's name, is thus left unperformed. For 10 points-name this work featuring the aria "Nessum Dorma," the last opera of Giacomo Puccini.;;Turandot;;
Geography;;Before its 1849 discovery by Austin Layard, it was considered a Biblical myth. It displaced Calah as a capital, but it was destroyed by a coalition of Babylonians, Medes, and Scythians in 612 BCE. Its sites included the grand palace of Sennacherib and the twenty thousand cuneiform tablets found in the library of Ashurbanipal. For 10 points-name this city on the Tigris which served as the capital of the Assyrian Empire.;;Nineveh;;
American Literature;;His second novel, When She Was Good, failed to recapture the success he obtained with Letting Go. His other novels include My Life as a Man and The Great American Novel, which were followed up by 1979's The Ghost Writer, introducing his reoccurring character Nathan Zuckerman. For 10 points-name this American author of Goodbye, Columbus, who also wrote American Pastoral and Portnoy's Complaint.;;(Philip) (Milton) Roth;;
Geography;;This country's head of state has received patents for a water mill, an oxygen pump and palm oil vehicle fuel. King Bhumibol Adulyadej, who is also an award-winning yacht racer and prolific musician, recently received his fourth patent, on the "super-sandwich" technique to induce rain. For 10 points-name this country known as the "land of the free" because it was never an occupied colony, formerly called Siam.;;(Kingdom) (of) Thailand|(Prathet) Thai|(Muang) Thai;;
European History;;Examples included Dunwich, which had fallen into the sea, and towns such as Bramber, Old Sarem, and Gatton. Eventually, all fifty-six were eliminated, affecting an average of only thirty-nine people per district. For 10 points-name these English constituencies which retained seats in the House of Commons despite dwindling population, abolished in 1832.;;rotten boroughs;;
World History;;In 2003, she issued a statement to the barangay tanod, traditional village watchmen, acknowledging the group's role in protecting villages from Abu Sayaaf. She has been criticized for allowing U.S. intervention against terrorists and for economic difficulties since she defeated Joseph Estrada. For 10 points-name this president of the Philippines.;;(Gloria) (Magcapal)(-)Arroyo;;
World Literature;;The protagonist of this novel is assisted by Msimangu, while his brother John is a successful merchant kept under surveillance by the police. The protagonist's sister Gertrude becomes a prostitute after moving to Johannesburg, and Mr. Jarvis befriends the main character even after Absalom kills Arthur and is sentenced to death. For 10 points-name this novel about the Zulu priest Stephen Kumalo, by Alan Paton.;;Cry(,) the Beloved Country;;
United States History;;This graduate of Columbia Law School ran unsuccessfully for the U.S. House as a Republican in 1974, and he later worked as a staffer for Jesse Helms and David Duke. He was shot by a sniper during the March Against Fear, and he wrote a book about his most famous experience, a standoff with Ross Barnett. For 10 points-name this man who transferred from Jackson State College in 1961, becoming the first African-American to attend the University of Mississippi.;;(James) Meredith;;
Physics;;It works only with one time dimension and an odd number of space dimensions. It predicts back propagation corresponding to advanced potentials, but this back propagation is typically ignored. It can be used to derive Snell's law of refraction and helps explain diffraction in terms of wave propagation. For 10 points-name this principle which considers every point on a wavefront a source for secondary wavefronts.;;Huygens(')(s) (principle);;
Music;;Among the many unusual characteristics of this symphony is the fact it is written in F-sharp minor. The horns are dominant in the third Trio movement, which is based on a Gregorian chant. It finishes with only two violins playing. At its first performance, only Tomasini and the composer remained as the others blew out candles and left the room. For 10 points-name this symphony written to propose the return of Prince Nikolaus's court to Vienna, by Franz Haydn.;;Farewell (Symphony)|(Symphony) (Number) 45|Abschiedsymphonie;;
American Literature;;The journalist Matthias Pardon and the student Henry Burrage attempt to woo one of the female characters. Dr. Prance attends Miss Birdseye, a veteran of reform movements, while the amorous advances of Adeline Luna are rejected by a publisher of Carlylean tracts. Finally, Basil Ransom overcomes the interference of Olive Chancellor and successfully romances Verena Tarrant. For 10 points-name this Henry James novel about a hapless group from a New England city.;;(The) Bostonians;;
Art;;His San Giovenale Triptych was one of the earliest fifteenth-century works to have no Gothic influence, and he developed many of the techniques for showing light sources in such works as the Santa Maria Novella Trinity and the Pisa Altarpiece. Because he refused to devote attention to anything outside of his work, including his clothes, he was nicknamed with a term meaning "pigpen". For 10 points-name this Florentine painter of The Expulsion from Paradise and The Tribute Money.;;Masaccio|(Tommaso) (di) (ser) Giovani (di) (Mone);;
Biology;;The p450 variety plays a large role in metabolizing drugs in the liver, and genetic differences in it cause severe drug interaction problems. The c variety is a terminal electron acceptor, and like other varieties, it contains a heme group and translocates protons, helping set up a proton gradient that causes ATPase to synthesize ATP. For 10 points-name these membrane bound proteins found in the mitochondrial cristae, which play a key role in the electron transport chain.;;cytochrome(s);;
United States History;;Samuel Flagg Bemis won a Pulitzer in history for a 1927 book on this agreement. It opened the Mississippi beyond the boundaries of the Treaty of Paris, established tax-free deposit access in New Orleans, and set 31 degrees north latitude as the southern boundary of the United States. For 10 points-name this October 1795 treaty which briefly ended contention with Spain.;;Pinckney(')(s) (Treaty)|(Treaty) (of) San Lorenzo;;
Chemistry;;It relies on a crust of solid cryolite as thermal insulation.  A fluoride is used to lower the melting temperature of molten cryolite beneath the crust. The entire mixture is electrolyzed, and the carbon anode is oxidized to carbon dioxide as the end product collects in liquid form at the bottom of the tank. For 10 points-name this process discovered by an American and a Frenchman at the same time in 1866, the major method for producing aluminum.;;Hall(-)(Heroult) (process)|(Hall)(-)Heroult (process);;
British Literature;;In this book, "A Painful Case" concerns the Platonic love that develops between crotchety Mr. James Duffy and Emily Sinico, a forty-three year old woman who ostensibly commits suicide when she steps in front of the 10 o'clock train from Kingstown. Another story deals with Mrs. Morkan's annual dance, at which Miss Kate, Miss Julia, the dashing Mr. Browne, the drunk Freddy Malins, and Gabriel Conroy and his wife are in attendance. For 10 points-"The Dead" is the most noted story in what 1914 James Joyce collection about life in the namesake city?;;(The) Dubliners;;
Philosophy;;He made the career of Johann Gottlieb Fichte by publishing the latter's Attempt at a Critique of All Revelation. In 1770, he claimed that the works of David Hume "awoke him from his dogmatic slumber". He went on to explain "the starry heavens above…and the moral law within…" in such works as The Metaphysics of Morals. For 10 points-name this German transcendentalist who posited the categorical imperative in Critique of Judgment and Critique of Pure Reason.;;(Immanuel) Kant;;
Computer Science;;Apostolico-Giancarlo, Knuth-Morris-Pratt, and Boyer-Moore are all fast algorithms for searching within them. The Pascal variety has an encoded length count attached to its beginning, but the null-terminated variety is far more common. Generally encoded into binary by ASCII, in C and Java, constants of this type are surrounded by quotation marks. For 10 points-name this data structure, a series of ordered characters in which text can be stored.;;string(s);;
Music;;He played the flügelhorn to record "Springville" and "Blues for Pablo" under the direction of Gil Evans. You're Under Arrest and Aura are among his late albums. His early efforts were released as The Birth of the Cool, which indeed created the "cool jazz" style which supplanted bebop. What is probably his most respected work was recorded with Jimmy Cobb, Bill Evans, Paul Chambers, and John Coltrane among others. For 10 points-name this composer and trumpet player on Kind of Blue.;;(Miles) (Dewey) Davis (III);;
European Literature;;She gave up the teaching of philosophy after the 1943 publication of her first novel, She Came to Stay. Her autobiographical volumes include Memoirs of a Dutiful Daughter and A Very Easy Death. She wrote about many of her relationships, for example, Nelson Algren in Les Mandarins. For 10 points-name this author of the feminist work The Second Sex and close companion of Jean-Paul Sartre.;;(Simone) (de) Beauvoir;;
Psychology;;Its proponents attempted to explain illusions such as the Kanizsa triangle and phi phenomenon by using the the principles of grouping items by similarity, proximity, continuity, and closure. Emerging in 1912 as a reaction to structuralism, it was founded by Kurt Koffka, Wolfgang Köhler, and Max Wertheimer. For 10 points-name this psychological school which believes in studying perception as an irreducible whole.;;Gestalt;;
World History;;His Ph.D. thesis from Moscow's Oriental College was the basis for the controversial 1984 book The Other Side: The Secret Relationship Between Nazism and Zionism, in which he denies the Holocaust. One of the negotiators under Yassir Arafat at the Madrid and Oslo conferences, he has served as secretary-general of the executive committee of the PLO since 1996. For 10 points-name this man who, in 2003, was named Prime Minister of the Palestinian National Authority.;;(Mahmoud) Abbas|(Abu) Mazen;;
World Literature;;It opens with an epigraph from Romans 12:19. The title character is is married to a man who has a habit of cracking his fingers while he thinks and accentuates unusual words with his shrill voice. Along with a side plot about Kostya and Kitty, we follow the title character's affair with Count Vronksy, with whom she has a daughter. For 10 points-name this novel in which the title character meets an end under the wheels of a train.;;Anna Karenina;;
European History;;The expansionism of August II of Poland and Danish agitation in Holstein-Gottorp began this war, which transferred Estonia and Livonia after the battles of Hangö, Narva, and Poltava. Hegemony over the gulfs of Finland and Bothnia as well as the Baltic lands began for Russia under the terms of the Treaty of Rystad. For 10 points-name this war fought from 1700 to 1721 by Charles XII of Sweden and Peter the Great.;;(Great) Northern War;;
European History;;In his side career as an author, he wrote Vivian Grey, Sybil, and Coningsby. In 1876, he was made the first Earl of Beaconsfield in honor of his political career. Though an early follower of Sir Robert Peel, he opposed the rescinding of the Corn Laws in 1846. Twice the Chancellor of the Exchequer, he enfranchised two million voters in 1867, the year before his first stint as Prime Minister. For 10 points-name this Conservative rival of William Gladstone.;;(Benjamin) Disraeli;;
Geography;;In June 2003, the head of this country's Supreme Court, Julio Nazareno, was impeached at the urging of newly elected President Nestor Kirchner. Kirchner alleges that rampant corruption in the judicary helped amplify the crisis of 2001, in which Ramon Puerta, Adolfo Rodriguez Saa, Fernando De La Rua, and Eduardo Duhalde all fell from office over a period of weeks. For 10 points-name this South American country which froze bank accounts during a yearlong economic crisis.;;(Republica) Argentina|Argentine Republic;;
Chemistry;;The physical basis for potassium-argon dating of rocks, a neutrino is emitted as the atomic number in the nucleus changes, thus making it possible for unstable carbon-11 nuclei to become boron-11 nuclei. For10 points-name this radioactive process in which a proton is changed into a neutron by incorporating a negatively-charged particle into the nucleus.;;electron capture|K-capture;;
World History;;It began with the formation of the Sat-Cho Alliance, who sought to challenge the bakufu. Developments included the granting of rights to the eta, the signing of the Charter Oath, the issuance of the Constitution of 1889, the removal of feudal authorities from the daimyo, and the start of modern industry. For 10 points-name this period of "Enlightened Rule" that saw the end of the Tokugawa Shogunate in Japan.;;Meiji (Restoration);;
Music;;Its penultimate movement, "Nun ist der Herr zur Ruh gebracht", features the four aria soloists each singing a line from a hymn, with choral interjections. Its sixty-eight movements consist of a series of arias and choruses meditating on the events narrated by the tenor Evangelist. An 1829 performance of it conducted by Felix Mendelssohn is credited with beginning the "revival" of its composer's works. For 10 points-identify this 1729 oratorio, written by J.S. Bach, with text drawn from the first of the Gospels.;;Matthauspassion|(St)(.) Matthew(')(s) Passion|(The) Passion (of) (our) (Lord) (Jesus) (Christ) (According) (to) St(.) Matthew||Passio (Domini) (Nostri) (Jesu) (Christi) Secundum (Evangelistam) Matthaeum;;
Religion;;May 24, 1738, is celebrated as the date of his epiphany at a prayer meeting at Aldersgate Street in London, when Luther's preface to the commentary of Paul's letter to the Romans was read. Afterwards, he would shock the church hierarchy proclaiming that the world was his parish and split his denomination over the question of predestination. For 10 points-name this founder of Methodism.;;(John) Wesley;;
Philosophy;;The "Barbara" version is the most common example and is found in the Prior Analytics. The "Cesare" is an example of revising an "imperfect" one into a "perfect" one. Called the foundation of formal deductive reasoning, a famous one proves that Socrates is mortal. For 10 points-name this technique of Aristotelian logic which uses two premises to prove a conclusion.;;syllogism;;
European History;;His mother was Marie Adelaide of Savoy and his father was the titular duke of Burgundy. His early reign was controlled by the advisor Andre Hercule de Fleury, and later his mistresses, Comtesse Du Barry and Madame de Pompadour, wielded power. He oversaw French participiation in the War of Polish Succession, the War of Austrian Succession, and the French and Indian War. For 10 points-name this king who ruled from 1715 until 1774.;;Louis XV;;Louis
Birtish Literature;;The poet implores his lover to "Let us roll all our strength and all / Our sweetness up into one ball". He appears exasperated with her, declaring that he would love her ten years before the Flood and she would refuse him till the conversion of the Jews, thereby seizing on the carpe diem theme common among metaphysical poets. For 10 points-"Had we but world enough, and time" begins what Andrew Marvell poem?;;To His Coy Mistress;;
United States History;;Though it was established by Rule 22 in 1917, Henry Clay proposed it as early as 1841 in response to the Democrats' efforts to block the passage of his bank bill. First invoked in 1919 during the Senate debate over the Treaty of Versailles, it was revised in 1975 to have a sixty vote requirement instead of a sixty-seven vote one. For 10 points-name this Senate rule that can be used to override a filibuster and bring a bill to a vote.;;cloture;;
Physics;;Ceramics made of barium titanate, lead zirconate, and lead titanate exhibit this material property, making such materials useful for ultrasonic transducers. For similar reasons, rochelle salt was used in early crystal microphones. For 10 points-name this effect, which explains the use of quartz in watches, in which a mechanical force upon a crystal produces a charge.;;piezoelectric (effect)|piezoelectricity;;
Art;;Following a storm in late December 1999, part of the 152-meter-high cast-iron spire of this building fell through the roof and destroyed the choir. Stained glass windows were added over a long period to the St. Romain and Beurre Towers, and Richard the Lion-hearted is interred in its crypt. For 10 points-name this French cathedral painted thirty times by Claude Monet.;;Rouen (Cathedral);;
United States History;;It is deployed from a C-130 aircraft and initially has a parachute, but its final descent is governed by the Inertial Navigation and Global Positioning System. Its indefinite shelf life is almost as strategically valuable as its eighteen thousand pounds of tritonal explosives. For 10 points-name this enormous bomb whose use expected to eliminate the possibility of tactical nuclear strikes.;;M(assive) O(rdinance) A(ir) B(last);;
Geography;;The indigenous Ona, Yahgan, and Alacaluf called this archipelago their home. The northern part is relatively flat and home to an oil field; the southern and western parts are home to Monte Sarmiento and Monte Darwin, both over seven thousand feet in height. For 10 points-name this island group found by Ferdinand Magellan at the southern tip of South America.;;Tierra del Fuego;;
American Literature;;The sound of a flute reminds him of his father, an itinerant inventor, and he holds conversations with his dead brother Ben, who walked into the jungle at 17 and walked out rich at 21. A disconnected gas pipe in the basement foreshadows his eventual fate to his wife, Linda. Fired by Howard Wagner, he futilely tries to cultivate his backyard garden, and then commits suicide by crashing his car in order to allow his family to cash in on his insurance. For 10 points-name this father of Happy and Biff, the title character of Arthur Miller's Death of a Salesman.;;Willy (Loman) (prompt) (on) Loman;;
Music;;Its instrumentation includes quintuple winds, eight horns, five trumpets, and two tubas. Derisive laughter greeted the opening bars of this work, played on the highest registers of a solo bassoon. Calling for the largest orchestra ever used by its composer, this bipartite work ends with the depiction of a Totentanz, in which the "chosen one" dances herself to death as an offering to the pagan god Yarillo. For 10 points-name this work which caused a riot on May 28, 1913 in Paris, a ballet by Igor Stravinsky.;;(The) Rite of Spring|(Le) Sacre du Printemps;;
Computer Science;;Commonly used in depth-first searching algorithms and pushdown automata, this data structure is almost universally used to store information about function nesting. It also comes in handy when using reverse polish notation, as any character that is read can be compared to the symbol at the top of this data structure; if there is a match, the symbol can be removed. For 10 points-name this last-in-first out data structure, from which an object can be popped or onto which an object may be pushed.;;stack;;
Geography;;The project was conceived by its namesake's wife and sister Artemisia, and it was competed in 350 BCE, three years after it became necessary. Its rectangular base was 100 by 120 feet, while a white alabaster structure decorated with gold was found on the podium and surrounded by Ionic columns. It was found in the city now called Bodrum in southwest Turkey. For 10 points-name this burial chamber, a wonder of the ancient world.;;Mausoleum (at) (Halicarnassus);;
United States History;;He told the Senate that Douglas MacArthur's plan to take the Korean War to China was "The wrong war, at the wrong place, at the wrong time, and with the wrong enemy". A protégé of George Marshall, he took command of the Second Corps in 1943 and led the First Army at Normandy. Later, as commander of the Twelfth Army Group in France, he oversaw 1.4 million combatants in the largest field command in US history. For 10 points-name this Missouri-born "GI General" who became the first Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.;;(Omar) (Nelson) Bradley;;
European History;;His namesake father, a wealthy swordsman, died at age seven, and he was to inherit a large estate, but his guardians abused his trust. After studying under Isaeus, he took his guardians to court and won damages. He eventually killed himself on Calauria to escape the proscriptions of Antipater, years after overcoming a speech impediment by talking with pebbles in his mouth. For 10 points-name this Greek orator who delivered the Olynthiacs and Philippics.;;Demosthenes;;
Physics;;This result holds for any pair of incompatible observables, since the commutator of the corresponding operators is non-zero. It was introduced in a paper on the interpretation of matrix mechanics which included a thought experiment with a gamma-ray microscope. Part of the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics, it weakens causality since perfect information is impossible. For 10 points-name this principle stating the a subatomic particle's position and momentum cannot be simultaneously and precisely known.;;Heisenberg uncertainty|Heisenberg indeterminacy;;