Physics;;This property increases with temperature in gases due to an increase of friction between molecules, while in liquids it decreases with an increase in temperature. Generally calculated by dividing stress to shear strain, the absolute variety can be divided by mass density to derive the kinematic variety of this property, first discovered by Isaac Newton. For 10 points, name this resistance to flow of substances, which can be measured in units of poise or stokes.;;viscosity
Religion;;This object's Hebrew name, seneh, connotes a relation with the mountain upon which it was discovered, also known as Mount Horeb. It is sometime used as an emblem of the Presbyterian Church, denoting that sect's early persecution. Its discoverer was tending a flock belonging to his father-in-law, a priest of Midian known as Jethro. Seen in Christian thought as a prefigure to the Annunciation, it claimed to be the God of the Israelites and ordered Moses to release his people from Egypt. For 10 points name this plant on Mount Sinai in the book of Exodus, ablaze yet not consumed by the fire.;;(the) burning bush
Geography;;Massanutten Mountain splits the river for which this valley is named, loosely translated as "daughter of the stars". Settled primarily by German immigrants, it became an important source for iron. The song named after it has been proposed as a new state song for Virginia. For 10 points, name this valley bounded by the Alleghenies on the West and the Blue Ridge to the East.;;Shenandoah (Valley)
World Literature;;This artist's The Cubs, and Other Stories portrays a victim of castration. In his criticism, he considers García Márquez as "a God-Killer" and Flaubert's works as "The Perpetual Orgy". Several of this man's works have had their titles changed in translation; for example, Pantleón y (ee) las visitadoras became Captain Pantoja and the Special Service and La ciudad y (ee) los perros became The Time of the Hero. For 10 points, identify the author of the autobiographical tale of semi-incest, Aunt Julia and the Script Writer, a Peruvian writer and politician.;;(Jorge) (Mario) (Pedro) Vargas Llosa
European History;;One side took position on Senlac Ridge, while the other took up arms at Caldbec Hill, rallying around the Old Hoare Apple Tree. A fool named Taillefer started it, trying to mount a one-man attack on the Saxon lines. The Bretons on the left wing fled, the fyrd broke down, and Harold assumed the role of a common soldier, possibly dying from an arrow through the eye. For 10 points, name this event depicted on the Bayeux tapestry, a 1066 battle won by William the Conqueror.;;(Battle) (of) Hastings
Music;;The hero of this musical work discovers thirteen maidens playing with golden apples in a garden and falls for one of them, but he is warned not to pursue her because of their captor, who turns men into stone. That monster, the ogre Kastchei, is destroyed when the egg holding his soul is shattered by Ivan, who defeats Kastchei's minions after using a feather to invoke the help of the titular creature. For 10 points, name this ballet by Igor Stravinsky.;;(The) Firebird
Biology;;Its most primitive member is found in the New Calydonian genus Amborella, which in contrast with the "ranalean complex" that comprises many of this group's members, has a prominent androecium [and-row-EE-cee-um] and a simple perianth [PEAR-ee-anth]. Containing the diverse families Poaceae, Fabaceae, and Asteraceae, its most common name means "enclosed seed". Also known as Magnoliophyta, for 10 points, name this division of the plant kingdom that is further divided into monocots and dicots, which, unlike gymnosperms, contains flowering plants.;;angiosperms
British Literature;;His bleak poem "1967," written "five-score summers" earlier, ends with the hope "that thy worm will be my worm, Love". His other poems such as "Channel Firing" and "The Darkling Thrush" remain popular, but he is likely better known for novels such as The Dynasts. For 10 points, name this English author who wrote of Wessex in The Mayor of Casterbridge, Tess of the D'urbervilles, and Far From the Madding Crowd.;;(Thomas) Hardy
Psychology;;One explanation for this phenomenon, with regards to children, is that society gains when children are helped because this allows the human race to continue to survive. Other reasons for it include gaining self-esteem, presenting oneself as caring, and avoiding censure for failing to live up to the expectation of help. For 10 points, psychologists have established an evolutionary source for what practice, an unselfish interest in helping others?;;altruism
United States History;;It called for general assemblies in April and September, the first being the Court of Election at which any person who took the Oath of Fidelity could vote for the governor or six magistrates. This document's last article states that all taxes must be allocated by a board consisting of an equal number of residents from each town. Adopted in 1639, it is regarded, along with the Mayflower Compact, as the start of the constitutional tradition in America. For 10 points, name this charter stating that "the Inhabitants and Residents of Windsor, Hartford and Wethersfield"…"conjoin ourselves to be as one Public State".;;(the) Fundamental Orders of Conneticut
Art;;Although most of his sculptures were done in either bronze or marble, St. John the Baptist and Mary Magdalen were of painted and gilded wood. His Cantoria was of bronze and marble with mosaic inlays, and Judith and Holofernes and Feast of Herod were of gilded bronze. The figure in his most famous sculpture wears a hat with laurel leaves and boots and is otherwise nude. For 10 points, name this Renaissance sculptor of the bronze David.;;Donatello
World History;;The decisive battle occurred at Ulundi, where Lord Chelmsford's forces crushed the enemy, and soon afterwards, Cetewayo was captured and sent into the exile. The end of the conflict was a stark contrast to its most famous battle, where thousands of impi routed Chelmsford's men at Isandlhwana. For 10 points, name this 1879 war between British colonists and South African natives.;;Zulu (war)
Chemistry;;They can be used medicinally, as ethyl nitrite is a diuretic and ethyl chaulmoograte has been used to treat leprosy. When they react with a metallic base, saponification occurs, and pentyl ethanoate, pentyl pentanoate, and pentyl butanoate are common ones found in fruits. Formed by a condensation reaction between an alcohol and an acid, for 10 points, name these organic compounds that contain a carbon double bonded to an oxygen, which are well-known for their aromas.;;ester(s)
World Literature;;According to its author, the titular subject of this work it is governed by five constant factors: the Moral Law, Heaven, Earth, the Commander, and Method and Discipline. Point 18 in the first section, entitled "Laying Plans," says that deception is the basis of all, and as such, point 20 says, "hold out baits to entice the enemy. Feign disorder and crush him". For 10 points, name this manual by Sun Tzu.;;(The) Art of War
American Litearture;;Set around a plan post-Civil War plan to build a cotton gin to exploit cheap labor, the main character wishes to join in the plan with her brothers, Ben and Oscar Hubbard. Preventing her is her husband Horace, whom she allows to die by refusing to give him his heart medication. For 10 points, what is this play about Regina Giddens by Lillian Hellman?;;(The) Little Foxes
Biology;;Innervated by the fifth and sixth cervical nerves, it attaches to the scapula at the coracoid process and the supraglenoid tubercle. Its namesake tendon is attached near the head of the radius, allowing it to function as a flexor of the elbow and a supinator of the forearm. For 10 points, name this upper arm muscle, which consists of only two heads and opposes the motion of the triceps.;;biceps (brachii)
Philosophy;;Jeffrey and McClennen raised objections to it based on the suspect notion of infinite utility, which a human being could only appreciate in a finite manner. Diderot voiced his objection to it with the statement "an Imam could reason just as well this way". Its originator assumed that the probability of success was one half, though strong atheists insist that the probability of winning it should be zero. For 10 points, name this philosophical argument found in its creator's Pensees, which states that one should believe in God because of the "infinite payoff" one would receive should God exist.;;Pascal's Wager
American Literature;;His reward for writing a campaign biography of Abraham Lincoln was the consulship in Venice, where he wrote Venetian Life. This man became the editor of the Atlantic Monthly in 1871 and later wrote the "Easy Chair" column in Harper's Magazine. His most famous review is that of his friend in My Mark Twain, while he is better known for liberal novels like A Traveler from Altruria and A Hazard of New Fortunes. For 10 points, name this American author of A Modern Instance and The Rise of Silas Lapham.;;(William) (Dean) Howells
Anthropology;;After a lengthy chapter called "The Killing of the Tree Spirit," this book spends five chapters discussing the Adonis myth, which is followed by a comparison to his Phrygian counterpart, Attis; both, in turn, are compared to Osiris. The most controversial section suggests that the story of Jesus stemmed from various pagan myths. For 10 points, name this James Frazer work that takes its title from a magic object Aeneas used to enter the underworld.;;(The) Golden Bough
Computer Science;;A skip is a structure consisting of several of these in parallel, which results in a search time complexity that is logarithmic in the number of elements. The HP STL [aych pee ess tee el] contains an implementation of the headed, circular variety of these, which allows easy destruction and, in that implementation, each object contains a value, a pointer to itself, a pointer to its predecessor, and a pointer to its successor. For 10 points, name the linear data structures that have "singly" and "doubly" varieties and that are often used to implement stacks.;;linked(-)list(s)
World History;;St. Genevieve's prayers supposedly prevented him from taking Paris. He died of a burst nasal artery on the same night that he married the maid Ildico, and many of his actions were spurred by Marcian's refusal to pay tribute. He was defeated only once, by Aetius at the Battle of Châlons in 451, after which Pope Leo I persuaded him not to sack Italy. The son of Mandiuch, he murdered his brother Bleda in 444. For 10 points, name this man, known as the "Scourge of God" as leader of the Huns.;;Attila (the Hun)
Astronomy;;Kerr described the rotating variety as a unique solution to Einstein's equations in 1963. In this case, these objects are surrounded by an ergosphere, denoted by a static limit, inside which particles rotate in the same direction. If there is no rotation, that limit is otherwise a surface of infinite redshift known as the event horizon. For 10 points, what is the name of this collapsed star from which light cannot escape?;;black hole(s)
Mythology;;This deity invented loom weaving, silkworm cultivation, and rice fields. This deity also makes children by chewing up a brother's sword; that brother, Susanowo, proceeds to throw feces in her house and leave a flayed horse in the house's weaving room. In reaction to such antics,she hides in a cave until Uzume lures her out with a suggestive dance. She is placed in charge of the "High Celestial Plain," or Takamagahara. For 10 points, name this oldest daughter of Izanagi, the Shinto goddess of the sun.;;Amaterasu
European Literature;;One character lies in a mental institution one cell away from the poet Ivan Nikolayevich Homeless. Another uses a special cream given to her by Azazello and the tomcat Behemoth to turn into a witch. A novel-within-a-novel about the cruel Fifth Procurator of Judea, the rider Pontius Pilate, runs parallel to the main plot, but the focus is Woland, a magician and incarnation of the devil. For 10 points, name this novel by Mikhail Bulgakov.;;(The) Master and Margarita;;Alexandria
Art;;A 1917 lithograph copy omitted some of the ropes present in this painting. The event depicted took place at a private club across the street from the artist's studio. The two central figures butt heads while the referee looks down at their feet and the audience looks on in shock or disgust. For 10 points, name this Ashcan School piece by George Bellows.;;(A) Stag at Sharkey's
United States History;;After losing two percent of its mass during use, it was recovered by Darrell C. Tomlinson and is currently National Archives exhibit CE399. The Betzner photograph shows that a difference in seat heights makes Arlen Specter's theory about it plausible, but critics say that it cannot have entered at a forty-five degree angle with only a twenty degree elevation to the Mannlicher-Carcano which ejected it onto Dealey Plaza. For 10 points, give the common name of this object which damaged John Connally's chest, wrist, and thigh after passing through the back and neck of John F. Kennedy.;;magic bullet
European History;;He introduced the pomestie system which granted estates to nobles in exchange for loyalty to the crown. He married Zoë Palaeologus, niece of the fallen emperor of Byzantium, and eventually gave in to her intrigues with Lithuania by naming her favorite son Vasily heir. He conquered Tver, Novgorod, and parts of present-day Ukraine, but his most important move may have been an alliance with the Crimean Tatars which allowed him to repudiate tribute to the Golden Horde. For 10 points, name this Muscovite prince who laid the foundations for the empire built by his eponymous "terrible" grandson.;;Ivan (III|the Third|the Great){1}?
European Literature;;In this poem, lines about "faith's sunlit mountains" and "flowers from the bud" that the title entity coaxes illustrate the Romantic notion of finding God and heavenly ecstasy through "kind nature's flowing breasts". Its first stanza declares "Fire drunken we are ent'ring/Heavenly, thy holy home!" and uses the phrase "Daughter of Elysium" in a praiseful apostrophe that addresses the titular entity. For 10 points, name this Friedrich von Schiller poem that was set to music in Beethoven's Ninth Symphony.;;Ode to Joy|An die Freude
Music;;A trill-laden Adagio introduces the overture of the first one in F major, which also features several minuets, a bourree, and a hornpipe. The second one, with its popular Alla Hornpipe movement, was written in D major; and the third and final one was written in G major. Completed in 1717, these musical sets were written for King George I and are often played together with the Music from the Royal Fireworks. For 10 points, name this series of Handel suites originally played at parties on a river barge.;;Water Music (Suite)
World History;;This group's rule was supported by the Popular Army, led by the president's brother Humberto, and the DGSE secret police directed by Tomás Borge. It was founded in 1962 by Borge, Silvio Mayorga, and Carlos Fonseca, who named it for one of Juan Bautista Sacasa's supporters. In 1979, they overthrew Anastasio Somoza Debayle and ruled until 1990 under the leadership of Daniel Ortega. For 10 points, name this Communist group which fought a lengthy war against the Contras while ruling Nicaragua.;;Sandinistas
Chemistry;;The van't Hoff equation gives its temperature dependence. The law of mass action relates it to the activities of the reactants and products. Comparing its value with the reaction quotient shows in which direction a reaction will proceed. For 10 points, name this quantity, equal to the reaction quotient when the forward and reverse reactions are balanced.;;equilibrium constant
Geography;;The original was commissioned in 1176 by a chaplain of St. Mary's of Colechurch and completed in 1209. It was completely rebuilt in 1831, then bought by Robert McCulloch for two and a half million dollars and moved in 1971. For 10 points, what structure, now residing in Lake Havasu, Arizona, once spanned the Thames in England?;;London Bridge
European Literature;;He branched out into literary criticism with "Preoccupations" and "The Government of the Tongue" in the 1980s, following a poetry career, collected in Station Island and Field Work. His most famous poetry comes from his 1966 debut Death of a Naturalist. He has most recently won acclaim for his translations of Sophocles plays and most notably, a new translation of Beowulf. For 10 points, name this Irish poet, winner of the 1985 Nobel Prize in Literature.;;(Seamus) Heaney
Mythology;;An example from Indian myth is the patrons of medicine, the Asvins. In Mayan myth, Ix'Balanque and Hunahpu were the divine ones. Other examples include Quetzalcoatl and Xolotl in Aztec myth, or from Roman legend the foster children of Acca Larentia and Faustulus, one of whom killed the other for jumping over the walls of Rome. An example from Greek myth is the pair Idas and Lynceus, who feuded with the more famous Dioscuri. Apollo and Artemis, Remus and Romulus, and Castor and Pollux were all examples of what paired relationship?;;twins
Physics;;In an adiabatic situation, this quantity gives rise to the non-homogenous term in the Reynolds energy transport equation. The magnetic field cannot affect this because it has no potential function and, for a body experiencing a change in volume ?V [delta vee] given pressure p [pee], the amount of this done by the body is given by  [the integral over delta vee of pee dee vee]. For 10 points, identify the energetic quantity that, for a particle moving along displacement ?s [delta ess] in an uniform force field F [eff], is given by F · ?s [eff dot delta ess] and, as the product of force and distance, joins heat transfer as a mode of energy transfer in classical thermodynamics.;;work
Economics;;He outlined his policy opinions in Essays on Persuasion and was an outspoken opponent of the Chancellor of the Exchequer's attempts to return his nation to the gold standard. He attacked the Treaty of Versailles in The Economic Consequences of the Peace and advocated that the U.S. increase government spending to get out of the Great Depression. For 10 points, name this opponent of classical economics and founder of a namesake economic school, the author of The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money.;;(John) (Maynard) Keynes
United States History;;Its allowed JP Morgan to build the Hukuang railroad and was cited to overthrow José Santos Zelaya in Nicaragua. Its failures became clear when Nicaragua's populace, on grounds of national dignity, refused to support a loan request from Zelaya's successor, showing that it cannot account for non-economic motivators. For 10 points, name this strategy, created by Secretary of State Philander Knox for use in the Taft administration, which used financial transfers, in lieu of military force, as the guiding instrument of U.S. foreign policy.;;dollar diplomacy
Biology;;Similar to von Willebrand disease, its mild "C" variety is like Tay-Sachs disease in that it is concentrated in Ashkenazi Jews. The most common version, known as "classical" or "A," involves an inversion of the F8 gene; the "B" form is associated with mutations in the F9 gene located further up the long arm of the X chromosome. As a result, the F8 and F9 proteins have significantly reduced or no activity, causing platelets to not be held in place at a wound site. For 10 points, name this sex-linked inherited disease in which blood fails to clot properly.;;hemophilia
Geography;;At just under twenty-five thousand feet, Kula Kangri is this nation's tallest peak. In 1998, its revered Taktsang Monastery burned down. Its people call themselves Drukpas, which means "dragon people" in the official language of Dzongka. While its traditional capital is Punakah, the druk grapyo established the palace elsewhere. For 10 points, name this small Himalayan state with its official capital at Thimphu.;;Bhutan
Music;;It begins with the melody from "We Have Built a Stately House, which is introduced by the trumpets. The third section, introduced by the bassoons, draws from a light-hearted song about hazing, which leads to a concluding passage based on "Gaudeamus Igitur," a popular anthem among students. For 10 points, name this piece written by Johannes Brahms after he got an honorary degree from the University of Breslau.;;Academic Festival Overture
World Literature;;This country's best-known novelist wrote Sea of Death, The Golden Harvest, and Gabriela, Clove and Cinnamon. Its greatest poet wrote Occidentaes and Chryalidas. Its national epic is Rebelliion in the Backlands by Euclides da Cunha. For 10 points, name this country whose twin literary pillars are is Jorge (hor-hay) Amado and Joachim Machado.;;Brazil
Mythology;;Among his consorts are Grid, Rind, and Jord. Son of Bor and Bestla, this god has a ring, Draupnir, which duplicates itself nine times over every night, and he rides the eight-legged steed Sleipnir. He gave one of his eyes to the giant Mimir in order to drink from the giant's well of knowledge. For 10 points, name this Norse god, father of Thor.;;Odin
European History;;It declined under the leadership of Viktor Lutze and Wilhelm Scheppmann until it was relegated to the duty of training the Home Guard in 1939. Its demise was due to the compromises of Gregor Strasser and to industrial unrest over its socialist leanings. Its membership peaked at two million, or twenty times the size of the official army which it sought to supplant, until Ernst Röhm and other leaders were called to the Hanselbauer Hotel in Wiesse. For 10 points, the Night of the Long Knives purged what organization of Nazi street brawlers, known by their brown shirts?;;SA;;brown shirts
Math Theory;;The generalized variety of this allows one to state the Jacobian matrix of functions y [why] with respect to variables x [ecks] as the product of the Jacobian matrix of y with respect to u [you] and the Jacobian matrix of u with respect to x. For one variable, this can be derived most directly using the mean value theorem, and its inverse is the integral u substitution. For 10 points, name the rule for differentiation of the composition of two functions which states that, for functions f [eff] and g [gee], the derivative of the quantity f composed with g is equal to the derivative of f of g of x times the derivative of g of x.;;chain rule
British Literature;;The young intellectuals May, Hammond and Berry visit the estate of Wragby in hopes of visiting the main character's husband, for whom Mrs. Bolton serves as a caretaker. Hilda Reid despises the middle-class, but ultimately helps the main character to engage in an affair with the playwright Michaelis and to leave Clifford for the title character. For 10 points, name this novel about gamekeeper Oliver Mellors and Constance, written by D.H. Lawrence.;;Lady Chatterly's Lover
Psychology;;Symptoms of this psychological disorder include affective flattening, which is a lack of emotional response, and alogia, or severe reduction of speech. Positive symptoms include clangs, or associations based on the sounds of words, and the disorganized speech known as "word salad". For 10 points, name this wide-ranging disorder which causes delusions, hallucinations, and paranoia, named from the Greek for "split mind".;;schizophrenia
Art;;In one painting of her, a cherub with a blue sash stands in front of a red satin curtain, slightly drawn back to reveal a deep brown wall. A deep satiny curtain covers a white bed, on which sits an extraordinarily pale woman with her back to the viewer. The woman looks into a mirror held by the cherub, providing a fuzzy glimpse of her face. That "Rokeby" version is probably not as well known as another treatment by the same painter. For 10 points, who was also depicted lying on a bed looking at the viewer while servants rummage through a chest in the "Urbino" version of a favorite Titian subject?;;Venus
Biology;;ECL cells located in the mammalian gastric fundus release this chemical, which in turn spurs an increase of acid secretion in the stomach. Found in the venom of bees and wasps as well as stinging nettles, it was isolated from the ergot plant fungus by George Barger and Henry Dale. Basophils harbor many granules containing this substance, and its activity can contribute to anaphylaxis. For 10 points, name this biological substance released in the presence of a foreign antigen, a causative agent of allergic reactions.;;histamine
European History;;He joined the West Indies expedition of Pedro Arias Dávila, and he eventually supplanted Gil González de Ávila as sole commander of the Nicaraguan slave-trading franchise. Serving under Pizarro against the Incas, he commanded the cavalry at the Battle of Cajamarca and became the Spanish envoy to Atahualpa. In 1538 he was appointed governor of Cuba and Florida, but his expedition met resistance at Mauvila and he died in present-day Louisiana after seeing Tennessee and Arkansas. For 10 points, name this Spanish explorer, the first European to see the Mississippi River.;;(Hernando) (de) Soto
American Literature;;Lawrence Lefferts, a journalist, speaks to the protagonist about the business failures of Julius Beaufort, which prove to be scandalous. The protagonist's sister Janey loves to gossip about him and his secret love for two granddaughters of Mrs. Manson Mingott. Despite his engagement to the debutante May Welland, he falls in love with Countess Ellen Olenska, whom he chooses to ignore in the end. For 10 points, name this novel about the wealthy Newland Archer, written by Edith Wharton.;;(The) Age of Innocence
Religion;;Originally led by Samuel ben Kalonymos, it focused on contemplating the merkava, the throne described by Ezekiel. Its name means "the pious," and its modern version was started in the eighteenth century by Bal Shem Tov. For 10 points, name this orthodox Jewish sect, noted by their full beards, long black coats, and large hats.;;Hasidics
Religion;;The garbha-dhatu style represents movements from one to many while the vajra-dhatu represents the opposite. The Kalachakra one represents the entirety of universal time. They appear in such unlikely sources as the writings of Hildegard of Bingen, while Carl Jung's studies of it were a critical step in his individuation theory. For 10 points, name this representation of the universe in Hinduism and Buddhism, named from the Sanskrit for "circle".;;mandala
United States History;;It started over a disputed 1805 treaty signed in St. Louis. Sac and Fox Indians returned from Iowa back into Illinois, causing a panicking governor to summon the militia and pursue the Indian's leader. Pursuit lead throughout Wisconsin and ended with a battle at Bad Axe. For 10 points, name this war in 1832 which featured a young Abraham Lincoln in the Illinois militia.;;Black Hawk (war)
Art;;Later works of this type exhibited the artists' skill at proportion by depicting the male subject at the feet of the female. In the most prominent example, the body of one figure appears to be asleep rather than dead, with its relaxed limbs and head falling back limply. The exquisite carving of the other figure's neckline shows the quality of the marble used but was never repeated in the artist's later sculptures. For 10 points, name this Michelangelo sculpture, the only one he ever signed, consisting of a dead Christ on the lap of the Virgin Mary.;;Pieta
British Literature;;In this novel, a tenant is forced to stay at his landlord's house overnight in a snowstorm, and while in a disused bedroom he finds a diary with many cryptic entries, which inspires nightmares. When Mr. Lockwood returns to Thrushcross Grange, the housekeeper Nelly Dean tells a story about the estate's history that takes up the remainder of the novel. The story covers the destruction of the Earnshaw family, the fates of Isabella and Edgar Linton, and the machinations of Heathcliff. For 10 points, name this 1847 book, the only published novel by Emily Bronte.;;Wuthering Heights
Chemistry;;For a one-component mixture at this locus, there are zero degrees of freedom according to the Gibbs phase rule. It can be found as the intersection of two solutions of the Clapeyron equation because it is the terminus of the melting and boiling curves on a phase diagram; that is, those solutions meet the sublimation curve at this point. For 10 points, identify the unique state which, for water, occurs at 611.73 Pa [six hundred eleven point seven three pascals] and 273.16 K [two hundred seventy-three point one six kelvins] and at which the vapor, liquid, and solid phases are in equilibrium.;;triple point
World History;;The first step in establishing it was the Group Areas Act of 1950, followed by a series of Land Acts. It became harsher in 1970, when three million citizens were forcibly expelled from cities and repatriated in ten "homelands". Designed by Hendrik Verwoerd, it was enforced by the "pass laws" until its dismantling in 1991 under F.W. de Klerk. For 10 points, name this policy, opposed by such groups as the Inkatha Freedom Party and African National Congress, which maintained racial separation in South Africa.;;apartheid
European Literature;;After a tour of military duty, the main character Marcus Vinicius returns to Petronius. The young man falls in love with Lygia, the daughter of a foreign king who is served by the giant Ursus, but she goes into hiding. Vinicius is injured trying to recover her and winds up learning of the Christian philosophy, ultimately eschewing his pagan lifestyle. For 10 points, name this 1895 novel set in the time of Nero's reign, written by Polish Nobel laureate Henryk Sienkiewicz.;;Quo Vadis
Geology;;First discovered by Explorer I [one] in 1958, they are most intense over the Equator and nearly absent over the poles. With an energy exceeding 30 million electron-volts, intense solar activity can disrupt these bodies, and this disruption has been linked to auroras and magnetic storms. Consisting of both an inner and outer version, for 10 points, name these toroids of highly charged particles present in the Earth's magnetic field, named for an American physicist.;;Van Allen (radiation) (belts)
United States History;;He created the "implied warranty" doctrine in his majority decision for MacPherson v. Buick Motor Company and later clarified the meaning of negligence in Palsgraf v. Long Island Railroad. Elected to the New York Supreme Court as a reform candidate in 1913, this man wrote two books, Law and Literature and The Nature of the Judicial Process. For 10 points, name this Justice who was appointed to the Supreme Court by Hoover on the resignation of Oliver Wendell Holmes.;;(Benjamin) (Nathan) Cardozo
British Literature;;It is left to some neighbors by the dying Ruth, but her family disregards her final wishes. Following the marriage of the deceased's widower to the rightful heir, the heir's sister, Helen, becomes pregnant by Leonard Bast. This leads to his murder at the hands of one of Margaret Schlegel's stepchildren. The words "Only Connect" are emblazoned on the title page of, for 10 points, what E.M. Forster novel about an estate?;;Howard's End
Religion;;Born in modern-day Croatia, he was a close friend and student of Gregory of Nazianzus and became secretary to Pope Damasus I around 380. It was Damasus who selected him for his most famous assignment, and after the pope's death he moved to Bethlehem. It was there where, according to legend, he aided the lion which is often pictured at his feet. For 10 points, who was this early church figure who used Hebrew and Greek to translate the Bible into the Latin Vulgate?;;(St.) Jerome
Chemistry;;It can be calculated from a temperature versus wet-bulb temperature graph, but to obtain an accurate measurement of it, the pressure must be held constant. If it falls below zero degrees Celsius, it is known as the frost point, and at 100% relative humidity, it will be equal to the current temperature. For 10 points, name this quantity used in some hygrometers, the temperature to which air must be cooled at constant pressure in order to be saturated with water vapor.;;dew point
Art;;Apprenticed to Michael Wolgemut, his later works include a painting of the Madonna and Child and an engraving entitled The Great Cardinal. He claimed that "the perfection of form and beauty is contained in the sum of all men" in his Four Books on Human Proportion. His paintings include Christ Disputing with the Doctors and his engravings include The Knight and Death and Melancolia. For 10 points, name this German artist of the Passion and Apocalypse series of woodcuts.;;(Albrecht) Durer
European History;;He entered Parliament for Meath, and, four years later, became the head of Michael Davitt's Land League under the "new departure" strategy. While jailed, he negotiated the Kilmainham treaty to end the violence of 1882. He was cleared of approving the Phoenix Park murders, but the seeds of his downfall were laid when he nominated an opponent in the Galway election under threat of scandal. For 10 points, name this leader of the Home Rule Party who was ruined by his affair with Kitty O'Shea.;;(Charles) (Stewart) Parnell
Economics;;The non-satiation principle governing them states that greater quantities are always more desirable than lesser ones, and the completeness principle states that individuals know their own preferences. Never crossing and always convex and facing the origin, they are parallel in the case of perfect substitutes, and their slope is called the marginal rate of substitution. For 10 points, name these curves that illustrate the utility consumers get from various combinations of given goods.;;indifference (curves)
British Literature;;The title figure's journey brought him to a "land of mist and snow…" and his ship was later stranded with no wind to power the sails. Time passed, and the sailors became so dehydrated that none could speak. Life and Life-in-death soon visit, and the sailors start dying off. All is related to a wedding guest, chosen when the title figure "stoppeth one of three". For 10 points, name this Coleridge poem in which a man must repent for killing an albatross.;;Rime of the Ancient Mariner
Computer Science;;These generally consist of two phases, analysis and synthesis, and are often terminated by peep-holes, which perform system-specific optimization. The first of these was A-0 [ey zero], which was written for the BINAC by Grace Hopper in 1951. Standard modern ones proceed by lexical token generation, parsing, optimization, and code generation, though some contain built-in preprocessors. For 10 points, name the computer programs that translate a high level language to assembly or machine code and examples of which include Glasgow for Haskel, GCC for C, and a Microsoft Visual variety for C++.;;compiler(s)
United States History;;He joined the Navy in 1944, fighting in World War II and completing his service two years later, before becoming involved in California's Community Service Organization to support workers' rights. He left the CSO in 1962 to form an organization that would merge with the Agricultural Workers Organizing Committee four years later. For 10 points, name this agrarian leader who organized California wine grape pickers as leader of the United Farm Workers.;;(Cesar) (Estrada) Chavez
Music;;Among his works are variations on Mozart's Die Zauberflöte for cello and piano. Vocal works include the Elegiac Song, the cantata The Glorious Moment and the song cycle To the Distant Beloved. For 10 points, name this German composer of incidental music to Egmont, the Emperor Concerto, and some symphonies that you may have heard of such as the Choral, Pastoral, and Eroica.;;(Ludwig) (van) Beethoven
World Literature;;The main character in this work is assisted by Sha Monk, a loyal but long suffering valet; Chu Pa-chieh, a lazy and gluttonous half-human, half-pig; and Sun Wu-kung, a primate whose is referenced in one English translation, Monkey, Folk Novel of China. For 10 points, name this novel attributed to Wu Cheng-en that tells the tale of the Buddhist priest Hsuantsang's [SHU-ahn-sahng] quest to India to search for holy scriptures.;;Journey to the West
Religion;;Numbering twelve in the Eastern Orthodox tradition, their supposed relics are presently in Cologne Cathedral. Their social status was likely inferred from Psalms 72:11, while the eighth-century Exerpta latina barbari is the probable origin of the names by which they are known in today; Balthasar, Melchior, and Gaspar. For 10 points, identify these pilgrims "from the East" who, according to Matthew 2, brought "gold and frankincense and myrrh" to the infant Jesus.;;(Three) Magi
European History;;He killed his own brother-in-law while carrying out the proscriptions of Sulla and served two years as governor of Africa. Later, he gained support from the masses by promising to cancel debts and execute the wealthy, but he was undone by documents leaked by the Allobroges while he hid at Faesulae. He died a month later at Pistoria, in battle against Gaius Antonius Hybrida, after the Senate agreed to impose the "ultimate decree" at the behest of Cicero. For 10 points, name this disaffected Roman politician who led a namesake conspiracy to seize power after losing two elections to the consulship.;;Catiline
Biology;;Random tears ["tairz"] occur during its growth in utero, making it a potentially useful biometric tool, but its past use to determine paternity is not reliable. Its most notable characteristic is caused by eumelanin and pheomelanin, and Ruysch was the first to describe in detail its circular sphincter and dilator muscles, which are lined by interstices to permit the passage of aqueous humor. For 10 points, name this circular tissue that controls how much light enters the pupil, a pigmented tissue of the eye.;;iris
Music;;Their leader succeeded Gavriil Lomakin as director of the Free School and produced such works as Tamara and Islamey. Puss-in-Boots and Orientale were among the major works of one of their lesser members. Named by a critic named Stasov, this group also was responsible for such works as In the Steppes of Central Asia, Snow Maiden, and Boris Godunov. For 10 points, name this group that included Cui, Mussorgsky, and Rimsky-Korsakov, a collection of nationalistic Russian composers.;;(The) (Mighty) Five
World History;;His reign began when he defeated Hemu and, using marriage alliances to conquer the Rajputs, he extended his family's empire as far as Kandahar on the northwest and Bengal in the southeast. Among other reforms, he integrated the army with the bureaucracy and placed a diwan, who reported directly to the throne, in the entourage of every governor. He abolished the jizya tax on non-Muslims and invited scholars of various religions to his court, eventually creating the new religion of Din-e Ilahi. Succeeding Humayun, he left his empire to his son Jahangir. For 10 points, name this "great" Mogul emperor of India.;;(Abu-ul) (fath) (Jalal-ud-din) (Muhammad) Akbar
World Literature;;After starting off in acting, he served for a time as a soldier, encountering the plays of Menander in Greece. He was wandering about hand-milling corn for households when he wrote his first plays, "Addictus" and "Saturio". He engaged in social satire in Epidicius and Aulularia, but he made his name in the lowbrow New Comedy style with such plays as "Pseudolus" and "Casina," the basis for Stephen Sondheim's A Funny Thing Happened On the Way to the Forum. For 10 points, name this playwright of "Miles Gloriosus" and "Menaechmi".;;(Titus) (Maccius) Plautus
American Literature;;She wrote the poem "Admetus" sometime after she was inspired by a reading of Longfellow to write "In the Jewish Synagogue at Newport". Her Jewish heritage is evident in Songs of a Semite and "An Epistle to the Hebrews," and her frequent visits to Jewish refugees on Ward's Island caused her to write a about the "huddled masses yearning to breathe free". For 10 points, name this American author who wrote the sonnet that graces the Statue of Liberty, "The New Colossus".;;(Emma) Lazarus
United States History;;A dissent by John Gibson in the 1825 Pennsylvania court case Eakin v. Raub contains one of the foremost arguments against this legal practice, calling it a usurpation of legislative power not provided for in the Constitution. Thomas Jefferson also saw it as a violation of separation of powers, though it first appeared during his presidency, when John Marshall established it in Marbury v. Madison. For 10 points, give this two word term for the Supreme Court's ability to decide whether or not a law is constitutional.;;judicial review
Physics;;Baron Eötvös provided support for the principle of equivalence when he demonstrated that the mass associated with this concept is equal to gravitational mass. A rotating bucket of water demonstrates Mach's principle, which states that its local value is due to the distant stars. For 10 points, name this property of objects to maintain uniform rectilinear motion by opposing forces applied to them.;;inertia
United States History;;The cabinet member John Gardner played a major role in much of its legislation. Establishing the Corporation for Public Broadcasting and the National Endowment for the Arts, it also included the Upward Bound and Model Cities programs. Public education funding was increased heavily, and the Head Start and Medicare programs were established as a part of it. For 10 points, name this nationwide reform program including the "war on poverty", declared in a 1965 speech by Lyndon Johnson.;;Great Society
American Literature;;The fifth chapter of this book was published forty years after the rest. It traces the experiences of two doctors, two women, and two clerics, including Father Kleinsorge and Mrs. Nakamura. Occupying an entire issue of The New Yorker, it was subtitled "A Noiseless Flash". For 10 points, name this nonfiction account of a bomb's effects, by John Hersey.;;Hiroshima (A Noiseless Flash)
Sociology;;He defended the constitutional monarchy as the most honorable system of government, claiming that "liberty is the stepchild of privilege". His 1734 Considerations of the Grandeur and Decadence of the Romans illustrates how a democracy without public virtues perishes in tyranny. His 1721 Persian Letters satirize French society through the eyes of two visitors, and the framers of the U.S. Constitution drew heavily from his idea of "checks and balances," a term which he coined in his landmark 1748 treatise. For 10 points, name this French author of The Spirit of Laws.;;(Charles) (Louis) (de) (Secondat) (Baron) (de) (la) (Brede) (et) (de) Montesquieu
American Literature;;The novel centers around a planned symposium entitled "The Modern Novel In The Age of McLuhan" and scheduled for Midland City, Indiana. The sponsors are Eliot Rosewater and Dwayne Hoover, who were affected by the short story "Now It Can Be Told". Kilgore Trout is invited as a featured speaker, but during the seminar, Hoover goes batty and injures eleven. For 10 points, name this satirical novel by Kurt Vonnegut.;;Breakfast of Champions (Goodbye Blue Monday)
British Literature;;He first appears as a slightly bored aristocrat. He learns to fence and dance but soon falls into debauchery. He arrested in a scene where a white flash of lightning splits the sky and the virtuous Sarah Young attempts to come to his aid, then he marries a rich old woman and promptly gambles away her fortune. He is naked but for a small white blanket, and chained to the ground, after being sent to Bedlam. For 10 points, name this character, whose dissolute "progress" was chronicled in a 1735 series of plates by William Hogarth.;;(Tom) Rake(well)
Physics;;The partition function derived from this equation results in Gibbs' paradox, and it may be stated very succinctly as Z = 1 [big-zee equals one]. In this law's canonical form, one of its sides is equal to two divided by the number of degrees of freedom times the energy predicted by the equipartition theorem, and a widely-used form of its namesake constant is equal to the product of Boltzmann's constant and Avogadro's number. For 10 points, name the combination of Boyle's, Charles', and Avogadro's laws that is often stated PV = nRT [pee vee equals enn arr tee].;;ideal gas (law)
United States History;;Its main influence was in a bloc of fourteen Representatives who were able to prevent the Democrats from exercising their House plurality in the thirty-first Congress. It also sent party founder Salmon Chase and former Liberty candidate John Hale to the Senate. At its formative convention in Buffalo, Barnburner Democrats and Conscience Whigs joined to support the Wilmot Proviso. For 10 points, name this party which ran a ticket of Charles Francis Adams and Martin van Buren in 1848 on a platform opposing the creation of new slave territories.;;Free Soil (Party)
Mythology;;He is equivalent to the Vedic figure Dharmaraha. He was supposedly armed with a knife and torch at birth, and on his first day of life he killed Geusha Urvan. In the historical view of the origin of Jesus, commentators note that this figure was supposedly born on December 25, under the eyes of shepherds. His cult spread to the Mediterranean world with Alexander's army and reached its zenith among soldiers and traders of the first few centuries CE. For 10 points, name this god of multiple mythologies, especially prominent in Persia and Rome, who is usually depicted slaying a bull.;;Mithras
Computer Science;;The SGI STL defines these as a hierarchy of structures consisting of six concepts, the most general of which is the random access variety, which allows pointer arithmetic. Languages with postfix increment and decrement operators greatly simplify the use and implementation of the bidirectional variety of these, and they are the preferred generic interface between linear container structures and their algorithms. For 10 points, identify the access members that are generalizations of pointers and that, as their name implies, move in order along the elements of a linear structure when incremented.;;iterator(s)
European History;;While retreating from a loss in this war, a fleet suffered what Polybius dubbed the greatest naval disaster known when a storm sunk 184 ships at Camarina. The loss was due to the mercenary commander Xanthippus, who defeated Regulus. In its first battle, Appius Claudius Caudex defeated the alliance of Hiero II. After the decisive battle at Drepana, the victors received the Lipari Islands and Sicily, where the war had begun due to foreign interference in a rivalry between Messana and Syracuse. For 10 points, name this 264 to 241 BCE war between Rome and Carthage.;;First Punic (war)
Astronomy;;A cataclysmic variable is one of these in which luminosity is variable due to accretion, until the system destroys itself. The orbits of these objects are observed to decay in a manner consistent with the existence of gravitational waves, which is a proof of general relativity, and the region of space in which a mass is bound to one of the component stars of this is known as the Roche lobe. These astronomical objects are classified in one or more of four types: astrometric, spectroscopic, visual, and eclipsing. For 10 points, name the astronomical systems, of which Sirius is an example, that consist of two stars in orbit about each other.;;binary (star) (systems)
British Literature;;At the end, when "the Sun had stretch'd out all the hills/And now was dropt into the Western bay," the title figure rises to "fresh Woods, and Pastures new". In discussing "the spur that the clear spirit doth raise," the poets ears are touched by Phoebus, who declares that "Fame is no plant that grows on mortal soil". "The Shepherds weep no more" for the title character, who "sunk…beneath the watry floar". For 10 points, name this elegy on the death of Edward King by John Milton.;;Lycidas (A Lament for a friend drowned in his passage from Chester on the Irish Seas, 1637)
Mythology;;One of these creatures was the mother by Zephyrus of Balius and Xanthus, the immortal horses of Achilles; her name was Podarges. Another one, Celaeno, prophecied that Aeneas and his companions would wander until they ate their tables. In another story, some of these creatures were driven away by Calais and Zetes, flying members of the Argonauts, who rescued King Phineas from having his food stolen and befouled by these creatures. For 10 points, name these creatures who were half-woman, half-bird.;;harp(ies|y){1}?
European History;;He wrote the patriotic novel Raza, which was later made into a poorly-received. He was never awarded the laurel cross of San Fernando, despite being wounded at El Biutz. He crushed the Bolshevik revolution of Asturias coal miners using the same cruel tactics he had employed earlier when defeating the Riff tribes in Morocco. For 10 points, name this man known as "el Caudillo," who led the Nationalists to victory in the Spanish Civil War, and, from 1936 until his death in 1975, was the dictator of Spain.;;(Francisco) Franco
Computer Science;;The Ackermann-Peter function is often used to test a compiler's ability to optimize this process, while a function to compute the Catalan numbers is easily coded using it. Languages such as Scheme require its "tail" variety to be used, which saves only the calling function's address, eliminating the need to save successive "frames" on the stack. For 10 points, divide and conquer algorithms, the Towers of Hanoi puzzle, and calculating the Fibonacci numbers are all tasks that are easily solved by what process, which involves a function calling itself until a base case is reached?;;recursion
World Literature;;This writer's treatise on "Love and Eroticism," The Double Flame, hints at his experimentation with, and rejection of, automatic writing. This founder of The Prodigal Son, a literary review, expressed his Spanish Republican sentiments in "Beneath Your Clear Shadow and Other Poems," and his other poetic volumes include The Bow and the Lyre and Freedom Under Parole. For 10 points, name the author of the Aztec-inspired The Sun Stone and the critical volume The Labyrinth of Solitude, a Mexican diplomat and poet who won the 1990 Nobel Prize for Literature.;;(Octavio) Paz
Music;;An 1873 performance of his patriotic cantata The Heirs of the White Mountain first brought him fame throughout his country, while Joseph Barnaby's British premiere of his Stabat Mater brought him international fame. He is probably best known today for his Ninth Symphony in e minor, which included folk songs collected by Harry Burleigh. For 10 points, name this Czech-born composer of From the New World.;;(Antonin) (Leopold) Dvorak
British Literature;;The main characters of this slim novel take a quick trip through the southeast but spend most of their time in Boston. One of them, the former Baroness Münster, attempts to "educate" Clifford Wentworth, but he returns to his similarly-aged lover, Elizabeth Acton. Although the title characters, Eugenia and Felix, are American citizens, they have spent all their life on the Continent. For 10 points, name this 1878 novel by Henry James.;;(The) Europeans
Art;;This movement began to decline by the time its leader published "Note of a Painter". Works produced during its peak include Interior With Open Windows and Charing Cross Bridge, respectively by Raoul Dufy and Andre Derain. Given its name by scornful critic Louis Vauxcelles, the movement was led by the painter of The Joy of Life, Henri Matisse. For 10 points, identify this early 20th Century art movement that emphasized the use of bold color, whose name refers to "wild beasts".;;fauvism
European History;;Mikhail Speransky led the court that tried its instigators, eventually executing thirty-six people. It may have originated at Prince Shcherbatov's house or the Moscow Mathematics society. The Northern Society, lead by Nikita Muravyov, met at Kondraty Ryleiev's house on Christmas Day to plan on a strategy which would ultimately gather 3,000 soldiers in an attempt to depose Nicholas I. For 10 points, name this failed Russian revolt of 1825, named for the winter month in which it occurred.;;Decembrist (revolt|uprising)
Physics;;Lovelock suggested the use of this as a chromatographic mobile phase, and it finds wide application in liquid-solid separation for its namesake extraction. Water in this phase is a good solvent for non-polar substances, and it is defined as a member of the set of points beyond the right end of the boiling curve. Often used to remove pollution from rivers or to decaffeinate coffee, this is, for 10 points, what phase of matter in which the distinction between the gas and liquid phases is blurred, formed when a substance's pressure or temperature increases beyond the critical point?;;supercritical (fluids)
European History;;He was the British negotiator at the Treaty of Amiens. Earlier, he defeated Tippu Sultan in the Third Mysore War. His namesake "Code" is credited with preventing bureaucratic corruption throughout British rule in India, and he later resigned as viceroy of Ireland in protest over Parliament's denial of Catholic rights. In an earlier capacity, he won at Brandywine, Germantown, and Camden, but he was soon trapped at the convergence of Washington, Grasse, and Rochambeau's armies. For 10 points, name this general who surrendered under siege at Yorktown, sealing British defeat in the American Revolution.;;(Charles) Cornwallis
American Literature;;The book opens with the narrator explaining why he lives in the basement and takes the current to operate 1369 lights from Monopoly Light and Power. The narrator then returns to his adolescence and tells of being forced to fight for the amusement of whites and driving a philanthropist around while in college. For 10 points, name this book about a man who goes unnoticed much of the time, written by Ralph Ellison.;;Invisible Man
Mythology;;The poet Stesichorus claims he was a child when his father was murdered. In Choephoroi, Pylades's only lines remind him of their sworn pact and to count all men as his enemies rather than the gods; thus, he has the strength to commit matricide. He acts according to the wishes of Apollo and takes refuge in Athens, pleading his case to Aeropagus. For 10 points, name this son of the murdered Agamemmnon who took revenge on Aegisthus and Clytemnestra.;;Orestes
Math Theory;;This foundational lemma is sometimes divided into two statements, and it is not directly extensible to dimensions higher than one, though corollaries of the generalized Stokes' theorem allow an analog of it to be stated for any simply connected manifold. Barrow's Lectiones Geometricae contains a geometric statement of this law, which, in that form, states that "the determination of areas and tangents are inverse problems," though the most famous statement of this theorem is credited to Barrow's student, Newton. For 10 points, name the theorem that, for a function f [eff], is often stated  [eff of ecks equals eff of eh plus the integral from eh to ecks of eff-prime of tee dee tee] and that, therefore, states that integration and differentiation are inverses.;;f(undamental) t(heorem) (of) c(alculus)
Religion;;One of its key rituals is misogi, ritual ablution near shrines. The creative force of musuhi and the sincerity called makoto are also key concepts. This religion includes the Four Affirmations: Tradition and the family, love of nature, physical cleanliness, and worship of ancestral spirits and gods. For 10 points, name this religion that venerates the kami, the indigenous faith of Japan.;;Shinto(ism)
Music;;Premiering in October 1942 with a performance by the Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo, its songs include "Saturday Night Waltz," "Buckaroo Holiday," and "Hoedown". Subtitled "The Courting at Burnt Ranch," it was choreographed by Agnes de Mille, who starred in its first performances. For 10 points, name this ballet with music by Aaron Copland, a love story set in the American Southwest.;;Rodeo
Biology;;Thought to be caused by viral infection of the mitochondrial genes in the brain and liver, it is associated with aflatoxin or warfarin poisoning. Though cases are reported throughout the year, the incidence of this non-contagious pediatric disease is higher during the winter months, usually after an outbreak of flu or chickenpox. For 10 points, name this syndrome that is strongly associated with the administration of aspirin during a viral infection.;;Reye('s) (Syndrome)
United States History;;The grandson of a Confederate general, he was a contender in the military pentathlon at the 1912 Olympics. He served under John Pershing and later led the Third Army to victory at Sicily, Normandy, and the Battle of the Bulge. For 10 points, identify this temperamental general, nicknamed "Ol' Blood and Guts".;;(George) (Smith) Patton (Jr.)
United States History;;It proclaimed its independence at Westminster and became the first constitutional government in history to forbid slavery and adopt universal male suffrage. It functioned as an independent country for ten years while the newly created aristocracy, dubbed the "River Gods," fought with those wishing to preserve Benning Wentworth's land grants. The latter system was eventually recognized due to agitation by Seth Warner, John Stark, Ethan Allen, and the rest of the Green Mountain Boys. For 10 points, New York thus gave up its claims to what area, allowing it to become the fourteenth state of the U.S.?;;Vermont
American Literature;;Subplots include Eugene Morgan wanting to marry Isabel, who instead marries the dull Wilbur Minafer, and the eventual resentment that George feels at the attentions paid to his mother. Coming between The Turmoil and The Midlander in the Growth trilogy, it follows a spoiled scion as his family fortune collapses. For 10 points, name this 1918 novel by Booth Tarkington.;;(The) Magnificent Ambersons
Geography;;Built between 1933 and 1975, this one-mile-long structure is 550 feet tall from the bedrock base to the blacktop of the two-lane road it supports. It generates around 6500 megawatts of power from the artificial reservoir Franklin Roosevelt Lake in Washington. For 10 points, name this dam controlling the flow of the Columbia River, the largest masonry project in North America.;;Grand Coulee (Dam)
Astronomy;;Its namesake "cloud" contains objects such as Barnard's Loop, the Rosette Nebula, and Messier objects 42 and 43. This constellation is also home to the stars Saiph and Bellatrix, as well as the Trapezium Cluster and the Horsehead Nebula. It lies between Taurus and Canis Major, and includes a blue-white supergiant as the left knee and a red supergiant as the right shoulder. Those supergiants are Rigel (pron. RYE-jell) and Betelgeuse (pron. BEE-tle-juice), respectively. For 10 points, name this constellation of a hunter with a famous three-star belt.;;Orion
World History;;As an advocate of the United Front against Japan, he flew to Xian and convinced mutinous generals not to kill Chiang Kai-Shek. During the Cultural Revolution he led the moderate faction against Lin Biao, and his policies won out in the long term when he successfully rehabilitated Deng Xiaoping to party leadership. In 1971 his strategy of improving ties with the U.S. was cemented when he met Henry Kissinger in Peking. Two years later, he arranged the summit between Mao Zedong and Richard Nixon. For 10 points, name this first foreign minister and longtime premier of Communist China.;;Zhou (Enlai)
Physics;;The streamfunction of fluid mechanics is fundamentally a type of this, and, as is generally the case, it is only unique up to an additive term. A 1/r2 [one over arr-squared] force in two-space results in the logarithmic variety of this, an electromagnetic gauge condition is a relationship between the vector and scalar variety of this, and the one for a uniform gravitational field of magnitude g [gee] directed along z [zee] is g(z-z0) [gee times the quantity zee minus zee-naught], the mass partial derivative of the gravitational energy. For 10 points, name the function from physics that, when multiplied by the generalized charge, yields its namesake type of energy; a fact exemplified by voltage.;;potential (function)
British Literature;;The first of two successful journals of its kind, it was published three times a week between 1709 and 1711 under the pseudonym of Isaac Bickerstaff. Originally intended as a report from various chocolate- and coffee-houses, it eventually wrote criticisms of society and established what it considered standards for proper behavior and good taste. For 10 points, name this periodical originally founded by Richard Steele with subsequent support from Joseph Addison, the precursor to the Spectator.;;(The) Tatler
European History;;In the first major engagement of this conflict, at Bibracte, one commander ordered the removal of the officers' horses to make a retreat impossible. Two years later the Sequani were routed at Mulhouse. The war was made feasible when the Suebi under Ariovistus were driven back across the Rhine. Consisting of campaigns against the Veneti, Aquitani, Bituriges, and Helvetii, this war ended with successive victories at Agendicum and Alesia over the forces of Vercingetorix. For 10 points, name this 58 to 52 BCE campaign by Julius Caesar in present-day France.;;Gallic Wars
Linguistics;;Alphabets without characters for these are called abjads; Hebrew is one example. These can be differentiated through height, backness, roundedness, length and nasalization. Many languages classify them as long or short or add diacritical marks to them. For 10 points, what sounds, characterized by an open configuration of the vocal tract, include in English five full-time letters and sometimes Y?;;vowel(s)
Music;;His work was heavily influenced by his study of Italian music with Kaspar Prentz. He worked as a tutor to two Bachs, and his son, William Hieronymus, replaced this man as the organist at Sebalduskirche after his death. He may be best known for a gigue and another work for three violins used frequently in film scores. For 10 points, name this German composer, creator of the Canon in D Major.;;(Johann) Pachelbel
European Literature;;A shoe-buying scene in Book II alludes to the social climbing of the protagonist, who finds the word "de" added to his name in the bootmaker's monogram. Pirard mentors the protagonist in his studies at the monastery, though he is more interested in high society, becoming the secretary of the Marquis de a Mole and the fiancé of his daughter Mathilde, until jilted ex-lover Madame de Renal shows up to complicate things. For 10 points, name this novel about Julien Sorel, written by Stendhal.;;(The) Red and the Black
European Literature;;This man introduced the writings of theologian Hermann Samuel Reimarus (rye- mah-roos) to the world as the "Wolfenbüttel fragments," which separated Jesus, the first-century Jew, from the Jesus of Christian understanding, son of God. He co-edited a journal of criticism with Nicolai and Moses Menhelssohn, and wrote the first tragedy that focused on middle-class Germans, "Miss Sara Sampson". For 10 points, name this German author of "Minna von Barnhelm," "Nathan the Wise," and "Laokoon".;;(Gotthold) (Ephraim) Lessing
Biology;;Formol toxoids can produce immunity against it, and hyperbaric oxygen therapy is sometimes used to combat it if the patient is diagnosed early. The genus Clostridium is responsible for the most virulent form of this disease, in which gas bubbles released from the bacterial toxin form underneath the skin and result in necrosis. For 10 points, name this condition of localized tissue death due to prolonged interruption of the blood supply to that tissue, seen often as a complication of diabetes and battle injuries.;;gangrene
Geography;;It was first mapped in 1866 by Doudart de Lagrée and Marie-Joseph-François Garnier. The first dam on the upper part of this river, Manwan, was built in 1993, and over fifty are scheduled to follow. Its source is in the highlands above Yunan Province, and it picks up volume in Cambodia from Tonle Sap before flowing into the South China Sea. For 10 points, name this river which forms an enormous delta in southern Vietnam.;;Mekong (River)
Religion;;Sections include "The Seven Arits," "The Chapter of Making the Transformation Into a Swallow," "The Judges in Anu," and the always valuable "Chapter of Not Being Boiled in Fire". Karl Richard Lepsius gave it the name by which it is currently known, as it is literally titled The Chapters of Coming Forth by Day. First seen in sites dating from around 1450 BCE, it incorporates the Coffin and Pyramid Texts. For 10 points, name this compendium of Egyptian tomb inscriptions.;;(The) Book of the Dead
Music;;Its final act sees the high priests try the lover of the title character for treason and sentence him to death in the temple of Vulcan, but not before the title character's rival, Amneris, makes a manipulative marriage proposal that is rejected by Radames. This opera was commissioned by Ishmael Pacha, who intended for it to open on the same day as the Suez Canal. For 10 points, name this Giuseppe Verdi opera about an Ethopian princess who is buried alive.;;Aida
European History;;Under the influence of his concubine Marcia, he eased persecution of Christians. He negotiated an unfavorable peace treaty with the Marcomanni, then earned several partial victories over the Germans. Late in his reign, he had the months of the year, the Senate, the army, and a rebuilt part of Rome renamed in his honor. For 10 points, name this Roman emperor who reigned from 180 to 192, a son of Marcus Aurelius who really did pretend to be a gladiator.;;(Marcus) (Aurelius) Commodus (Antoninus)
Biology;;Autonomic innervation is controlled by neurons synapsing at Auerbach's plexus and Meissner's plexus, found between muscle layers in this organ. Folds known as rugae straighten out when this organ is distended. Its greater curvature is four to five times the length of the lesser curvature, and it has more smooth muscle cells in the antrum region compared to the fundus region. For 10 points, name this digestive organ that can hold up for 3 liters of food, where pepsin mixes with hydrochloric acid to further the digestive process.;;stomach
Mythology;;His origins are uncertain: Ra ond Osiris are both cited as his father, and his mother may be Nephthys, Hesat, or Bastet. His fully human form is seen only in the temple of Ramses II of Abydos. What is certain is his role as chief embalmer. For 10 points, name this mysterious Egyptian deity, often depicted with the head of a jackal, who rules the underworld.;;Anubis
American Literature;;It begins "In 1902, Father built a house at the crest of the Broadview Avenue hill in New Rochelle, New York". Henry Ford, J.P. Morgan, and Harry Houdini and other real-life characters appear alongside the protagonist, Coalhouse Walker, Jr. For 10 points, name this E.L. Doctorow novel, which was made into a musical as its title would invite.;;Ragtime
British Literature;;He announces to the senator that "the beast with two backs" is being created and observes "we cannot all be masters, nor all masters cannot be truly follow'd". He suspects his plain-spoken wife Emilia is having an affair and thus lusts after Desdemona. For 10 points—name this most villain who is jealous of Michael Cassio's promotion in Othello.;;Iago
European History;;The referendum establishing it was the first time in the country's history that women voted. Vincent Auriol and René Coty were its only presidents, but the weak, compromise cabinets that Félix Gouin's constitution encouraged changed rapidly, and it had twenty-two prime ministers in twelve years of existence. The system's failures became evident during the Algerian crisis, which allowed Charles de Gaulle to return to politics and rewrite the Constitution at will. For 10 points, name this regime in place from 1946 to 1958 in France.;;Fourth (French) Republic
European History;;Speculation surrounds the third event of this name, which involved foreign minister Jan Masaryk in 1948. The first, in 1419, involved the killing of seven council members by a crowd of Hussites. The most famous one, the second, occurred following the election of Ferdinand, duke of Styria, as Holy Roman Emperor. For 10 points, the victims escaped serious injury by landing on a pile of manure in what event at Hradcany castle in 1618 that set off the Thirty Years War?;;Defenestration of Prague
Chemistry;;The distance between each of the main constituents of this substance is approximately 1.39 Å [one point three nine angstroms] and Pauling explained its low reactivity by use of resonance theory in 1931. This chemical compound may be reduced to cyclohexane through the use of a nickel hydride catalyst and, when substituted with a methyl group, it is known as toluene. For 10 points, name the carcinogen that is simplest aromatic hydrocarbon, a ring molecule with formula C6H6 [cee six aych six].;;benzene
Psychology;;The iterated version of this problem was examined by Robert Axelrod, who discovered that, when repeated over the long term, selfish strategies tended to hurt the player using them. According to its rules, cooperation between the two players would yield the best net result, but if one player cooperates while the other defects, the player who defects will go free at the expense of his partner. For 10 points, name this theoretical problem that depicts two individuals being interrogated in separate jail cells.;;prisoner's dilemma
British Literature;;Perhaps inspiring Fight Club, this title figure is Jack's dissolute brother, Jack's guise on trips into town, and Jack's eventual goal. He is contrasted to Bunbury, who serves a similar purpose and is equally nonexistent. He is engaged to both Cecily Cardew and Gwendolen Fairfax, and eventually both Algernon and Jack discover his value. For 10 points, Oscar Wilde noted the importance of being what pseudonymus adjective?;;Earnest
Religion;;She became pregnant in an adulterous relationship, and her lover, the king, called her husband home from the war so that the child would appear legitimate. This ploy failed, as her husband refused to stay with her, in comfort, while his men were sleeping in tents. The king then sent her husband, Uriah, to the front lines, where he was killed, so that the king could marry her. For 10 points, name this woman who was seen on her roof by King David.;;Bathsheba
Biology;;He received the nickname "Private 606" for administering arsenic, Paul Ehrlich's treatment for syphilis. After serving in the Royal Army Medical Corps during World War I, he turned to science, identifying and isolating lysozyme in 1921. This merely foreshadowed his future work, for which he would win the 1945 Nobel Prize in Medicine with Chain and Florey. For 10 points, name this British nobleman who, thanks to some serendipitous mold, discovered the antibiotic effects of penicillin.;;(Sir) (Alexander) Fleming
World History;;The Venezuelan ambassador to his country, Lino Martinez, denounced him for pursuing the opposite economic course of Venezuelan crackpot Hugo Chavez. Also in 2004, he was dubbed an American lackey by Fidel Castro, leading to a recall of his ambassadors from Cuba, but he spoke against American military unilateralism as host of the 2004 European Union-Latin America summit. For 10 points, name this National Action Party leader who, in 2000, succeeded Ernesto Zedillo as president of Mexico.;;(Vicente) Fox (Quesada)
Music;;It was originally written in 1886, for piano duo, string quintet, flute, clarinet, harmonica, and xylophone. However, its composer allowed only its penultimate movement to be performed publicly during his lifetime. Consisting of fourteen movements, it is a set of character sketches, including "Personages with long ears" and "Pianists". For 10 points, name this Saint-Saëns fantasy that ends with the braying of a donkey.;;Carnival of the Animals
Computer Science;;Floyd's algorithm can transform a list into one of these in linear time with respect to the number of elements. The namesake sorting algorithm of these structures consists of simply creating one and then removing the elements from it in order, and is in a fast because insertion and removal are both performed in log n [log enn] time. For 10 points, name these data structures that may be rigorously defined as binary trees such that the value of each node is always smaller than that of any of its descendants and which are, therefore, often used to implement priority queues.;;(binary) heaps
American Literature;;In "Genius Child," he writes of how no one can tame and love a prodigy and therefore wants to kill it. In "Me and the Mule," he writes that he is proud of the way he is, but in "High to Low," he condemns those who act like stereotypes. For 10 points, name this author of the Jesse B. Simple stories, a poet of the Harlem Renaissance who wrote "The Weary Blues" and "A Dream Deferred".;;(Langston) Hughes
United States History;;On the Third Circuit bench, he was known as "The Fighting Little Judge". In a 1958 gubernatorial primary loss to John Patterson, he refused the support of the Ku Klux Klan and received the endorsement of the NAACP. After winning the Florida primary in 1972, Arthur Bremer shot him while he was campaigning in Laurel, Maryland, leaving him paralyzed. For 10 points, name this segregationist who ran for president in 1968 on the American Independent Party ticket, the longtime Alabama governor who famously "stood in the schoolhouse doors" to prevent integration of his state's public schools.;;(George) Wallace
World Literature;;Some of his short stories are collected in Constancia and Other Stories for Virgins. He fictionalized the conquista in "All Cats Are Gray". This author edited his country's "Review of Literature" until 1958, and his other critical works include "The New Hispano-American Novel" and Don Quixote, or the Critique of Reading, but he is probably best known for his novels, the first of which was 1958's Where the Air Is Clear. For 10 points, identify the Mexican diplomat and author of Terra Nostra, The Old Gringo, and The Death of Artemio Cruz.;;(Carlos) Fuentes
Economics;;Karl Marx used this theory as an example of the exploitive tendencies of capitalism, claiming that both government reforms and labor unions were hopeless to challenge it. Derived from Thomas Malthus's theory that population growth would lead to mass impoverishment, it was used to justify its creator's criticism of the poor laws in Principles of Political Economy and Taxation. For 10 points, David Ricardo developed what questionable law, stating that the lowest laborer wages will always equal what is necessary for the bare minimums of physical subsistence?;;iron law of wages
Geology;;It can include the minerals aragonite, which is a less stable form of its primary mineral constituent, and dolomite, which is similar to its primary mineral constituent but contains magnesium instead of calcium. It is the predominant rock in regions with Karst topography, which is characterized by sinkholes and caverns. For 10 points, name this sedimentary rock which can metamorphose to produce marble, composed primarily of the mineral calcite.;;limestone
American Literature;;This work, in an exposition and "Application" quotes Psalm 73:18, and it was written to combat the heresy of Jacobus Arminius. In form, it is a homily on the verse Deuteronomy 32:35, "Their foot shall slide in due time". It borrows from the "pathetical" method of Gilbert Tenant, mentioning Suffield, a town neighboring its intended congregation of Enfield. In one passage, it compares the audience to a spider held over a fire by a figure which "abhors" the helpless being. For 10 points, name this representative work of the First Great Awakening, a classic "fire and brimstone" sermon by Jonathan Edwards.;;Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God
United States History;;Their destinations included Placerville, Murphys, Angels Camp, and Mokelumne Hills. Among their number were the parents of philosopher Josiah Royce and a man named Stevens who founded the local wine industry. When they suffered a cholera epidemic, Panama City closed its ports and the trails from Missouri to Wyoming became graveyards. Eighty thousand of them came through the port then called Yerba Buena, reacting to James Marshall's discovery at Sutter's Mill. For 10 points, what initial wave of Californian gold prospectors took its name from the year of their migration?;;forty-niners|49ers
European History;;Following the allocations at the Congress of Vienna, it became the fourth largest German-speaking state in Europe. It was made the ninth electorate of the Holy Roman Empire after its Duke, Ernest Augustus, arranged a marriage with the daughter of George William and remained independent until it was annexed by Prussia. Because its royal house was descended from Sophia of the Palatinate, granddaughter of England's James I, its king George Louis was invited in 1714 to become George I of England. For 10 points, name this German kingdom which thus established a namesake British royal house.;;Hanover
Mythology;;One was known for his sacred axe, or Parashu, which lopped off one of Ganesh's tusks. Another one, Naram-Sin, was a half-man, half-lion. The final one, Khalki, will appear on a white horse to destroy the world. Better-known ones include the husband of Sita, the charioteer in the Mahabarata, and the Buddha. For 10 points, these are all what Earthly manifestations of Vishnu?;;(Vishnu) avatars (of Vishnu)
Chemistry;;One consequence of it is that the spin wave function for electrons must be anti-symmetric, and because of this rule, atoms and molecules cannot be placed arbitrarily close together. Derived from the fact that a wave function given the same input for both parameters must equal zero, only fermions obey it. For 10 points, name this law which states that no two electrons can be at the same time in the same state, and often bears the name of its Austrian formulator.;;(Pauli('s)) exclusion principle
British Literature;;The speaker asks "To what green altar, O mysterious priest,/Lead'st thou that heifer lowing at the skies"? Earlier, the speaker implores "Ah, happy, happy boughs! that cannot shed/Your leaves, nor ever bid the Spring adieu", after commenting that "Heard melodies are sweet, but those unheard/Are sweeter". This poem begins by addressing the title object as an "unravish'd bride of quietness". For 10 points, identify this poem by John Keats which declares "‘Beauty is truth, truth beauty".;;Ode on a Grecian Urn
United States History;;Supreme Court jurisprudence over this ten-word passage began with 1947's Everson v. Board of Education, which dealt with government funding of certain school buses. Engel v. Vitale found a violation of it even though the passage in question was nondenominational. For 10 points, preceding the free exercise clause is what section of the First Amendment prohibiting Congress from making laws that endorse religion?;;establishment (clause)
Art;;When he died, he bequeathed a large sum of money to the support of "decaying artists". He was only fifteen when the Royal Academy exhibited one of his watercolors; later they showed his first oil painting, Fishermen at Sea. His classically inspired paintings include Dido Building Carthage and Ulysses Deriding Polyphemus, though he is also known for stormy scenes like The Evening of the Deluge. For 10 points, name this English painter of The Slave Ship and Rain, Steam, and Speed.;;(Joseph) (Mallard) (William) Turner
British Literature;;In this book, an older woman and her young maid try to escape the traditional experience of their fellow travelers by meeting the local residents. They have lunch with a doctor at the Marabar Caves and become embroiled in a court case when Miss Quested accuses the doctor of rape. This case brings to the forefront the racial tensions between the natives and the ruling English. For 10 points, name this novel centering around Mrs. Moore, Dr. Aziz, and Fielding, written by E.M. Forster.;;(A) Passage to India
United States History;;The Supreme Court upheld it in Ableman v. Booth, voiding Wisconsin's "personal liberty law" as contravening federal authority. Those charged under it were not entitled to a jury and could not testify in their own defense, and it authorized a network of "special commissioners" who could impose fines at will. For 10 points, name this part of the Compromise of 1850 which, zealously enforcing Constitutional Article IV, Section 2, mandated the return of those who escaped northward.;;Fugitive Slave Act (of 1850)
Geography;;Located in Colbert and Lauderdale counties, it is a thirty-five mile stretch of river that drops over 130 feet in height, first navigated by the Atlas in 1828. The Wilson and Wheeler Dams made the stretch navigable and created a major nitrate trade corrider along the Tennessee River. For 10 points, name this area improved by the Tennessee Valley Authority, located in northwest Alabama and home to a hydroelectric power plant.;;Muscle Shoals (Alabama)
Physics;;Originally stated in Nernst's heat theorem, it can be derived by showing that under the assumed conditions, the number of available microstates for a pure crystal falls to 1. It allows definition of an absolute scale of entropy, and implies that it is impossible to reach absolute zero temperature in a finite number of steps. For 10 points, name this law which states that entropy reaches a minimum at absolute zero temperature.;;third law of thermodynamics
Art;;The President of the Society of Independent Artists, Arthur B. Davies, organized it. It ran from February 17 to March 15, 1913. Over 1600 works were shown to 300,000 Americans, including some art students in Chicago who hanged Henri Matisse and Constantin Brancusi in effigy. For 10 points, name this exhibition which also debuted Duchamp's Nude Descending A Staircase in a former regiment-house.;;Armory (Show)
American Literature;;Among the characters in this novel are Joe Bell, a bartender; O.J. Berman, an agent; Sally Tomato, an imprisoned gangster; and Doc, the protagonist's first husband. The protagonist, a native of Tulip, Texas, is distraught when her Argentine diplomat fiancé, José Ybarra-Jaegar, dumps her after a mob scandal. Lulamae Barnes is the real name of that woman, whose naiveté does not serve her well after she finds fame in New York. For 10 points, name this novel about Holly Golightly by Truman Capote.;;Breakfast at Tiffany's
World History;;The party he founded rebelled against him over the Lavon Affair, causing him to resign from office and spend his latter political life as head of the opposition Rafi party. Earlier, he had created the powerful Histadrut labor confederation and the Mapai party, which eventually became a founding partner of Labor. Always serving as his own defense minister, he suffered a brief interregnum at the hands of Moshe Sharett but otherwise, for 10 points, who was the prime minister of Israel from the state's 1948 founding to 1963?;;(David) Ben(-)Gurion
Math Theory;;The Leibnitz identity allows generalization of the product rule in terms of this principle. The q-analog of this law has Gaussian polynomials as its coefficients, and the normal coefficients of this are often stated in a notation resembling a two-vector and can be extended to non-integer powers by using the gamma function instead of the factorial. The first known statement of this lemma in the modern form is attributed to Pascal, who is also the namesake of a certain device to express its coefficients for positive integer powers. For 10 points, identify the theorem that allows the expression of the nth power of the sum of two numbers, x and y, as  [the sum from kay equals zero to enn of enn choose kay times ecks to the kay times why to the enn minus kay], which is often used to find coefficients for the expansions of two-variable polynomials.;;binomial (theorem)
Philosophy;;Solicitor general, attorney general and lord chancellor under James I, he explored various questions in his Essays or Counsels, while his exploration of the ideal society Bensalem inspired the creation of the Royal Society with the fictional Solomon's House. He praises the titular pursuit in The Advancement of Learning, the basis for the first part of his incomplete Instauratio Magna. For 10 points, name this philosopher, the author of The New Atlantis, who outlined the inductive scientific method in Novum Organum.;;(Francis) Bacon
Music;;Although five works sharing this title were composed between 1901 and 1930, only the first, in D major, is widely heard today. The principal melody of its trio, in G major, was later used by the composer as the subject for the finale of his Coronation Ode and later as a stand-alone work, Land of Hope and Glory. The pieces take their collective title from Act III, scene 3 of Othello. For 10 points, identify this set of five Elgar marches most associated with processionals at American graduation ceremonies.;;Pomp and Circumstance (Marches)
United States History;;The first person to make them available in their entirety was Alaska Senator Mike Gravel. Earlier, they had been acquired by the Rand Corporation after delivery to Robert McNamara. Their handover to the New York Times and Washington Post caused the burglary of a psychiatrist's office and an attempt to use the CIA to assassinate the person responsible; both movements against the man who leaked them, Daniel Ellsberg, became part of the Watergate charges. For 10 points, name this seven thousand page "top secret" report, in which government officials stated that the Vietnam War was unwinnable.;;Pentagon Papers
Physics;;Materials with this property have a very high relative permeability and a very high remanence as well, which usually results from a large degree of hysteresis, or tendency to maintain a certain property after application of an external field. Arising from long-range ordering in microscopic magnetic domains, thermal agitation leads to its disappearance above the Curie temperature. For 10 points, name this magnetic property, usually found in nickel, cobalt, and of course, iron.;;ferromagnetism
Economics;;The Robinson-Patman Act outlawed the use of this practice for anti-competitive purposes. Examples of the first degree type include allowing for bargaining or issuing coupons; examples of the second degree include selling products cheaper in bulk portions, and examples of the third degree include offering discounts for children or seniors. For 10 points, name this practice where businesses charge varying prices for the same product.;;price discrimination
European History;;The one in Venice was established in 1516 on the site of an iron foundry. First appearing across Europe in the thirteenth century, they were made mandatory by Pope Paul IV in 1555. Abolished between 1883 and World War II, they had self-contained legal systems, but residents were not allowed outside the gates without permission. For 10 points, give this name for a section of a city in which Jewish residents were sequestered, now a slang term for any neighborhood dominated by a minority.;;ghetto(s)
Religion;;The son of Zachary, a priest in the course of Abia who lost and then regained the ability to speak, he grew up in the small town of Ain-Karim. His mother, Elizabeth, was the daughter of Aaron, and his second cousin, via Matham, was Mary. Though some observers commented that he "hath a devil" for his manic preaching and desert-influenced countenance, he sought to purify the bodies of those whose souls were cleansed by his sermons. For 10 points, name this Biblical figure whose head was removed at the behest of Salome.;;John the Baptist;;John
Astronomy;;The bowtie or Boomerang nebula, the coldest place observed in space, is located in this constellation. This constellation also contains BPM 37093, a degenerate star consisting of crystalline carbon, and the eponymous Omega globular cluster. The namesake Alpha, Omicron and Theta meteor showers radiate from this constellation. For 10 points, name this southern hemisphere constellation whose alpha triple star, at a distance of 4.3 light years, is the closest to our solar system.;;Centaurus
European Literature;;Although he received acclaim as a poet with his collections Over the Barriers, Safe Conduct, and My Sister Life, he stuck to translation for decades. He chose to end his career instead of going into exile, writing that "Leaving the motherland will equal death for me". For 10 points—who was ordered to refuse the 1958 Nobel Prize, given for his negative depiction of the October Revolution in Doctor Zhivago?;;(Boris) Pasternak
American Literature;;He is compared to "a hound that came a stranger … out of the woods," and his brother, a "somebody," lives "thirteen little miles" down the road. He could never convince his partner, the well-educated Harold Wilson, that "he could find water with a hazel prong". Found "huddled against the barn door fast asleep," he is given tea and tobacco by Mary, while Warren reminisces about his hay-stacking ability and resents his presence, stating that "home is the place where, when you have to go there,/They have to take you in". For 10 points, Silas is the name of what laborer whose death occurs in a Robert Frost poem?;;(The) Hired Man
Mythology;;Its inhabitants drink the hydromel of the she-goat Heidrun and are served by the cook Andhrimnir, who cooks the flesh of the boar Saehrimnir in the cauldron Eldhrimnir. It is situated in the grove Glasir, full of leaves of shimmering red gold. Its inhabitants, the Einheriar, are greeted by Hermod and Bragi after being lifted from the battlefield by the Valkyries. For ten points, the bravest of warriors eternally eat and fight in what "hall of the chosen slain" in Asgard?;;Valhalla
United States History;;He lambasted the attempt to seize Rip Van Dam's salary, helped found the Popular Party, and opposed the "hatchetman" Francis Harison. His first two lawyers were disbarred by the presiding judge, James Delancy, for attempting to defend him. He then hired Andrew Hamilton, who shocked the court by declining to contest authorship of the New York Weekly Journal's attacks on governor William Cosby. For 10 points, name this colonial publisher whose trial established that truth is an absolute defense to libel.;;(John) (Peter) Zenger
World Literature;;Nine-year-old Sophie Mol drowned in 1969, during an affair Ammu had with the family carpenter Velutha, an Untouchable. As a result of these events, Ammu is banished from her home and dies at age 31, Rahel is expelled from school and eventually marries an American while her fraternal twin Estha stops speaking. For 10 points, such events occur in what debut English-language novel by Arundhati Roy?;;(The) God of Small Things
European Literature;;Fulfilling the discovered task, the characters in this play sing songs about execution and otherwise attempt to annoy each other. Characters include the misogynist Garcin, the seductress Inez, and the adulterous murderer Estrelle. For 10 points, name this drama, concluding that "Hell is other people," written by Jean-Paul Sartre.;;No Exit
Biology;;Actual infections of the agent that produces it are incredibly rare, as it is produced by an anaerobe of the genus Clostridium. It blocks acetylcholine release from neurons, causing flaccid paralysis, and thus, beginning in 1989, patients suffering from blepharospasm and strabismus, characterized by excessive muscle contractions, were prescribed it as treatment. For 10 points, name this compound often associated with food poisoning, which some people inject to reduce wrinkles around the eyes.;;Botulism (toxin)
European History;;At this battle, Aristides succeeded in winning Psyttaleia, and, according to Herodotus, one side took especially heavy losses because its soldiers could not swim. For 10 points, name this naval battle of 480 BC, which saw Greek forces of Eurybiades and Themistocles defeat the Persians under Xerxes I.;;(Battle) (of) Salamis
Music;;Famous ones include Benjamin Britten's eight-movement one for tenor, horns, and strings and Tchaikovsky's four movement one for strings in C major. Popular ones by Mozart, often paired with his Divertimenti, include his seventh, the Haffner, and his ninth, the Posthorn. For 10 points, name this type of piece designed to be played in the open air during the evening, of which Mozart's Eine Klein Nachtmusik is perhaps the premier example.;;serenade(s)
Physics;;Assuming an electron's charge is distributed over its surface, this value will be two-thirds pi times the electron's charge, times the electron's radius squared, divided by the period of the electron's spin. Steiner's theorem and the plane-figure theorem relate this concept relative to other axes passing through the center of mass. Its value for a solid cylinder is half that of a cylindrical shell with the same mass and radius. For 10 points, name this physical property of an object's resistance to angular acceleration, the rotational analog of mass.;;moment of inertia
United States History;;Dissenting justice John McLean cited a provision in the Northwest Ordinance as a valid precedent for the law overturned in the majority decision of this case. Benjamin Curtis, who also dissented, claimed that the decision ignored citizenship rights granted by the Articles of Confederation. Nonetheless, the majority opinion, delivered by Chief Justice Taney (TAW-nee), declared the Missouri Compromise unconstitutional and rejected the argument that entering a free state annuls any relationship of slavery. For 10 points, name this 1857 case in which a slave unsuccessfully sued for his freedom.;;(Dred) Scott (v) (Sanford)
American Literature;;The policeman and social worker are dubbed "white ghosts" while a striking theme is the equivalence of a certain pronoun and the word for "slave". In Stockton, California, the author is told that "It is better to raise geese than girls" but learns of such female role models as Brave Orchid, a former doctor, and the hero of "White Tigers," Fa Mu Lan. For 10 points, name this book about learning to be Chinese-American female identify by Maxine Hong Kingston.;;(The) Woman Warrior (Memoirs of a Girlhood Among Ghosts)
Astronomy;;A speculated third type of these is caused by carbon detonation and leaves no remnant, and the energies they release are often measured in the unit foe. The emission of nickel-56 is characteristic of the first type of these, which are probably caused by dwarves that have acquired mass in excess of the Chandrasekhar limit. The core of the most common type of these, type II, is comprised of iron-56 because that nuclide has the highest binding energy per nucleon, and thus is the terminus of stellar nucelosynthesis. For 10 points, identify these violent explosions of massive stars.;;supernova(s)
World History;;In a clash at Panipat, he defeated Mahmud Tughluq, allowing him to raze Delhi. Victory over Tokhtamysh on the Kur River allowed his troops to occupy Moscow; by that time, he had also overrun Persia, Iraq, and the Caspian coast. Both Egypt and Byzantium prepared to surrender after he defeated the Ottomans in battle, but he died at Otrar during an expedition against China. His son Rokh buried him in the mausoleum of Gur-e Amir and briefly reunited his lands, and further descendents established the Mughal dynasty. For 10 points, name this Samarkand-based conqueror, known for his paralyzed right side.;;Tamerlane
Religion;;This man was scarred by his upbringing at the hands of his nunnish sister Marcellina. This author of the Hexaëmeron and De officiis ministrorum was serving as governor of Aemilia-Liguria when he was unexpectedly elected to a different position, which he converted to Christianity to take in 374. This newly powerful figure then defeated Symmachus' plan of tolerance and, in 388, rebuked the emperor Theodosius ex cathedra for punishing the burning of a synagogue. For 10 points, name this theologian, the baptizer of St. Augustine of Hippo, who was canonized bishop of Milan.;;(Saint) Ambrose (of Milan)
Chemistry;;It generalizes to the principle of corresponding states, and approximates a virial term as half the square of the number of particles, so it is only valid for very large numbers of particles. Derived by its namesake in 1881, one of its fit parameters accounts for the magnitude of its namesake's intermolecular forces. For 10 points, identify the equation of state that corrects the ideal gas law's assumption of point-like, non-interacting particles with two parameters, often called a and b.;;van der Waals (Equation)
Art;;This city was the setting of an artistic contest involving the depiction of the sacrifice of Isaac. Lorenzo Ghiberti won it, and earned the right to design the bronze doors for its bapistry, while rival Filippo Brunelleschi went on to design the dome for its cathedral, Santa Maria del Fiore. For 10 points, name this city, also the home of the Uffizi, which exhibits the many works commissioned by the Medicis.;;Florence
British Literature;;Early works include the poem "The Æolian harp," "France: An Ode," and "Apologia pro Vita Sua". A polymath, his writings also include essays on literary criticism, Newton's Optics, the scientific method, and ice-skating. A one-time housemate of the Wordsworth siblings, he was interrupted by a knock at the door from the opium trance which produced "a miracle of rare device/A sunny pleasure-dome with caves of ice". For 10 points, name this Romantic poet, author of "Kubla Khan.;;(Samuel) (Taylor) Coleridge
Geography;;Fed by the Bear, Weber, and Jordan Rivers, it reached a peak surface area of 2400 square miles in 1873 and a low of 950 square miles in 1963. Located at the foothills of the Wasatch Range, it was part of the prehistoric Lake Bonneville, usually draining through the Snake River. For 10 points, name this dense body of water located in northern Utah.;;Great Salt Lake
European History;;Early in his career he served with John Hawkins on a slave ship, until one voyage, where their ship was damaged by a hurricane and then ransacked by Spaniards at Vera Cruz. He responded by bombarding and raiding several cities in Panama. Nicknamed "The Dragon" by his Spanish rivals, he was knighted by Elizabeth I and accomplished his most famous feat aboard his vessel, the Golden Hind. For 10 points, name this first English explorer to circumnavigate the globe.;;(Sir) (Francis) Drake
Mythology;;He reveals his true identity to Prince Uttar [OO-tahr] and protects him, winning the favor of King Virata and securing Virata's daughter for his son Abhimanyu [UH-bee-MUHN-you]. He kills his rival Karna in war and uses his skill as the greatest archer in the world to win the hand of the princess Draupadi, whom his mother Kunti tells him to share with his four brothers. For 10 points, name this Pandava brother, the hero of the Mahabharata to whom Krishna enunciates the Bhagavad-Gita.;;Arjuna
Biology;;Refsum's disease and hyperoxaluria type I result from defects in its enzymes. Usually bound by a single membrane approximately one micrometer long, their division is promoted by the compound PEX11. They contain enzymes crucial to the breakdown of various lipids, but their most important enzyme is catalase, and they are only found in animal cells. Also containing many different oxidative enzymes are, for 10 points, what cellular microbodies that break down hydrogen peroxide?;;peroxisome(s)
Art;;This painting contains a fence surrounding a small shed. The artist's use of strange angles and mastery of light are used to indicate the distance of the outhouse and the Olson House from the grassy field in Chadd's Ford, Pennsylvania. For 10 points, name this Andrew Wyeth painting centering on a pink-garbed young polio victim.;;Christina's World
United States History;;Its latter sections created the Community Relations Service in the Department of Commerce. Its second section addressed the practices of hotels, restaurants, and theaters and was quickly upheld by the Supreme Court in the Heart of Atlanta Motel test case. More expected were Title 7, dealing with businesses that have more than fifteen employees, and Title 1, enforcing the 15th and 24th Amendments. Bob Dole voted for, but Al Gore Sr. and Robert Byrd voted against, for 10 points, what landmark 1964 bill to end segregation and expand the exercise of voting rights?;;Civil Rights Act (of 1964)
Psychology;;In 1848, he was working for a railroad company when an accident with blasting powder caused an iron rod to be driven through his face. He went from being a calm and hardworking man to obstinate, irresponsible and moody, unable to work even after his skull healed. For 10 points, name this man whose calamity taught psychologists that the front of the brain controls the center of personality in humans.;;(Phineas) Gage
British Literature;;Possibilities for the title location include Stoke Poges and Grantchester. Deriving several phrases from Paradise Lost, Horace's Odes, and Homer's Odyssey, it also discusses avoiding "ignoble strife". This poem's juxtapositions between darkness and the speaker indicate how familiar he wishes to be with death, and it describes how "the curfew tolls the knell of parting day". For 10 points, name this poem about human mortality by Thomas Gray.;;Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard
Physics;;When a magnetic field is present, Alfvén waves are found in it at frequencies less than the ion cyclotron frequency. It may be technically defined as a system that experiences Debye [deh-BYE] self-shielding, and the properties of one with a kinetic temperature on the order of 10 keV [kiloelectronvolts] or less may be measured with a Langmuir probe. For 10 points, identify the fourth state of matter that is a cohesive, partially ionized collection of matter, exemplars of which include flames and sparks.;;plasma
Philosophy;;This philosopher was born in Thagaste, in modern day Algeria. In his teens, he went to Carthage to be trained in rhetoric, after which he became a teacher in Africa and then Italy. His writings include On Free Will and Choice, and he died during a Vandal siege. For 10 points, identify this Bishop of Hippo, author of the Confessions.;;(Saint) (St.) Augustine (of Hippo)
Physics;;This device becomes a dc short in the long time approximation and, in the presence of an alternating current of circular frequency ? [omega], it presents an impedance equal to the product of i, ?, and its magnitude. Placing this in series with a resistor of resistance R [arr] results in a circuit with a time constant proportional to 1/R [one over arr]. The behavior of this is explained by Faraday's law in the lumped-circuit approximation, and it will not allow the current through it to be discontinuous in time. For 10 points, identify the circuit element generally symbolized by L [ell] and having a magnitude measured in Henrys.;;inductor(s)
Economics;;Under the Kaldor-Hicks model, it occurs when the value of social resources is increased such that the overall gains outweigh the losses. Harvey Leibenstein created the "x" type, which measures a firm's ability to maximize its output from a given input. Another model states that it exists only when nobody can be placed in a better situation without making someone else worse off; that model is named for Vilfredo Pareto. For 10 points, give this term that describes how smoothly an economic system is functioning.;;efficiency
World Literature;;In this work, Reverend James Smith goes against the precedent of his predecessor Mr. Brown by sanctioning the zealotry of Enoch, a fanatical convert who incites a clash between colonists and indigenous peoples. The main character is terrified of being compared to his lazy, gentle father Unoka and attempts to demonstrate his manliness by beating his youngest wife Ojiugo and by hacking his ward Ikemefuna to death. For 10 points, name this novel about Okonkwo by Chinua Achebe.;;Things Fall Apart
Philosophy;;It uses an analogy to the lyre and the harmony produced to explore its point. The conversation begins in order to exchange news between Phlius and Athens and explain the incident of the ship's stern which prevented the swift execution of Socrates. By Echecrates' request, the title character recalls the final hours of Socrates and recounts the ideas given about death. For 10 points, name this Platonic dialogue which asserts the immortality of the soul.;;Phaedo
Geography;;Renamed for a North Carolina senator, it was founded as Newtown across from Fort Hawkins in 1806. An important port for cotton, it was a gold repository for the Confederacy, and during World War II, its economy was bolstered because of its proximity to Robins Air Force Base. For 10 points, name this city on the Ocmulgee River, the hometown of Sidney Lanier and the Central Hockey League's Whoopee.;;Macon (Georgia)
Religion;;Immediately after passing through it, one hears "babbling tongues, terrible palaver, words of grief, inflections of deep anger, strident and muffled speech, and clapping hands" from the apathetic. It claims to be fashioned by "heavenly power" and it will "last eternally". Its inscription ends, in the original, with the warning Lasciate ogne speranza, voi ch'intrate. For 10 points, what structure, seen in the third canto of the Comedia, advises all who enter to abandon hope?;;(the) gate (to) (of) Hell
Biology;;For the most part, each one has a hilus into which blood vessels can enter or exit. A framework of trabeculae emanate from the capsule and the germinal centers, where macrophages and inactivated B and T cells reside. For 10 points, name this structure that serves to filter foreign antigens and release namesake infection-fighting cells into the blood, located prominently in the groin, neck, and armpits.;;lymph node(s)
United States History;;The first incident here began when an attempt to seize a single rifle spurred melee violence, which was escalated when Colonel James Forsyth opened fire with five Hotchkiss cannons. In 1970, Dennis Banks and Russell Means declared the Independent Oglala Sioux Nation here and issued demands in the name of the American Indian Movement. The earlier conflict was an attempt to capture Chief Big Foot, who camped here after hearing of Sitting Bull's death. For 10 points, name this site on the Pine Ridge Reservation in South Dakota where over three hundred Sioux were massacred in 1890.;;Wounded Knee (massacre)
Mythology;;During the New Kingdom, his consort was said to be Maht, who embodied the concept of "great earth mother," and their child was the moon god Khons. According to later traditions, he created himself, but according to earlier Theban tradition, he was created by Thoth as one of the eight primordial deities. For 10 points, name this Egyptian god later syncretized with Re, the main object of the temple at Karnak.;;Amun(-Re)
Geology;;About 900 kilometers wide and transporting only about 350 to 700 billion cubic feet of water per second, it is similar to its analog in the North Pacific. Extensive upwelling results in an abundance of nutrients at the surface, making for excellent fishing grounds. This upwelling only intensifies the cold flow that results from this phenomenon, which increases the aridity of the coasts of Chile and Ecuador. For 10 points, name this ocean current off the coast of Peru, named for the German meteorologist who discovered it.;;Humboldt (Current)
Math Theory;;The winner of a national examination in 1930, he entered university where he was part of the "Anonymous Group". He settled for a time in the United States, although his negligence of a "no trespassing" sign, while discussing mathematics with his colleagues near a military radio transmitter on Long Island, resulted in an FBI record. For ten points, name this mathematician best known for his contributions to number theory and his elegant proofs of Bertrand's conjecture, Chebyshev's Theorem, and the Prime Number Theorem.;;(Paul) Erdos
United States History;;He was quoted as saying "Too bad they both can't lose" during the 1980s Iran-Iraq war. His books include Does America Need a Foreign Policy? and The Troubled Partnership. He arranged the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks with the Soviet Union and negotiated cease-fires between Israel and Egypt and between the two Vietnams. For 10 points, name this German-born Secretary of State under Nixon and Ford.;;(Henry) Kissinger
Music;;It was created to accompany selections from a poem called "The Melting of Ice on the Ulea River," and it initially bore the bland title "Impromptu" to avoid censorship from the Russians. Opening with a powerful brass fanfare, this piece centers around a hymn-like melody that went on to become its country's national anthem. For 10 points, name this nationalistic tone poem based on the Kalevala and composed by Jean Sibelius.;;Finlandia
American Literature;;Faber is a retired English professor that the main character meets in a park. Mildred spends her days having generic conversatiosn with the walls. Composed of "The Hearth and the Salamander," "The Sieve and the Sand," and "Burning Bright," its other characters include Clarisse McClellan and the Mechanical Hound. For 10 points, Guy Montag is the protagonist of what anti-censorship novel by Ray Bradbury?;;Fahrenheit 451
Physics;;The exchange particles for this interaction are themselves subject to the interaction, so it has a very limited range, on the order of two fm [femtometers]. Particles subject to it exhibit asymptotic freedom; that is, carriers of its namesake charge are not observed in isolation. This force is explained by quantum chromodynamics and its laws exhibit SU(3) [ess you three] symmetry because its namesake charge comes in red, blue, and green forms. For 10 points, identify the interaction that holds nucleons together and joins the electro-magnetic, weak, and gravitational interactions to comprise the known fundamental forces of the universe.;;strong (nuclear) (force)
United States History;;He spent twenty years seeking a retroactive US Army commission for his father, who was tortured as a World War II POW while defending his native country. He says that he sought "adventure" when he joined the U.S. army upon graduating from Idaho State. While serving as the deputy commanding general for support in the Third Army, he was appointed to his most prominent duty by David McKiernan. In that capacity, he spent two months investigating the 800th Military Police Brigade. For 10 points, name this major general who wrote the report on the Abu Ghraib abuse scandal.;;(Antonio) Taguba
British Literature;;They are described as the relief when "on my couch I lie/In vacant or in pensive mood". There are ten thousand of the central objects, described as "Continuous as the stars that shine/And twinkle on the Milky Way". They are called more gleeful than the waves, inspiring the speaker's heart to dance along with them. For 10 points, name this poem in which William Wordsworth "wander'd lonely as a cloud" before seeing the titular flowers.;;Daffodils
United States History;;Standards for conviction under statutes prohibiting it were set in Smith v. California, and Jacobellis v. Ohio contained Potter Stewart's famous remark, "I know it when I see it". Criteria for determining it fall under a three pronged test using community standards to screen content for prurient interest and a lack of redeeming social value, as established by Miller v. California. For 10 points, give this legal term describing speech that is not constitutionally protected because of its extreme offensiveness and indecency.;;obscenity
Biology;;The supraspinatus tendon is one of the four major tendons involved, and its inflammation is associated with chronic impingement syndrome near the acromion. Consisting of the teres minor, subscapularis, infraspinatus, and supraspinatus muscles, it centers the humeral head in the glenoid socket. For 10 points, what is the collective name for this group of muscles at the shoulder involved in helping to raise one's arm over his/her head?;;rotator cuff
United States History;;Used as early as the Elizabethan era, this practice involved the use of gangs to round up men, though it officially exempted foreigners and apprentices. Its use grew in the early 1800s out of a need to fill out forces for the Napoleonic Wars, though it sparked outrage when thousands of Americans indiscriminately fell victim to it after being mistaken for British deserters, particularly in the Chesapeake-Leopard affair. For 10 points, name this practice of kidnapping sailors and forcing them to serve in the Royal Navy.;;impressment
Music;;Gaining fame for choreography based on Strauss' Blue Danube and Tchaikovsky's Symphonie Pathetique, she repudiated artificial technical movements in her work The Dance, instead emphasizing the grace and flow of natural movement by dancing barefoot in simple Greek apparel. For 10 points, name this American dancer, the creator of the so-called "New System" of modern dance.;;(Isadora) Duncan
British Litearture;;There are six of them, the last concluding "O, from this time forth,/My thoughts be bloody, or be nothing worth!" The longest is "O, what a rogue and peasant slave am I!" and the others include "Now might I do it pat, now he is praying," "O, that this too solid flesh would melt" and "How all occasions do inform against me". In one, the speaker resolves "I will speak daggers to her, but use none" and in another cries "Nymph, in thy orisons/Be all my sins remember'd". For 10 points, name these speeches including "Tis now the very witching time of night" and "To be, or not to be".;;(Hamlet('s)) soliloquies;;(Hamlet('s)) soliloquy
European History;;The son of a steelworker, he was party boss in Moldavia and was later sent to Kazakhstan by Khrushchev, who was wary of his amiable relationship with Stalin. Upon his return, he announced a namesake "doctrine" used to justify Soviet intervention in other Warsaw Pact countries. For 10 points, name this invader of Afghanistan, succeeded as Soviet ruler by Yuri Andropov.;;(Leonid) Brezhnev
Religion;;This Tishbite warned King Ahab of God's intention to punish him with a drought for promoting Baal. After delivering his message, he was given bread and meat from ravens near the Kerith Ravine before moving in with a widow for two years. After the drought was lifted, he was the target of a murder engineered by Ahab's evil wife Jezebel. For 10 points, name this Hebrew prophet who was taken into heaven by a chariot of fire.;;Elijah
United States History;;In his later career as a military strategist he promoted the construction of U.S. land bases in the Pacific. He built his early record on expeditions against the slave trade, service in the Mexican War, and three years as commander of the Fulton. Later, he gave himself an unauthorized promotion to the rank of admiral, entered Uraga Bay, and set up a meeting to negotiate the Treaty of Kanagawa, fulfilling President Fillmore's wishes for a new trading sphere. For 10 points, name this member of a prominent naval family who thus forced the re-opening of Japan.;;(Matthew) (Calbraith) Perry
Music;;Written in 1742, this fourth volume of the Clavierubung concludes with a Quodlibet, a mixed-up medley, followed by a recapitulation of the simple Aria which begins the work. Commissioned by the Russian ambassador to Dresden, Hermann Keyserlingk, they are built on a thirty-two measure sarabande in G major. For 10 points, name this composition for harpsichord by Johann Sebastian Bach, consisting of 30 "variations".;;Goldberg (Variations)
World Literature;;He went through a period as a playwright and director where he disavowed the use of scripts, giving actors only what he called, "a mandate to work around a cluster of images". His hometown, Port Elizabeth, plays a prominent role in his plays Blood Knot, Hello and Goodbye and Boesman and Lena. For 10 points, name this South African author of Sizwe Banzi Is Dead, The Island, and Master Harold and the Boys.;;(Athol) Fugard
Biology;;Purkinje cells are examples of them, while F waves are often used to measure their conduction velocity. In many of these cells, oligodendrocytes assist in maintaining a high propagation velocity by allowing electric impulses to pass between Nodes of Ranvier. For 10 points, Schwann cells and glial cells surround what type of cell consisting of a soma, dendrites, and an axon, which is found in the nervous system?;;neuron(s)
Geography;;The diversion of the Syr Darya and Amu Darya over the late twentieth century has resulted in a dramatic decrease in this lake's area and volume. This also resulted in a closer connection between the mainland and the island of Vozrozhdenya, a testing ground for biological weapons during the Soviet era. For 10 points, name this saltwater lake between Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan, once the fourth-largest inland body of water on Earth.;;Aral (Sea)
British Literature;;He prophesies that unhappiness will result from the strategic marriage of Freawaru to Ingeld. He slays the Frankish warrior Daeghraefn in his powerful grip, but he loses a swimming race to Breca, prince of the Brondings, which earns him the scorn of Unferth. Later, Unferth gives him the sword Hrunting, which he uses to slay the mother of his famous foe. Attended by Wiglaf, he dies while slaying a dragon. For 10 points, identify this Geat and servant to Hrothgar who kills Grendel.;;Beowulf
United States History;;An example of one was the Quirin case, which dealt with captured German World War II operatives. Many took place around the end of the Civil War, with the McCardle case dealing with a man arrested for publishing anti-Reconstruction editorials. Vallandigham, Milligan, and Merryman all concerned arrested Civil War opponents suing for their release. For 10 points, name this two word Latin term for a court case that features one party bringing about legal proceedings without involving any others.;;ex parte
Chemistry;;This generalization was promulgated almost simultaneously by Kossel and Lewis in 1916. Compounds that obey this precept have an electron structure below that of the noble metals. Boron compounds tend to fall short of the predictions of this generalization, while sulfur compounds tend to exceed them, exhibiting hypervalence. For 10 points, identify the chemical rule stating that bonding processes tend to result in atoms attaining the configuration of the adjacent noble gas, i.e. that with eight valence electrons.;;octet rule
Religion;;Founded by Isaac the Blind, it is centered on finding the En Sof by moving through the ten levels called sefrot as described in the Book of Splendor. Itss name is derived from a word meaning "to receive". One is not supposed to start studying it until age forty. For 10 points, name this Jewish mystical tradition.;;Kabbalah
European History;;Its foreign policy was successful, as it signed the Treaty of Campo Formio with the Hapsburgs and created the Cisalpine and Batavian Republics. It became unpopular after conscripting men into the War of the Second Coalition and purging royalists, Catholics, and neo-Jacobins in the Fructidor and Floréal coups. Its members were chosen by the Council of Ancients from candidates nominated by the Council of Five Hundred. For 10 points, name this five-member body which replaced the Committee of Public Safety in 1795 and held executive power until its 1799 overthrow by Sieyès and Napoleon.;;Directory
British Literature;;Despite the historical events described taking place when the author was five years old, the details are considered more authentic than the accounts of the same event in the Diary of Samuel Pepys. Narrated by H.F., the work mentions the marks on the doors, quacks taking advantage of the gullible, quarantining of houses and people trying to escape, and the pits where the dead of London were dumped. For 10 points, name this 1722 work by Daniel Defoe that chronicles the outbreak of disease in England in 1665.;;Journal of the Plague Year
World History;;Many blame this country's current problems on the introduction of Islamic law by J.M. Nimeri in 1981 and the banning of political parties in 1989 following the coup of Omar al-Bashir. Government forces are accused of bombing hospitals in Kajo Kaji, while the National Democratic Alliance and People's Liberation Army are major players in fighting which has caused famine in Bahr al Ghazal and Darfur. For 10 points, civil war now rages among Dinka, Beja, and Arabs in what country, physically the largest in Africa?;;(Republic of) (the) Sudan
Geology;;These dynamic structures were discovered during World War II by fighter pilots flying at high altitudes. Found just below the tropopause, their wind speeds are about 35 miles per hour during the summer and 75 miles per hour during the winter, when a subtropical one forms in addition to the ever-present polar one. For 10 points, name these meteorological structures that are fast flowing, confined air currents that form at the boundaries of air masses and appear serpentine on weather maps.;;jet stream(s)
Mythology;;In his hall at Denderah, a drawing of his coffin shows the tomb contained within a tree, representing his role as a forest patron and the inventor of winemaking. The cult of this god originated in Abydos, where his tomb is said to be located. He was a son of Nut and Geb, and Nephthys was one of his sisters. He ruled the world of men, but was the first to die when he was murdered by his brother Set. For 10 points, name this king of the dead and husband of Isis.;;Osiris
European History;;While in Britain he caused scandals by giving a Nazi salute to George VI, flying swastika flags on diplomatic vehicles, and allegedly having an affair with Wallis Simpson. Prior to becoming the first Nuremberg defendant executed, he wrote Between London and Moscow. As ambassador to Britain in June 1935, he negotiated naval rearmament, and he later formalized the Axis by negotiating the Anti-Comintern Pact, Pact of Steel, and Tripartite Pact. For 10 points, name this foreign minister of Nazi Germany whose name is attached to the German-Soviet nonaggression pact signed with Molotov.;;(Joachim) (von) Ribbentrop
Music;;The end of the second act features what is known as the "Letter Scene," in which a note from Mariandel is written to Baron Ochs. Mariandel is actually the convenient alias for Octavian who, on behalf of Princess von Werdenberg, hands Sophia the Baron's titular love-token, but immediately falls in love with her. For 10 points, name this comic opera by Richard Strauss.;;(Der) Rosenkavalier
Physics;;K.D. Froome used klystron oscillators to get within an error of plus-or-minus 3.3 x 10-5 [three-point-three times ten-to-the-negative-fifth] percent of it in 1958, while R. Blondlot used Maxwell's theories to divine a less accurate value in 1891. Ole Roemer's observations of Io during different times of the year were the basis for the first estimates of it, while French physicist Armand Fizeau made the first non-astronomical estimate by using a toothed wheel. For 10 points, what is this physical constant whose precise measurements were first attributed to American physicists Michelson and Morley, which is represented by the letter c?;;speed of light
American Literature;;A topographical officer for General William Hazen, he was wounded at Kenesaw Mountain with a bullet that lodged behind his left ear. His experiences in the Civil War inspired stories such as "The Haunted Valley," and the collections. Cobwebs from an Empty Skull. For 10 points, name this San Francisco Examiner writer who used his all-targeting wit to write The Prattler and The Devil's Dictionary.;;(Ambrose) Bierce
Art;;The first title character wears a rich black outfit with billowing white sleeves, and a gold chain running from his right shoulder to his left hip accents his image of wealth. His bearded face bears an expression of deep thought as he rests his left hand on the figure of the other title character, who was famous for his poverty. For 10 points, name this Rembrandt painting featuring the author of the Poetics and a marble sculpture of the author of the Iliad.;;Aristotle Contemplating (the) Bust of Homer
Geology;;Turbulent motions of the plasma below this layer generate sound waves, which cause it to oscillate radially with a typical period of five minutes. Those sound waves are generated in the convective zone below this layer, which, at about 5500 Kelvin, is cooler than the atmospheric layers above it; thus, the resulting oscillations are the subject of study in helioseismology. For 10 points, name this atmospheric layer, the visible surface of the Sun, which lies below the chromosphere and corona.;;photosphere
World History;;In 1952 he declared a "Peace Line" extending into the sea, setting off an incident over control of Dokdo and Liancourt. As leader of the Comrades' Society, he engineered the removal of Japan's colonial possessions during World War II, and he occasionally returned to his native land as a YMCA evangelist. In 1960, he was deposed by the April Revolution in protest of suspected election fraud and the execution of the Progressive Party's leader. For 10 points, name this first president of South Korea and uncompromising leader in the Korean War.;;(Syngman) Rhee
World Literature;;This man was relatively unknown before 1980's "Stars on a Cold Night," probably because he was forbidden to publish his work after his stint in a reeducation camp. His work was further suppressed after Fugitives, which is set during the Tiananmen Square massacre that occurred the same year as a walking tour of the Yangtze River, chronicled in his first novel. For 10 points, name this author of Soul Mountain whose 1983 play "Bus Stop" did much to win him the 2000 Nobel Prize for Literature.;;Gao (Xinjian)
European Literature;;His scholarly works include On Mountains and an analysis of classical myth, On the Genealogy of the Gods, both written in Latin prose. Sometimes accused of misogyny for his last literary work, Corbaccio, he also wrote the first major Western collection of biographies of females: On Famous Women. His magnum opus features stories about Ser Cepperello, Griselda, and Filippa. For 10 points, who wrote of refugees passing time during the Black Death in the Decameron?;;(Giovanni) Bocaccio
Chemistry;;Originally, this device was invented to perform research on kanalstrahlen, or positive ions generated by gases in cathode ray tubes. The sample is first ionized, and the positive ions are sent to a vacuum where their trajectories are deflected by electromagnetic fields. Based on the designs of J. J. Thomson and invented by Francis William Aston, for 10 points, what instrument in chemistry can thus analyze a sample to identify various isotopes of a specific element?;;Mass Spect(rometer)
Mythology;;In Russian folklore, one of them, named Garafena, lives on Booyan island. In Celtic myth, Smertios is constantly killing one. Egyptian myth has several including Renenutet, a patron of burial linen, Nehebkau, who guards the underworld, and Mehen, defender of the solar barge. In Hinduism, a thousand-headed patron of them, Sesha, leads a group of them called nagas. For 10 points, these are what creatures, also seen in Norse myth as Jormungand, who encoils the whole earth?;;snake(s)
World History;;The White House referred to it as Operation Menu and labeled its six phases Operations Breakfast, Lunch, Snack, Dinner, Dessert, and Supper. Consisting of nearly eighty thousand flights by B-52 and F-111 craft, it used three times as much weapon tonnage as the conventional attacks on Japan during World War II. It began in March 1969, and its exposure prompted the Kent State protest and the passage of the War Powers Act. For 10 points, what was this secret tactic during the Vietnam War which targeted Viet Cong bases in a neighboring country without the knowledge or consent of Norodom Sihanouk?;;(US) bombing of Cambodia
Geography;;The native people here were the now-extinct Guanche. Once called the Fortunate Islands by the Romans, they were created from the group of volcanoes which can still be seen at Pico de Teide on Tenerife. For 10 points, name this group of islands off the northwestern African coast, named for the abundance of dogs that inhabited the island, not for yellow birds.;;Canary (Islands)
American Literature;;Lucas believes that the forthcoming revolution will be led by a Swedish scientist named Schliemann, while Freddie Jones represents capitalism. Despite the rationalizations of Marija Berczynskas [MAH-ree-ah behr-ZEHNS-kahs], the protagonist beats Phil Connor for convincing his wife to become a prostitute. That character had already been imprisoned once for beating Connor, and he thus loses his house and job and watches his son Antanas drown in the streets of Packingtown. For 10 points, name this novel centering on the Lithuanian immigrants Ona and Jurgis Rudkus, set in the meat-packing industry and written by Upton Sinclair.;;(The) Jungle
Physics;;For a dense slab, a version of this may be applied to the gravitational field to derive Bourger gravity. For the magnetic field B [bee], the differential form of this law may be stated  [div bee is identically zero], which locally disallows the existence of magnetic monopoles. For the electric field, this law leads directly to charge conservation given Faraday's law. For 10 points, give the name that identifies two members of Maxwell's equations, one of which states that the integral of the electric field over a closed surface is proportional to the charge enclosed by that surface.;;Gauss' Law
Mythology;;This deity has providence over winter and darkness and his half-brother, a son of Rind, "will not… comb his hair/ until [this god] burns at the stake". That half-brother is Vali, the god of revenge, who sends this blind fool of a god to Helheim until Ragnarok after he accidentally kills his brother. For 10 points, identify the Norse god who was tricked by Loki into slaying his brother Baldur.;;Hod(e)r
European History;;Its causes included the Declaration of Indulgence which resumed toleration of dissenters and the subsequent prosecution of the Archbishop of Canterbury, William Sancroft. It began with a landing at Brixham; when general John Churchill defected to the invader, the king left for France. It was secured by a series of bills declaring that the king's flight constituted an abdication, barring Catholics from ruling in the future, and ending the royal power to suspend laws. For 10 points, give the name for this displacement of James II by William and Mary under the Declaration of Right.;;Glorious Revolution
Math Theory;;This mathematical contrivance cannot be created for functions with singularities, in which case Laurent's formula must be used, and the maximal error in one is given by the Legendre remainder formula. This power expansion may be used to derive Euler's formula by considering the one for an exponential with a complex argument, and most finite different formulas also have their basis in this infinite sum. For 10 points, name the infinite power series expansion of a function about a given point in terms of its derivates that, when the point expanded about is zero, is known as a Maclaurin series.;;Taylor (power) series
Psychology;;In its first substage, the subject performs reflexive actions such as rooting. Next, the subject begins to explore its surroundings with its hands, learns to do things intentionally, discovers that things fall when dropped and learns that an object is still present even if it is hidden. At the end of this stage, the baby has begun to think. For 10 points, name this stage of development lasting from birth to two years, the first stage in Piaget's theory.;;sensorimotor
World Literature;;Reginald Blyth's History of this was published in two volumes starting in 1963, and "The Cuckoo" was a leading periodical for the publication of it. Shiki Masaoka wrote a famous zatsudan lampooning those that had come before him in writing in this style. Koi Nagata is among this form's greatest modern practitioners, though its older writers, including Buson Yosa and Kyoski Takahama, are better known. For 10 points, name the form of poem that evolved from the tonka during the Tokugawa period, defined as "A work in three lines/Of seventeen syllables/Common in Japan".;;haiku
Art;;This artist's early paintings were impressionistic, such as The Red Mill and Trees in Moonlight, but his exposure to cubism in 1911 triggered the transition to a more abstract style. He published the manifesto Neo-Plasticism in 1920, explaining his deep hatred for the color green and habit of using primary colors and right angles. For 10 points, name this De Stijl artist of Broadway Boogie Woogie.;;(Piet) Mondrian
European History;;Prior to this event, Sir Roger Casement was arrested in County Kerry for running arms to the rebels, and Eoin MacNeill tried to stop it. Tom Clarke and Patrick Pearse continued the process, leading two hundred members of the Citizen Army and 1500 volunteers before the British put it down on April 29. Part of Eamon de Valera's rise to fame, it also proclaimed a new Republic after seizing the post office. For 10 points, identify this 1916 uprising in Dublin, named for a holiday.;;Easter (Rising|Rebellion)
Art;;This painting was inspired by a cottage in Eldon, whose gabled window and pointed arch serve as the central image in its background. After it won a three hundred dollar prize at a 1930 art exhibit, its painter denied accusations that the piece was intended to mock its subjects, portrayed by Dr. Byron McKeeby and the artist's sister Nan. For 10 points, name this painting depicting an old farmer and his daughter by Grant Wood.;;American Gothic
European History;;During the Risorgimento, the "Cinque Giornate" rebellion briefly took this city from Austria. It had earlier resurged from Dark Age obscurity under the bishops Ansperto and Ariberto, and it became a commune in 1045. Its history of family rule began with the Torrianis, who were soon rivaled by the Viscontis. In 1454 both families were displaced by the son of a Ravennan farmer, who founded a dynasty which remained in Italian politics for five hundred years. For 10 points, name this capital of Lombardy, a north Italian city long ruled by the line of Francesco Sforza.;;Milan
American Literature;;Recently, she has branched out from her main series, writing books about bards and a retelling of the Cinderella story. Her flagship series is mostly trilogies set in the world of Velgarth. The main country in those books lived without high magic for hundreds of years, surviving thanks to the mind-magic capabilities of the country's Heralds and Companions. For 10 points, name this author of books set in the country of Valdemar.;;(Mercedes) Lackey
American Literature;;To celebrate the birth of his child, one of the main characters dances until the fiddler drops from exhaustion. That character's son pays visits to the local prostitute Minnie. This drama begins with Simeon and Peter joining the California gold rush and renouncing their claim to the farm, leaving their father Ephraim to marry his third wife Abbie Putnam, who smothers her illegitimate child by her stepson Eben. For 10 points, identify this Eugene O'Neill play about the Cabots, named for the trees that bend over the central farm.;;Desire Under the Elms
Mythology;;The Incan goddess Mama Cocha, wife of the king of the gods, was the patron of this. Nerrivik of the Eskimos, the Japanese dragon Ryujin, the Celtic Manannan, the Polynesian Tangaroa, and either Njord or Aegir among the Norse were also in charge of it. For 10 points, all were patrons of what area, associated in Greek myth with Doris, Nereus, Amphitre, Triton, and Poseidon?;;(the) (sea|ocean){1}?
Physics;;This procedure was introduced in its namesake's Reflections on the Motive Power of Fire and is the embodiment of his principle regarding efficiency, which is a form of the second law of thermodynamics. This process forms a rectangular circuit in T-S [tee ess] coordinates and has efficiency 1 – T2/T1 [one minus tee-two over tee-one], where T1 and T2 are the absolute temperatures of its two reservoirs. For 10 points, identify the thermodynamic cycle named for a French engineer that is the most efficient possible given two heat reservoirs.;;Carnot (cycle)
Geography;;This structure stood in the Brucheium district as a part of the Mouseion, though a "daughter" to it was established in the nearby Temple of Sarapis. Its original organization was the work of the Phaleronian Demetrius, and Callimachus' catalogue of its holdings served as a standard reference long after its 272 CE destruction in the civil wars of Aurelian. For 10 points, name this center of ancient wisdom responsible for the standard cannon of Greek poetry and the division of ancient works into books.;;(Great) Library of Alexandria
Biology;;The only known mammal to locate its prey by sensing the prey's body electricity, its extraordinarily hemoglobin-rich blood allows it to stay underwater for a minute and a half while it eats worms, insect larvae and freshwater shellfish. These semi-aquatic, nocturnal creatures of genus Ornithorhynchus and species anatinus have venomous spurs on their hind feetFor 10 points, name these Australian animals that are egg-laying, web-footed monotremes.;;platypus
United States History;;Richard Nixon convinced state governors to support it at the Bolton Landing conference, while the long-debated question of its financing was solve by the Clay Committee's proposal for a revolving tax-into-bond system. The idea was laid in the 1954 State of the Union address, inspired by the President's experiences in Germany. Its construction required erecting fifty-five thousand bridges, but it is credited with saving three trillion dollars in fuel costs. For 10 points, name this forty thousand mile long network of controlled-access roads which bear odd numbers when running north and south.;;interstate highway(s)
United States History;;The majority opinion supported the District Court's decision not to grant standing to James Hallford and an anonymous married couple, using analysis of the word "person" in the Constitution. Harry Blackmun cited Eisenstadt v. Baird and Griswold v. Connecticut to argue that a newly established right to privacy was being violated by a Texas statute in this case, whose companion case was Doe v. Bolton. For 10 points, name this 1973 case in which the Supreme Court legalized certain forms of abortion.;;Roe (v(s)(.)|versus) (Wade)
British Literature;;The narrator is falsely accused of robbery shortly before Cousin Rashleigh commits the true crime in order to finance a Jacobite rebellion. At the jail of the MacVittie and MacFin company, Nicol Jarvie offers to help recover the stolen goods, but a frustrated Captain Thornton captures Nicol and the protagonist. Finally, with the death of Sir Hildebrand and the recovery of certain bills of sale, Frank Osbaldistone is able to marry Diana Vernon. For 10 points, name this novel by Walter Scott in which several scenes are resolved by the deus ex machina aid of a disguised Scottish outlaw.;;Rob Roy
Chemistry;;The second man for whom this reaction is sometimes named replaced its uranium-osmium catalyst with his namesake iron one, rendering it economically viable. Chambers designed to execute this process must be able to withstand over 200 bars of pressure because, although the desired forward reaction is exothermic, operation at below about 700 Kelvin results in an unacceptably low reaction rate. For 10 points, name the process developed in 1910 to create nitrates for munitions, a method of synthesizing ammonia from hydrogen and nitrogen gas.;;Haber(-Bosch) (process)
European Literature;;While he is waiting for his execution, this man develops a passion for life and an attention to detail, reflected in his observations of the walls of his prison cell. He is in prison for his lack of motives, including an absence of religious faith or love for Marie and lack of grief following his mother's death, but specifically for an act that he claimed "the sun" made him do. For 10 points, name this man who kills an Arab for no apparent reason in an Albert Camus story.;;Mersault
European Literature;;For centuries, the Order of Castalia lived in isolation performing it until one member left to tutor Tito. Playing it involves years of scholarly research to gain extensive knowledge of mathematics, history, philosophy, music theory, and literature. The goal is to relate every fact and idea to each other to create one single system under which all human knowledge can be placed; Joseph Knecht is a leading player. For 10 points, name this twenty-third century hobby which titles the last novel of Herman Hesse.;;(The) Glass Bead Game
Mythology;;He lives in a square castle consisting of gray stone. A courteous and hospitable handsome man with graying hair, his wound to his thigh or leg renders him in severe pain, which is reflected throughout his dominion. The wound was caused by the same sword which killed his brother, Goon Desert. For 10 points, Pelles is often given as the name of what character, the keeper of the Grail in many versions of the Arthurian legend?;;(the) Fisher King
United States History;;Contained within Bullitt, Hardin and Meade counties, it was founded as Fort Duffield in 1862. The area was revived for training for World War I, and later became a center for mechanization tactics. Today, this fort contains the Patton Museum of Cavalry and Armor and the U.S. Army Armor Center, in addition to its most famous contents. For 10 points, name this fort in Kentucky, named for the first Secretary of War, the site of the U.S. Bullion Depository.;;(Fort) Knox
Economics;;It served as the main piece of data influencing passage of the Kemp-Roth Act in 1981. Graphically, it appears as a U shape that touches the revenue axis at when the rate in question is zero or hundred percent. Critics claim that it has been debunked and leads to increased budget deficits; indeed, it was used by advocates of supply side economics to justify major tax cuts. For 10 points, name this curve, held by mainstream economists to be valid only at the extremes, that relates tax rates to government revenue.;;Laffer (curve)
European Literature;;In this play, the children Ivar, Bob and Emmy are primarily raised by their maid Anne and spend minimal time with their parents. Other characters include Doctor Rank, who suffers from consumption of the spine due to his father's sexual escapades, and Christine Linde, whose reunion with Nils Krogstad prompts Krogstad to cease blackmailing the main character. For 10 points, Nora Helmer's rejection of her husband Torvald ends what Henrik Ibsen drama?;;(A) Doll('s) House
European History;;After his betrothal to Maria Leszczynska led to involvement in the War of Polish Succession, he vowed to rule without a minister. Placed on the throne at age five, he attempted to restore power to the crown, but the influence of mistresses like Madame de Pompadour induced him to fight in both the War of Austrian Succession and Seven Years' War. For 10 points, name this great-grandson of the Sun King.;;Louis XV
Music;;Its premiere occurred at the Paris Conservatoire, conducted by François-Antonie Habeneck. Its central movement, entitled "Scene in the Fields," is an adagio, and is flanked by a dance scene and a march to the gallows. Presaging the use of leitmotif, it consists of five movements linked by an idée fixe. For 10 points, identify this 1830 orchestral work ending with a "Witches' Sabbath," a paean to Harriet Smithsom by Hector Berlioz.;;Symphon(ie|y){1}? Fantastique
United States History;;It rejected the Galloway Plan of Union but adopted the Suffolk Resolves and created the Association to administrate a semi-voluntary embargo. It issued a statement of Declaration and Resolves which demanded the reversal of recent concessions to Catholics in Quebec, the dissolution of standing armies, the restoration of peaceful assembly rights, and an end to taxation without representation. It elected Charles Thomson secretary and Peyton Randolph president when it convened on September 5 at Carpenters Hall under the suggestion of the Committees of Correspondence. For 10 points, name this body which met in 1774 to respond to the Intolerable Acts.;;First Continental Congress
Philosophy;;The sixth section of this work equates the general form of a truth function with the general form of a proposition. The first section states the world is a set of facts about things rather than the things themselves and declares that "philosophy is not a theory but an activity". In referring to the senselessness of metaphysical propositions in the seventh section, this work ends with the proposition, "What we cannot speak of we must pass over in silence". For 10 points, name this work which was literally written in the trenches of World War I by Ludwig Wittgenstein.;;Tractus Logico(-)Philosophicus
European Literature;;Argan wants to wed his daughter Angelique to Thomas Diaforos, but Beline wants to send her to a convent so she can inherit Argan's estate. Angelique, however, loves Cleante, who poses as her music instructor. For 10 points, name this lampoon of both hypochondriacs and doctors, in which the play's author Moliere was performing when he, in a final fit of irony, collapsed and died.;;Imaginary Invalid
Chemistry;;The original explanation of it contains the flaw that the integral of the proposed scattering kernel over all space diverges to infinity, which is the exposure of a fundamental limitation of classical mechanics. This experiment required excellent eyesight and patience because it used a zinc sulfide detector, so it was actually conducted by Geiger and Marsden, the lab assistants to its namesake. For 10 points, identify the important experiment in physics that repudiated the plum pudding model when it showed that some a [alpha] particles were scattered at very high angles; a fact that led the namesake New Zealander to conclude that the atom contains a small, dense nucleus.;;Rutherford (gold) (foil) (experiment);;gold foil (experiment)
Geography;;According to Theophanes, the remains of its ruin were sold to a merchant from Edessa, who transported the scraps on 900 camels. It was built from the remains of the siege equipment of Demetrius Polyorcetes after the latter abandoned the island. 56 years after its construction, an earthquake snapped it at the knees. For 10 points, name this ancient Wonder of the World, a large statue of Helios overlooking the harbor of Rhodes.;;Colossus (of Rhodes)
Mythology;;After he saw through the deception of Carna, he turned the seductress into Cardea, the goddess of doorknobs. He was born in Thessaly and moved to Latium to marry Camese, with whom he produced Tiberinus before giving the kingdom to Saturn. Regarded as the inventor of money and law, he once caused a hot spring to block the path of Sabine invaders, preventing the treason of Tarpeia from harming Rome. So that he could aid the city in the future, the gates of his temple on the Forum were kept open during war. For 10 points, name this Roman god of gates and beginnings, who had two faces on his head.;;Janus
Physics;;Subtracting the square of this quantity from the square of an astronomical body's speed gives the constant c3 [cee-three]. Jeans' formula indirectly gives the probability that a given molecule in a Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution will achieve this, and this astronomical quantity is itself equal to root two times the velocity of any object in uniform circular orbit about the body in question at the radius in question. This result is derived by setting the object's kinetic energy equal to its gravitational potential energy at that radius. For 10 points, name the constant that, for a planet of mass M [emm] with radius R [arr], is given at the planet's surface by  [root two gee emm over arr], the upward speed the object needs to free itself from the gravitation of that body.;;(surface) escape velocity
American Literature;;It was written with the aid of Lawrence Shiller, and its secondary focus is on Nicole Baker. Its protagonist is presented as one great contrast: on one hand, an articulate, caring human being; on the other, a cold-blooded killer who robs and murders two innocent men. Based on real events, it tells of Gary Gilmore's crime and conviction, followed by his insistence on dying for his crime. For 10 points, name this winner of a 1980 Pulitzer Prize, a nonfiction account by Norman Mailer.;;(The) Executioner's Song
Physics;;These rules were first published by the Royal Society in 1833 and are an extension of standard stoichiometry to their namesake type of reaction. These two physical characterizations were derived from a corpuscular understanding of the electric current, given charge conservation, and the second gives rise to a namesake constant, equal to approximately 9.65×104 [nine point six four times ten to the fourth] Coulombs. For 10 points, identify these quantitative laws for processes involving electrochemical cells, the first of which states that chemical change is proportional to the amount of electricity used, which are named for an English physicist.;;Faraday's laws (of) electrolysis
Geography;;The area around its harbor is known as the Condamine, while Fontvieille is a manmade platform of twenty-two hectares reclaimed from the sea. Despite having only three miles of coastline and thirty thousand people, it joined the United Nations in 1993 with the blessing of the Grimaldi line. For 10 points, name this principality, nine miles east of Nice [NEECE], where Monte Carlo can be found.;;Monaco
Music;;The one by Ralph Vaughan Williams ends ambiguously on a unison F. Johannes Brahms's ends with a passacaglia based on a nine-bar bass line. Jean Sibelius's ends with the unusual marking of mezzo-forte. Charles Ives's ends with a "mystical chorus" singing wordlessly. Gustav Mahler's ends with a soprano solo. For 10 points, all those works share what genre and number with Mahler's Ode to Heavenly Joy and Bruckner's Romantic?;;Fourth Symphony
World History;;This group's most prominent dynasty, the Mermnade, flourished around 680 BCE under Gyges. Their last leader was overrun by Cyrus the Great in 546, and they were ultimately absorbed into the Persian Empire along with their capital, Sardis. For 10 points, name this ancient civilization whose lands in present day Turkey had large deposits of gold and silver, leading to hoarding by King Croesus and the invention of coined money.;;Lydia(n) (Empire)
American Literature;;After receiving a traveling fellowship from the American Association for Arts and Letters, he took a trip to Ireland, where he met his second wife Anne DeLisle, and he soon finished his book Outer Dark. His 1973 novel Child of God was inspired by events that took place in Sevier County, Tennessee, but he is best known for his Border Trilogy. For 10 points, name this writer of Blood Meridian and All the Pretty Horses.;;(Cormac) McCarthy
British Literature;;When this poet was a young child, his mother called him Sophia and dressed him up in girl's clothes to compensate for the loss of a daughter a few years before. His first compilation of poems, Life and Songs was published when he was 19, and his visits to Russia inspired his three-volume cycle The Book of Hours. For 10 points, name this German-language poet of The Duino Elegies and Sonnets to Orpheus.;;(Rainer) (Maria) Rilke
Psychology;;It is often paired with the self-serving bias, the tendency to attribute one's successes to internal character and failures to external obstacles. It occurs when a person observes the actions of another and tries to explain that person's behavior but overestimates the importance of personality traits. For 10 points, name this error in which an observer underestimates the relevance of situational factors in explaining behavior.;;fundamental attribution (error)
World History;;Initiation to this group required mixing one's blood with that of a goat, pouring the solution on banana leaves, and performing a mystic devotion to the number seven. The Lari massacre was their last major action before the capture of Dedan Kimathi ended their major influence. Overall, in their war with Oliver Lyttleton, they lost eleven thousand men while killing only a hundred British. For 10 points, name this offshoot of the Kikuyu Central Association which failed in its 1950s revolt against British rule but later saw member Jomo Kenyatta become the first president of independent Kenya.;;Mau Mau
Mythology;;The hills named for her are inhabited by the diminutive Menehune, and, besides a sister who lives in her armpit, her siblings include the shark-god Kamohoalii, the fertility goddess Kapo, and the dancer Hi'iaka. This companion of Lohiau was born in Honua-Mea as the daughter of Haumea and Kane Milohai. For 10 points, name this Polynesian goddess who lives inside Kilauea, the patron of lightning and volcanic eruptions.;;Pele
Biology;;During this process in amphibians, convergent extension at the marginal zone helps to determine the anterior-posterior axis. Its two general methods are epiboly and emboly, the former of which is utilized heavily by creatures with large, yolky eggs. Consisting of three layers of cells, clusters of cells called organizers begin to produce molecular signals to induce other cells to different fates. For 10 points, the archenteron, or digestive cavity, appears during what stage of embryonic development that is a double-walled sphere formed after cells have invaginated from the blastula stage?;;Gastrula
United States History;;Their first project together was a Royal Society mission to Sumatra to observe a transit of Venus. They failed to pass the Cape of Good Hope but nonetheless received another commission in 1763. They fulfilled the task by laying out a series of milestones bearing coats of arms until trouble with natives forced a return to Philadelphia. The result runs for 233 miles along the thirty-ninth parallel and settled a dispute between the Calverts and Penns. For 10 points, name these surveyors who set the border which actually divides Pennsylvania and Maryland and symbolically separates the North and South.;;(Charles) Mason (and) (Jeremiah) Dixon
World Literature;;It has the structure of a single chapter set in the "present," an extended flashback, and a conclusion, in which the two surviving main characters set sail down a river to listen to the cries of manatees, but decide never to return. One of the main characters; in spite of having had over 662 erotic dalliances, claims to have remained a virgin for a vow of love; the other male lead dies after falling while chasing his pet parrot. For 10 points, name the novel that centers on a fifty year long love triangle between Fermina Daza, Florentino Ariza, and Juvenal Urbino, by Gabriel García Márquez.;;Love in the Time of Cholera
Biology;;There are approximately 12,000 species in this phylum, which consists of only protostome coelomates. Members of it have well developed cerebral ganglia, closed circulatory systems, and complete one-way digestive tracts. Bristles of chitin known as setae help them anchor during locomotion or in their burrows, and parts of their bodies are divided by septa. For 10 points, name this phylum containing polychaetes and earthworms, generally known as the segmented worms.;;annelid(a)
United States History;;Al Gore mentioned him during the primary campaign, but he was not brought to national prominence until David Carmen created a commercial for the National Security Political Action Committee. The commercial detailed that, despite being in jail for murdering Joey Fournier, he was given ten unsupervised furloughs. He used the last one to go to Maryland and assault Clifford and Angie Barnes. Entitled "Weekend Passes," the commercial, criticized for racist subtext, complemented the earlier "Revolving Doors" spot in alleging that Michael Dukakis was soft on crime. For 10 points, name this man sometimes credited with winning the 1988 election for George Bush.;;(William) (Willie) Horton (Jr.)
Math Theory;;The transformations producing these are not one-to-one because the origin maps to an infinite number of points and because the azimuthal coordinate's transform is not properly surjective. The area element in this coordinate system is the product of the radial coordinate, its differential, and the differential of the azimuthal coordinate, and the surfaces defining it are a plane, a perpendicular cylinder, and a perpendicular plane intersecting the origin at a given angle. For 10 points, identify the two-parameter coordinate system introduced by Newton and defined by the transform x = r cos(?) [ecks equals arr cosine of theta], y = r sin(?) [why equals arr sine of theta], where x and y are Cartesian coordinates.;;(circular) polar (coordinate(s) system)
Geography;;The Imperial Valley was cut off from it by the delta of the Colorado. It is part of a depression in the earth's surface that extends inland to the Coachella Valley. Its coastline includes the island of Tiburon, while the shore cities of La Paz, Guaymas, and Mazatlán are major tourist centers. For 10 points, name this arm of the Pacific Ocean which separates Mexico from a western peninsula.;;Gulf of California
World Literature;;Instances of it include Shahrnush Parsipur's "Tea Ceremony in the Presence of the Wolf" and Natsuki Ikezawa's "The Downfall of Macias Giri". The term was probably coined by Franz Roh to describe a genre of painting, though it is often attributed to the prologue of The Kingdom of the World, a novel by Alejo Carpentier. González Echevarría claims it has much in common with Greek tragedy, bewailing the idea that it is "the peculiar feature of all Latin American literature". For 10 points, name the genre that emphasizes the mythical in everyday life by interspersing fantastical and lifelike scenes.;;magic(al) realism
Art;;For this painting, 51 men, women, and children met, including the artist's father and sisters, the mayor, and a dog. The dog and a bourgeois with green stockings are near the front center of this twenty-two-foot-long canvas. Behind and to their right is a group of mourning women, and to the left are the presiding clergy and pall-bearers. For 10 points, name this painting depicting a funeral ceremony for a commoner in the hometown of Gustave Courbet.;;Burial at Ornans
Astronomy;;At relativistic velocities, the transverse form of this effect becomes appreciable and it is used to identify spectroscopic binaries. C. H. D. Buys-Ballot verified its existence in 1845, three years after its namesake predicted it. Hubble found that most galaxies are receding from us by measuring the redshift produced by this effect, which is also the basis for radar guns. For 10 points, name this effect in which the perceived frequency of a wave changes if the source or observer are moving relative to one another.;;doppler (effect)
Anthropology;;His works include Magic, Science, and Religion and The Dynamics of Culture Change, as well as the introduction to Facing Mount Kenya by Jomo Kenyatta. He conducted field work in Africa and in Mexico's Oaxaca Valley, but the landmark work of this founder of functionalism came in studying the Kula Ring exchange of the Trobriand Islanders. For 10 points, name this Polish-born anthropologist who wrote Argonauts of the Western Pacific.;;(Bronislaw) Malinowski
British Literature;;He participated in the Duke of Monmouth's rebellion and defended William III of Orange in his work The True-Born Englishman. After promising to work as a Tory pamphleteer for Robert Harley, he was released from prison, where he had been placed as punishment for his work The Shortest Way with Dissenters. However, he may be best known for two novels: one about a girl in Newgate prison, and another based on the adventures of Alexander Selkirk. For 10 points, name this author of Moll Flanders.;;(Daniel) Defoe
United States History;;This battle saw the only use of the Twin Sisters, two cannons donated by the government of Cincinnati. Occurring shortly after the burning of Harrisburg in a late campaign to take the coast, it ended the Runaway Scrape. Beforehand, Sidney Sherman led an expeditionary skirmish and Deaf Smith destroyed Vince's Bridge, cutting off the retreat. The losing commander disguised himself and hid in the grass; when captured, he was betrayed by other prisoners' shouts of "El Presidente!" and agreed to the Treaties of Velasco, evacuating Mexican forces. For 10 points, name this 1836 defeat of Santa Anna by Sam Houston which ended the war of Texan independence.;;(Battle of) San Jacinto
Mythology;;Aethra became her servant after her brothers rescued her from her kidnapping by Theseus and Pirithous. According to some stories, her nephew tried to kill her, and in the Aeneid, Aeneas draws his sword and considers stabbing her for her deeds. Her foster-father Tyndareus forced her suitors to swear an oath to protect her before giving her to Menelaus. Hatched from a swan's egg, along with her siblings Clytemnestra, Castor, and Pollux, FTP, name this woman who eloped with Paris, setting off the Trojan War, the most beautiful woman in the world.;;Helen
British Literature;;In this novel, John Raffles works as an investigator for Nicholas Bulstrode, who bails out Rosamond Vincy and her husband from debt. Lydgate hopes to locate the building block of life and Edward Casaubon wants to write the "Key to All Mythologies". All of this is irrelevant to the main character, of course, as she remains true to her heart and ditches Casaubon for his young cousin Will Ladislaw. For 10 points, name this novel centering on young Dorothea Brooke, the masterpiece of George Eliot.;;Middlemarch
Biology;;Guillain-Barré syndrome is a delayed reaction to it that results in demyelination, and the illness it causes was once thought to be caused by a bacterium of the genus Haemophilus. Among the genes included in its A, B, and C-subtypes are those that code for neuraminidase and hemagglutinin proteins that help it to break linkages to glycoproteins and attach itself to respiratory epithelial cells, respectively. For 10 points, identify this orthomyxovirus that causes acute respiratory distress in mammals, of which there was a pandemic in 1918.;;(in)flu(enza)
United States History;;In the Alcoa case, he objected to the "rule of reason" precedent and held that monopolies are always illegal even if not abusive. In his more than two thousand opinions, he became known for his contributions to the burgeoning field of patent law and as an ardent defender of free speech. He wrote The Spirit of Liberty and Of The Bill of Rights shortly after retiring from the Second Circuit Court of Appeals. For 10 points, name this man often called the "tenth justice of the Supreme Court".;;(Billings) (Learned) Hand
British Literature;;It describes such incidents as the destruction of the White Tree of Valinor by Ungoliant, the Kinslaying, the downfall of Numenor, and the challenge of Melkor to recover the titular jewels. Among its five sections are the Ainulindalë, the Valaquenta, and Of the Rings of Power and the Third Age. For 10 points, name this compendium of mythology which forms the backbone of the J.R.R. Tolkien universe.;;(The) Silmarillion
World History;;Their appearance is recorded in a relief of a battle at the Temple of Medinet Habu. Divisions within them included the Lukka, Teresh, Danuna, and Shardana. Egypt fought them under Merneptah and Ramses III, and they destroyed the Hittites. Possibly identified as Achaean or Mycenean Greeks, a portion of them became known as the Philistines. For 10 points, name this mysterious group that invaded the coastal Middle East in the thirteenth century BCE.;;Sea People(s)
Physics;;Alexey Abrikosov and Vitaly Ginzburg shared part of the 2003 Nobel Prize in Physics for work with them, and Heike Kamerlingh-Onnes discovered helium to be one in 1911. The type-I variety exhibits damping of the interior magnetic field known as the Meissner effect, while those of the type-II variety all occur at higher temperatures, and their properties were explained by Cooper pairs and the BCS theory. For 10 points, name these compounds, which, at low temperatures, exhibit no electrical resistance.;;Superconductor(s)
Art;;Marble statues of Apollo holding a lyre and Minerva holding a staff flank the left and right sides of this work, which is set under a high Romanesque dome. The artist put himself on the far right wearing a black hat, to place the fine arts on an equal plane with liberal arts. Images of contemporaries such as Bramante and Michelangelo are used to represent classical figures such as Euclid and Heraclitus. For 10 points, name this picture of a large gathering that also includes Plato and Aristotle, painted by Raphael.;;(The) School of Athens
Mythology;;One of them helped Peleus find his stolen magic sword and counseled Peleus on how to win the hand of Thetis. These creatures resulted from the union of Nephele, a cloud in the shape of Hera, and Ixion. They had a famed rivalry with the Lapiths, and several died due to the poisoned arrows of Herakles, including Pholus; Nessus, who tried to kidnap Herakles' wife Deianeira; and the wisest one, who tutored Achilles, Jason, and Herakles. For 10 points, Chiron was what type of half-man, half-horse creature?;;centaur(s)
Mythology;;According to one story, this man populated Corinth with men sprung from mushrooms; according to another story, Medea gave him the city. He was the father of Glaucus, who was devoured by his own horses, and the grandfather of Bellerophon. He cheated death twice, once by ordering his wife Merope to leave him unburied, and once by tricking Hades into handcuffing himself. For 10 points, name this man who was then punished in Tartarus by rolling a boulder up a hill in perpetuity.;;Sisyphus
European History;;While making his living as a shoemaker's apprentice and thief, he was caught stealing a suitcase of Communist recruitment flyers and mistakenly imprisoned with political dissidents at Doftana. While in jail he shared a cell with Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej, whom he later succeeded. Calling himself "Conducator" and carrying a sceptre, he maintained control with a secret police force, the Securitate. For 10 points, , name this dictator, executed along with his wife Elena Petrescu in 1989, the long time Communist leader of Romania.;;(Nicolae) Ceausescu
Astronomy;;Tolman showed that the current temperature of this is inversely proportional to the universal size factor in 1934. Anisotropies in it may be caused by inverse Compton scattering, which is known as the Sunyaev-Zel'dovich effect, or may correspond to nonuniformities in the "last scattering surface," which produced it when the temperature of the universe dropped to a level sufficient for atom formation. For 10 points, identify the ubiquitous radiation field that corresponds to blackbody radiation of temperature 2.735 K [two point seven three five kelvins] according to the satellite COBE, which was first discovered by Pensias and Wilson in 1964.;;cosmic (microwave) background (radiation)
World History;;Created by a merger of Free Center, Laam and Gahal, its current coalition with the National Religious Party is in jeopardy due to a long-discussed "disengagment plan" put forth by its leader. The leader of its hardline faction, finance minister Benjamin Netanyahu, opposes the plan to withdraw from the Gaza Strip. For 10 points, name this party led by Ariel Sharon which currently leads the Israeli government.;;Likud (party)
American Literature;;His plays, such as "The Girl in the Coffin" and "The Hand in the Potter," tended towards the tragic, while his short stories, such as "Free" and "Chains," often reflected his rocky marriage. Darwinian thought is readily apparent in his works; for example, Frank Cowperwood observes one sea creature devour another in the "Trilogy of Desire," which consists of The Titan, The Financier, and The Stoic. In perhaps his most famous novel, Clyde Griffiths dies for his crime. For 10 points, name this American author of Jennie Gerhardt, Sister Carrie, and An American Tragedy.;;(Theodore) Dreiser
Art;;An unfinished second version of the same pose is in the Tate Gallery in London, while the Metropolitan Museum of Art houses the more famous one. The main subject is the daughter of a Civil War general. Until this work's painter creates Carnation, Lily, Lily, Rose, he was poor due to the scandal of this work's eroticism and eccentricity. For 10 points, name this provocative portrait of Virginie Gautreau by John Singer Sargent.;;(Portrait of) Madame X
Math Theory;;If this scalar-valued function is unity, the object with which it is associated is called unimodular, whereas if this vanishes, that object is called singular, as the associated object formed by the coefficients of a non-trivial linear equation must be. These mathematical objects are not linear, but they have the useful property of n-linearity, and consideration of the calculation of one by permutation inversion of cofactors leads to the popular method of evaluating them by expansion by minors. The vector triple product may be stated as one of these with unit vectors on its first row. For 10 points, name the mathematical object that is symbolized with vertical bars, defined only for square matrices, and equal to ad – bc for the square matrix with first row a,b and second row c,d.;;det(erminant)
American Literature;;Instead of going to Tuttle's Grocery to gamble and fight, townsmen begin to congregate around the title character, who lives in the cabin of Stumpy. Later on, others think of building a hotel to attract decent families for him and donate a silver tobacco box, a woman's handkerchief, and a diamond ring.h. Kentuck gets emotional when the title character, a "little cuss," grabs his finger, but when the North Fork floods, the orphaned son of Cherokee Sal dies. For 10 points, name this story about the infant Thomas, whose presence improves the denizens a mining town, written by Bret Harte.;;(The) Luck of Roaring Camp
Biology;;Twenty-two of them are currently known. Along with pyrogens such as bacterial endotoxins, number 1 helps to cause fever and fight inflammation. Number 8 serves as a chemoattractant for neutrophils and T cells, while number 2 helps to proliferate B cells and activate T cells. For 10 points, name these regulatory molecules crucial to the immune system, produced by macrophages and deriving their name from their communication between white blood cells.;;interleukin(s)
European History;;European powers guaranteed their support of this cause in the London Protocol and soon fixed the boundary of the new state at a line extending from Volos to Arta. It established a monarchy under the former Otto of Bavaria eleven years after it was declared at the Prut River by Alexander Ypsilanti. In its last stage, the recapture of Missolonghi was undone by a European naval alliance at Navarino. For 10 points, what successful attempt to leave the Ottoman Empire included a June 1827 battle on the Acropolis?;;(war of) Greek Independence
American Literature;;John promises the narrator that Cousin Henry and Julia will be invited for a long visit as soon as the narrator gets well, but John also threatens to send the narrator to Weir Mitchell if her condition doesn't improve. The narrator describes the title object as resembling "a broken neck and two bulbous eyes" and a toadstool and eventually comes to believe that a woman is trapped behind it, prompting her to vandalize the nursery in which she is held. For 10 points, a nameless woman's descent into insanity after being forced to abandon writing is chronicled in what Charlotte Perkins Gilman story?;;(The) Yellow Wallpaper
Geography;;The Fulidu, Kardiva, and Ariyaddu are among the channels which run through this country. The government of this Islamic nation is concerned about the seventy percent divorce rate. The Divehi-speaking population is spread out among seventy-four islands, none of which have an elevation higher than six feet above sea level. For 10 points, name this archipelago southwest of India.;;(Republic of) (the) Maldives
Biology;;Increased rates of this phenomenon are found in carriers of robertsian translocations and in those who suffer from syndromes affecting DNA repair, such as Bloom's syndrome. A common cause of miscarriage, especially when it affects chromosome 16, it is much more prevalent in the fetuses of women age 40 or older. Patau's syndrome, Edwards's syndrome, and Klinefelter syndrome are all examples of, for 10 points, what type of genetic disorder caused by the presence of an additional chromosome, whose most famous example, Down Syndrome, involves three copies of chromosome 21?;;trisomy
United States History;;Under this program, the U.S. lost fifty "four-pipers" but acquired such strategic points as Harmon Air Force Base in Newfoundland. Sixty percent of the goods transferred under it were overseen by Maxwell Aitken, who stepped down from Churchill's cabinet to oversee it. Its declared objective was to "extend to the opponents of force the material resources of this nation," and it ended up distributing forty-nine billion dollars of aid to forty countries beginning in 1940. For 10 points, name this program under which the US provided war materials to allies before entering World War II.;;lend-lease
Music;;While in the Milan conservatory, where he was a student for nine years, he wrote the introduction and one aria in a team of four composers for the opera Il Sindacco Babbeo. An organist at Cremona, he revised his first opera I promessi sposi for the opening of the Teatro dal Verme in Milan. Librettist Arrigo Boito, using the pseudonym Tobia Gorro, took the Victor Hugo play Angelo, Tyrant of Padua for his opera La Gioconda. For 10 points, name this Italian composer who wrote the [supremely annoying] ballet within that opera, "Dance of the Hours".;;(Amilcare) Ponchielli
Chemistry;;The Allred-Rochow scale measures this quantity by taking the product of the charge of an electron and the effective charge of an electron and dividing it by the distance from the nucleus to the electron squared. The Mulliken scale averages ionization potential and electron affinity to derive this quantity, but the most famous scale for it is the one invented by Linus Pauling, which has a maximum value of 4. For 10 points, name this measure of the force at which an atom draws electrons into covalent bonds, which reaches its peak with the element fluorine.;;electronegativity
World Literature;;This man was jailed in connection with Prince Lin's treachery and frequently claimed to be a member of the royal house, with whom he fortuitously shared a family name. This author wrote a missive to a famous contemporary from Shantung, and he called the "Waterfall at Lu-Shan" "the Milky Way pouring down from heaven". A favorite of Ezra Pound, the Italian translated this man's "Taking Leave of a Friend" and "The River Merchant's Wife". For 10 points, Chinese poet of "Song Before Drinking" who allegedly drowned after trying to embrace the reflection of the moon in a river.;;Li Po
Economics;;A decrease in aggregate demand relative to aggregate supply can lead to one type, and artificial increases in the cost of irreplaceable goods can cause the other type. Its percentage rate can be divided into 72 to determine how long it will take for a sum of money to lose half its worth, and it is inversely proportional to unemployment according to the Phillips curve. For 10 points, demand-pull and cost-push are the two types of what phenomenon, a general increase in prices?;;inflation
Mythology;;It feeds horses including Dain and Durathor, as well as the perpetually lactating goat Heidrun. Its top is called Lerad, hosting an eagle with the falcon Vedfolnir between its eyes. At its base are the horn Gjall and the wells of Hvergelmir, Urd, and Mimir and Nidhod, who gnaws at its roots. Ratatosk, the squirrel of discord, runs along it trying to cause strife between the eagle and Nidhod. For 10 points, name this ash tree which connects the worlds of Norse myth.;;Yggdrassil
World History;;On the pretext of celebrating Charles III's birthday, he organized a banquet at which he captured and executed the cruel colonial governor Antonio Arriaga. His Proclamation of Liberty declared an end to slavery, and he besieged La Paz before his own execution. Victor Polay Campos later used his name for the modern-day group responsible for the 1996 takeover of the Japanese embassy. For 10 points, name this Tinta chief who took the name of an Incan king to lead a rebellion against Spanish control in Peru.;;Tupac Amaru (II)
American Literature;;She depicts herself as Alabama Beggs in her only novel and wrote the play Scandalabra to spite the man in her life. She published the short story "Our Own Movie Queen" under her husband's name to get a bigger paycheck. She later remarked, "plagiarism begins at home," accusing her husband of using her diaries to model the characters Gloria Patch and Nicole Warren. For 10 points, name this author of Save Me the Waltz, a flapper who died in a hospital fire after a tumultuous marriage to the author of Tender is the Night and The Great Gatsby.;;Z(elda) (Sayre) Fitzgerald;;Fitzgerald
Biology;;The Mu [mew] bacteriophage has the highest concentration of these, introducing about one hundred of them per cell per generation. Relying on a namesake enzyme, the ends of their sequence contain inverted repeats that bind to the target site, which is then cut, allowing this structure to be placed between the "sticky" ends. The ones within fruit fly genomes are called P elements, and they comprise about 50 percent of the genome of maize, in which they were first discovered in 1940. For 10 points, name these sequences of DNA that can move to different positions within the genome of a cell, discovered by Barbara McClintock.;;transposon(s)
United States History;;It warns that failing to use great power to promote peace is "unworthy of a free and religious people" and condemns Communism as "a hostile ideology global in scope, atheistic in character, ruthless in purpose, and insidious in method". It makes two chief warnings, one against federal control of science because "government contract becomes virtually a substitute for intellectual curiosity". The second admonition tells Americans to guard "our liberties" and "democratic processes" against "the military-industrial complex". For 10 points, name this January 17, 1961 speech by the outgoing President.;;(Dwight) (David) Eisenhower(') (s) farewell address
Music;;After studying under Humperdinck, he created his first major work, "The Czar Has Himself Photographed". After fleeing Hitler, he wrote "Knickerbocker Holiday" with Maxwell Anderson and "One Touch of Venus" with Ogden Nash. For 10 points, name this composer who worked with Bertolt Brecht to adapt John Gay's The Beggar's Opera into The Three Penny Opera.;;(Kurt) Weill
Religion;;He gives a speech on the history of Israel, describing God's mercy and Israel's ungratefulness, in Acts Chapter 7. He was one of a group of seven "Hellenist" deacons chosen by the original disciples to distribute food among the poor, though he came to be opposed by several synagogues, who had him arrested and placed before the Sanhedrin. It is noted that those who were about to kill him lay their coats at the feet of Saul. For 10 points, name this man who was stoned to death, considered to be the earliest Christian martyr.;;(St.) (Saint) Stephen
Biology;;For a solute of mole fraction x [ecks], this ideally results in a chemical potential decrease of RT ln(1 – x) [arr tee times the natural log of one minus ecks]. Pfeffer made the first serious study of this spontaneous reaction in 1877 and van't Hoff showed its namesake pressure, also known as turgor and defined as the applied stress required to cease it, is approximately colligative. For 10 points, identify the diffusion process that is best defined as the spontaneous movement of water across a semi-permeable membrane.;;osmosis
European History;;It occurred soon after the KSC was taken over by liberal reformers, who forced Antonin Novotny to resign. After this movement was put down, Gustav Husak began a process of "normalization" to undo the laws passed during it and re-establish central control over the national economy and strengthen police authority. Called an attempt to allow "socialism with a human face" by its leader was, for 10 points, what Alexander Dubcek-led 1968 period that tried to relax government control in Communist Czechoslovakia?;;Prague Spring
Chemistry;;Long chain compounds of this type may be synthesized from symmetric alkyl halides using the original Wurtz reaction and, by increasing carbon number, its members have positional isomer numbers 1, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 9, 18, 75, et cetera. Members of this series may be prepared via hydrolysis of Grignard reagents; all lack color and those with between 5 and 15 carbons are liquid at standard conditions. These will produce atomic carbon when burned in deficient oxygen, and are also known as paraffins. For 10 points, name this class of saturated hydrocarbons with general formula CnH2n+2 [cee sub enn, aych sub two enn plus two], examples of which include octane and propane.;;alkane(s)
United States History;;In this case, which overturned Betts v. Brady and extended an earlier ruling from Powell v. Alabama, the appellant was represented by future Supreme Court Justice Abe Fortas. After Hugo Black issued the majority opinion, the appellant had a retrial for breaking and entering charges in Florida, and was acquitted. For 10 points, name this 1963 Supreme Court decision that made state-appointed attorneys for indigent defendants a part of due process.;;Gideon (v(s)(.)|ersus) (Wainwright)
American Literature;;His father, Ira, wrote a series of articles entitled "The Bunglers" in the magazine Eugenics. The public's reaction to early novellas such as Poor Fool and The Bastard prophesized this author's later struggles against censors. With his second wife, the photographer Margaret Bourke-White, he wrote the book You Have Seen Their Faces about poverty in the South. That subject at the heart of his two most famous works, which follow the destitute Walden and Lester families. For 10 points, name this author of God's Little Acre and Tobacco Road.;;(Erskine) Caldwell
European Literature;;He burned his first published work, the narrative poem "Hanz Kuechelgarten," after critics panned it. He despised the "poshlost," or the banality of the ordinary bureaucratic life, as demonstrated in the collection Arabesques and a work where a man thinks himself to be Ferdinand VIII, king of Spain. Alexander Pushkin related to him a humorous anecdote about being mistaken for a government official, which this author turned into his most famous play. For 10 points, name this Russian author of Diary of a Madman, The Inspector General, and Dead Souls.;;(Nikolai) Gogol
Chemistry;;One of these is the higher-energy shell involved in the Laporte transition, and they are the root cause of phosphorescence because each exists as a set of three identical and mutually perpendicular regions. These spatial constructs overlap to create p-bonds [pie bonds] and they do not exist for principle quantum numbers less than 2. For 10 points, identify these regions in which an electron with angular momentum quantum number 2 is 95% likely to be found; a "peanut-shaped" electron orbital.;;p(-)(orbital)
Mythology;;They moved to Arcadia to escape a pack of wolves, despite the fact they were covered in lethal razors. They terrorized a lake and devastated the local crops and orchards, and only bronze castanets from Athena could scare them into flight. For 10 points, what name is given to these birds whom Heracles killed to complete his sixth labor?;;Stymphalian (Birds)
British Literature;;His book Complaints contained revised versions of his first published work, poems which appeared in "The Theatre for Worldlings". His sonnets were collected in Amoretti and his idyllic works in The Shepheardes Calender. The "Mutabilitie Cantos" were cut from his major epic, which featured such symbolic characters as Triamond, Calidore, Artegall, Britomart, and Sir Guyon. For 10 points, identify this namesake of a nine-line stanza form used in his tale of the Red Crosse Knight, The Faerie Queen.;;(Edmund) Spenser