British Literature;;He defines hell by "logical rules" in "The Place of the Damned," and wonders what happens when the poet's money is spent in "The Progress of Poetry". A secretary to Sir William Temple, he supervised the education of Esther Johnson, writing a collection of letters to her titled Journal to Stella. This author of Battle of the Books suggested an unusual source of food and a solution to Irish poverty in A Modest Proposal. For 10 points, name this author who created Lilliput.;;(Jonathan) Swift
Religion;;The liturgical hymns Veni Creator Spiritus and Veni Sancte Spiritus were composed for it, and the Sunday after it is Trinity Sunday. Until Advent, the weeks of the Christian calendar are counted from this festival. It is known as Whitsunday in Anglican churches, and related to the Jewish festival of Shavuot. For 10 points, name this holiday which takes place fifty days after Easter in the Orthodox church and is the namesake of Christian movements that emphasize glossolalia, or speaking in tongues.;;Pentecost
Chemistry;;An interesting demonstration of this law at work is the sound of knuckles cracking, which is actually cavitation caused by the change in location of gas with respect to the synovial fluid of the joints. A more tragic example is the 1986 overturn of Lake Nyos in Cameroon, where thousands suffocated in a cloud of carbon dioxide gas. Its proportionality constant k comes from a partition function involving a reference chemical potential of the pure solvent and terms related to the Helmholtz free energy of the gas. For 10 points, name this principle that the solubility of a gas is proportional to its partial pressure above the solvent.;;Henry's (law)
Music;;His works include the "Musical Jokes," The Battle of Tancredi and Clorinda, and The Return of Ulysses. His appointment as conductor at San Marco in Venice led to a rebuilding of their choir and orchestra. His works show a distinct progression from Renaissance polyphony to Baroque monody, particularly in his eight books of madrigals. For 10 points, name this Italian composer of Vespers for the Blessed Virgin, whose three surviving operas out of eighteen include The Coronation of Poppea and L'Orfeo.;;(Claudio) Monteverdi
World History;;The law implementing this program underwent two years of revision by the "editorial commissions". This event triggered the start of a forty-nine year schedule of redemption payments which were to transfer ownership of land to the affected group. Nikolay Mulyutin drafted the manifesto announcing this program and oversaw its implementation in Poland, and it was closely tied to the creation of the zemstvos three years later. For 10 points, identify this 1861 action taken by Alexander II which ended feudalism in Russia.;;Emancipation of serfs|end of serfdom
Art;;Executed with heavy impasto, this life-sized painting contains a dog depicted in the manner of medieval manuscripts on the lower right, in front of a crowd of darkly-clad ladies. It depicts a man in blue to the right, two men in red with large hats to the left, and a staff with a crucifix held above the crowd. Below the staff is a boy in vestments carrying a censer. For 10 points, name this painting exhibited at the 1855 "Pavilion of Realism," showing a freshly dug grave for the grandfather of Gustave Courbet.;;(A) (Burial|Funeral){1}? at Ornans
American Literature;;He criticized American writing in Cannibals and Christians and chronicled the CIA in Harlot's Ghost. Tim Madden wakes up with a hangover and finds a woman's head in his Tough Guys Don't Dance. He co-founded and named the Village Voice, and he reported on the death of Gary Gilmore in another book. He also wrote about both major party conventions of 1968 in Miami and the Siege of Chicago. For 10 points, name this author of The Executioner's Song and The Armies of the Night.;;(Norman) Mailer
Mythology;;Items given as compensation for this person were later promised to Heracles in order to get that hero to rescue Hesione (hee see OH nee). When Laomedon reneged on trading those "fine mares," Heracles sacked this person's hometown. King Tros had received the horses in exchange for this son of Callirhoe (CAH leh row eeh), who replaced Hebe in Olympus. For 10 points, name this Trojan youth abducted by Zeus in the form of an eagle in order to become cupbearer of the gods.;;Ganymede(s)
World History;;This man eventually married George Clinton's daughter and became a farmer in New York. After being kicked out of Russia by Catherine the Great, this man was given a mission to call in debts for his home country, which later disavowed him after his rechristening of the Little Sarah to The Little Democrat broke his agremeent to stop outfitting privateers from American ports. For 10 points, name this man who attempted to gain American aid for the war against Britain by the French Revolutionary government.;;(Edmond) (Charles) (Citizen) Gene(s)t
Physics;;This person's namesake logarithm is a plasma parameter derived from the binary collision approximation, the auge named for this person is selected by setting the divergence of the vector potential to zero. The namesake of a law of dry friction for which he postulated an electromagnetic explanation, this scientist refined the torsion balance to the point necessary to derive his more famous namesake law, the one-over-r-squared force law for static charges. For 10 points, name this French physicist, the namesake of the SI unit of electric charge.;;(Charles)(-)(Augustin) (de) Coulomb
Biology;;The interaction of these objects with the Shine-Delgarno sequences present on their counterparts was first observed in 2006. Chloroplasts posess a 55S version of these objects and many antibiotics exploit the differences between the 70S prokaryotic and 80S eukaryotic versions. All types are comprised of two joined subunits consisting mostly of RNA. These organelles use mRNA and tRNA to synthesize proteins. For 10 points, name these small, dense cellular organelles that cause the roughness of rough ER.;;Ribosome(s)
British Literature;;It is the title poem of a collection that also includes "Rhapsody on a Windy Night" and "Mr. Apollinax". It repeats the phrase "known them all" five times, "that is not it at all" twice, and "do I dare" three times. Comparing himself negatively to "a pair of ragged claws" and "prince Hamlet," the narrator twice says "I grow old" and "in the room the women come and go talking of Michelangelo". For 10 points, the line "Let us go then, you and I," opens what T.S. Eliot poem?;;(The) (Love Song of J. Alfred) Prufrock
Art;;Several of his creations were decorated with the woodwork of Grinling Gibbons, and he also employed Caius Cibber as a pediment-carver. He enlarged Kensington Palace for William III and also created the Temple Bar, Royal Naval Hospital. and Theatre Royal at Drury Lane. His epitaph reads "Reader, if you seek a memorial, look around you," as he was interred in one of the more notable reconstruction projects he oversaw following the Great Fire of London. For 10 points, name this designer of St. Paul's Cathedral.;;(Sir) (Christopher) Wren
World History;;During this conflict, Dairen was seized after the Liaotung Peninsula was cut off, and its final land war battle was fought at Mukden following the withdrawals at Liao-Yang and Sha Ho. Admiral Rozhetvensky was informed of the fall of Port Arthur while leading the Baltic Fleet halfway around the world, and was ultimately defeated by Admiral Togo at the Battle of Tsushima. For 10 points, name this this 1905 war ended by the Treaty of Portsmouth.;;Russo-Japanese (War)
Mythology;;In the form of Rig, he created the three races of mankind. Raised by the earth, seawater, and the blood of a boar, he can sleep less than a bird. Also known as Gullintani for his "golden, shining teeth", this grandson of Aegir by nine mothers resides at Himinbjorg. He will kill and be killed by Loki at Ragnarok, after calling the gods there with his great Gjallarhorn. His ability to hear the grass grow and see a hundred miles around him helps him ward off giants. For 10 points, name this guardian of the rainbow bridge Bifrost.;;Heimdall
American Literature;;His prose includes the collection Letters of a Traveler, and he delivered the address at the unveiling of the Statue of Liberty. His rustic works such as "Oh Fairest of the Rural Maids" and "A Forest Hymn" were more typical than his federalist satire of Jefferson's trade policies, The Embargo. He returned to the pastoral genre for "The Yellow Violet" and a poem about death that begins with the lines "To him who in the love of nature holds". For 10 points, identify this author of "Thanatopsis" and "To A Waterfowl".;;(William) (Cullen) Bryant
Religion;;Some of them are found in the Book of Good Qualities. The "qudsi" subcategory are believed to be divine in origin, while another elevated class of these invokes the "companions". Collections of them are divided, based on organizational style, into the musannaf and the musnads. Each one is comprised of the matn, or text, and the isnad, or chain of transmission. For 10 points, identify these sayings attributed to Mohammed which supplement the Quran.;;Hadit(h)
Chemistry;;Their discoverers used aluminum nitrates and methylisobutyl ketone to extract them, and alpha-hydroxyisobutyric acid cation exchange was used to separate them. Their solubility in water varies markedly according to their oxidation states, which can vary from 3+ to 6+, with the higher oxidation states having higher solubilities and diffusion constants. Many of them were discovered during and after the Manhattan project. For 10 points, name this fifteen-element series preceeding lawrencium in the periodic table that includes fermium, thorium, and americium.;;Actinide (series)|Actinides
Art;;This onetime apprentice of Michael Wolgemut executed a portrait of his patron Fredrich the Wise, and later made a print called The Triumphal Arch for Emperor Maximillian. Three years after Holbein, he also did a portrait of Erasmus, though he may be better known for The Four Holy Men and a series of self-portraits at different ages. For 10 points, name this German Renaissance artist whose greatest work was in the genre of engraving, including his Melancholia I and Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse.;;(Albrecht) Durer
United States History;;"Freedom Our Rock" was the motto of this group, named for the man who signed the Treaty of Shakamaxon with William Pennand. "Honest" John Kelly reorganized it and Fiorello La Guardia won the mayoral race in 1933 on a fusion ticket opposing it. William Randolph Hearst also railed against this organization, named for a chief of the Delaware. For 10 points, name this ethnically targeted machine which controlled the Democratic Party in New York.;;Tammany (Hall)
Music;;This work includes the mezzo-soprano "trouser role" of Prince Orlofsky, and areas for improvisation are allowed for the jailer Frosch and the lead tenor role. Mistaken identities abound in the third act, when Gabriel portrays a lawyer seeking to prove Rosalinde's infidelity. The plot is set in motion after Falke (FAHL keh) brings Gabriel to a masquerade ball, once Alfred is convinced to serve Gabriel's jail sentence. For 10 points, name this merry Johann Strauss, Jr. operetta whose plot has nothing to do with bats.;;(Die) Fledermaus
World History;;In the last of several periods of exile, this man is credited with introducing the chicle plant as a replacement for rubber, while his assistant James Adams helped invent chewing gum. After another exile he returned to his country to fight the French in the Pastry War, during which he lost a leg. His military abilities proved wanting after that, as he lost at Churubusco, Contreras, Cerro Gordo, and San Jacinto. For 10 points name this Mexican figure often defeated by Texans and Americans after his victory at the Alamo.;;(Antonio) (Lopez) (de) Santa Anna
European Literature;;His time in prison inspired The Baths of Algeria, while he finished Persiles and Sigismunda three days before dying. Several short works about scamps, such as "Colloquy of the Dogs," comprise another of his works. Jorge Luis Borges attributed this author's masterpiece to the fictional Pierre Menard, who recreates characters such as Countess Trifaldi, Samson Carrasco, and Dulcinea. For 10 points, identify this author of his Novelas Emplejares who created Sancho Panza and Don Quixote.;;(Miguel) (de) Cervantes
Religion;;Jewish tradition assigns to him responsibility for the destruction of Sennacherib and Sodom, and he is also held to be inscriber of the Tau on the elect. He explained the prediction of the Seventy Weeks to Daniel, and he tells that prophet that the horned ram predicts the destruction of Persia by Alexander. For 10 points, name this archangel whom Christians see as blowing the trumpet on Judgment Day and Muslims as dictating the Quran to Mohammed, also described as conducting the Annunciation to Mary.;;Ga(b|v){1}?riel|Jibril
Biology;;Their discovery was described in the 1977 paper "Adenovirus Mazes at Cold Spring Harbor," and they were named by Walter Gilbert. Scientists at Ohio State discovered their "homing" property, while evolutionary controversy between the "early" and "late" theories came to a head with the discovery of them in the bacteria Fischerella. The self-cleaving ones are types of ribozymes, while others are excised by a protein-RNA complex known as a spliceosome. For 10 points, name these sequences of nucleotides that are non-coding as opposed to exons.;;Intron(s)
Physics;;One method of describing the electroweak properties of their light pseudoscalar variety involves combining the Bethe-Salpeter and Schwinger-Dyson equations. The discovery of the eta type of these particles supported the Eightfold Way, while that of the upsilon version revealed the existence of bottom quarks. Including the D, F, and B types, these colorless bosons were studied in both CP violation in decay modes and in strong interactions between protons and neutrons, and are composed of an even number of quarks and antiquarks. For 10 points, name these hadrons postulated by Hideki Yukawa, a class of particles that includes the charmed paired J/psi, kaons, and pions.;;Meson(s)
World History;;His son became a neo-Nazi who claimed that this man was murdered by the British secret service. After Gustav Strasser's faction left, this man became deputy party leader, and he was eventually placed after only Göring on the succession list. Finding his power waning by 1941, this man, who had transcribed most of Mein Kampf, parachuted into Scotland and proposed peace to Britain. For 10 points, name this convincted Nazi war criminal who spent twenty-one years as the only inmate of Spandau prison.;;(Walter) (Richard) (Rudolf) Hess
British Literature;;His "monodrama" Maud earned him enough money to buy Farringford and the peace to create later verses like "The Higher Pantheism". He describes the death of a mythical creature "Below the thunders of the Upper Deep" in "The Kraken". He took inspiration from Shakespeare in "Mariana" and from Homer in both "The Lotus Eaters" and a poem in which the title character wishes "To strive, to seek, to find, and not to yield". For 10 points identify this Victorian poet of The Princess, "Ulysses," and Idylls of the King.;;(Alfred) (Lord) Tennyson
Mythology;;A battle with Sicyon caused this city's ruler, Nycteus, to be mortally wounded and entrust Lycus with regency over the child king Labdacus. Later in the myth of this city, Epopeus's wife was seduced by Zeus in the form of a satyr and gave birth to Amphion and Zethus, who built its walls and its seven gates. Due to the boasts of Amphion's wife Niobe, those twins were deposed by Laius, whose son defeated the sphinx that lived outside this city. For 10 points, name this city founded by Cadmus and ruled by Oedipus.;;Thebes
Art;;This painter of Agrippina with the Ashes of Germanicus and The Departure of Regulus from Rome replaced Joshua Reynolds as Royal Academy president. In another of his works, he replaced the convention of classical dress with accurate contemporary clothing in order to depict a 1763 event. For 10 points, name this man who showed a pondering Indian warrior and a group of soldiers with jackets of various colors watching the last moments of the red-clad title character in The Death of General Wolfe.;;(Benjamin) West
Mythology;;Upon learning of the death of his beloved, this god created the demons Bhadrakali and Virabhadra, from whose pores grew the monsters known as Raumyas. His most vengeful form is the Saddyojat, often associated with the Rudraksha tree. The father of Kartikeya, he takes the form of Nataraja, the cosmic dancer. Often depicted riding the white bull Nandi, he is the husband of Parvati. For 10 points, name this destroyer god, a member of the Hindu Trimurti along with Brahma and Vishnu.;;Shiva
Music;;A Survivor from Warsaw is one of his last works; A Modern Psalm and Jacob's Ladder, along with his only opera, were left unfinished at his death in 1951, His vocal works include The Book of the Hanging Gardens and the Erwartung. He also composed the string sextet Verklärte Nacht (fair CLAIR tuh nakht) and the narrated "song cycle" about a "moonstruck" man, Pierrot Lunaire. For 10 points, name this teacher of Webern and Berg who founded the serialist school.;;(Arnold) Schoenberg
United States History;;They spanned an eight-week period, starting in Ottawa and ending in Alton, and at one of them, the Freeport Doctrine was first explained. Each lasted for three hours and discussed such topics as the division of Texas into several states, the Lecompton constitution in Kansas, and the intent of the Founding Fathers. Jonesboro, Charleston, Galesburg, and Quincy were other locations for these in 1858. For 10 points, issues of slavery were the major subject of what forensic events between two Illinois senatorial candidates?;;(The) Lincoln-Douglas debates
American Literature;;It describes a mismatched romance between Helen White and Seth Richmond. In another section, Dr. Parcival dreams about a lynch mob. The main character, a journalist, falls for Louise Trunnion in the section "Nobody Knows" and Belle Carpenter in "An Awakening". The first two sections, "Paper Pills" and "Hands," are prefaced by the description of the novel as a "Book of Grotesques". For 10 points, George Willard recounts his experiences in the title town in what novel by Sherwood Anderson?;;Winesburg, Ohio
Physics;;This phenomenon is marked by such properties as asymptotic freedom and confinenment. Interactions governed by it are explained by the SU(3) theory known as quantum chromodynamics, while its symmetry was explained by the eightfold way. The most fundamental particles that obey it exhbit a "color" charge. For 10 points, identify this fundamental force which keeps hadrons together and governs the behavior of quarks and gluons.;;Strong (nuclear) (force)
Music;;The conductor Robert Craft assisted in the creation of many of his late scores, including the Requiem Canticles. He collaborated with André Gide for the melodrama Perséphone, and wrote musical tributes to Dylan Thomas and John F. Kennedy. W. H. Auden lived with him while collaborating on The Rake's Progress, and he also composed The Soldier's Tale and such ballets as Petrouchka and The Firebird. For 10 points, name this Russian composer who started a Parisian riot at the premiere of his Rite of Spring.;;(Igor) (Fyodorovich) Stravinsky
Religion;;Popular examples of this type of figure include the patron of the dead Ksitigarbha and the wise Mañjusri. They are said to value karuna equally with prajna and follow the stages of bhumi. All sects agree that only men can attain this status, though Japanese schools hold it open to laymen in opposition to the tradition that only monks may achieve it. One dedicated to mercy, Avalokitesvara, is said to be reincarnated as the Dalai Lama. For 10 points, name these figures who destined to become Buddhas but choose to be reborn.;;Bodhisattva(s)
World History;;Her four daughters married five kings among them, including Christian II of Denmark, Louis II of Hungary, and both Manuel I and John III of Portugal. After her father displaced her from the regency for the young Charles V, she was imprisoned at Tordesillas, where this last surviving child of Ferdinand and Isabella lived the last seven years of her life as queen in absentia. For 10 points, identify this queen of Castile and Aragon who went insane, producing her usual nickname.;;Joanna (the Mad)|Juana (la Loca)
World Literature;;A man who gives false sympathy to a former employer in this play will not accept money for his travels with Anya. Noting that diseases are never cured by applying several drugs, the ineffectual Gayev plays billiards all day and ends conversations by noting that he is silent. Boris Simoneov's sale of his estate to clay miners presages what will happen when, by outbidding Doridanov, the ex-peasant Lopakhin buys the estate of Ranevskaya. For 10 points, Lopakhin cuts down the title entity in what Anton Chekhov play?;;(The) Cherry Orchard|Vishnovy sad
Biology;;Two instances of this are joined by a short loop to form a liked-named hairpin, while four joined ones comprise the Greek key motif. Oligomers of this structure comprise the plaques implicated in many neurodegenerative diseases. One of the configurations allowed by the Corey-Pauling rules, this structure results from an extensive hydrogen bond network between strands of amino acids with extended peptide bonds. For 10 points, name this regular protein secondary structure distinct from the alpha helix.;;Beta(-)(pleated) sheet(s)
Music;;Unique in his repertoire is the mezzo-forte dynamic at the end of his fourth symphony, which includes music planned for a tone poem based on Poe's "The Raven". His other works include En saga, The Oceanides, Tapiola, the Karelia suite, and Kullervo. His tone poems Pohjola's Daughter and Luonnotar were based on the same source as his The Swan of Tuonela, namely the Kalevala. For 10 points, name this composer who drew on his country's movement for independence from Russia to write Finlandia.;;(Johan) (Julius) (Christian) (Jean) Sibelius
Philosophy;;His spirit introduces the action of The Jew of Malta, and this man wrote a play about Ligurio's attempt to bring Callimaco together with Lucrezia. Both Belfagor and The Mandrake were more popular in his time than his Discourses on Livy, which defended republican government. In another work, he discussed the relative advantages of being feared and loved. For 10 points, name this author who attempted to resume a career in the government of Florence by giving the Medicis his handbook on power, The Prince.;;(Nicolo) Machiavelli
World History;;This man's navy dominated the Mediterranean following the battle of Preveza, which was won by his kapudan, or admiral, known as "Barbarossa," Khair ad Din. The Treaty of Amasya ended the last of his wars with the Safavids, while his European exploits included a victory over the teenaged Louis II of Hungary at the battle of Mohacs. He succeeded his father, Selim I, in 1520, and reigned for the next forty-six years. For 10 points, name this great sultan of the Ottoman Empire.;;Sule(y|i){1}?man (I|the First|the Magnificent|Muhtesem|the Lawgiver){1}?
Religion;;His mother was a Byzantine-born slave named Narjis Khatun, and this man was reported to speak while in the womb and grow to adulthood in six years. The Bahai founder Bahaullah used the term "gate" or "bab" in order to express his access to this figure. He succeeded Hasan al-Askari before entering the "ghaybah," or occultation. For 10 points, name this figure whom Twelver Shiites believe lived on eternally and will one day return as the Mahdi or savior of Islam.;;(The) (Hidden|Twelfth){1}? Imam|Muhammad Al-muntazar
World Literature;;Their greatest author outlined his philosophy in The Flower Book and wrote such works as The Falling Block and the Woman in the Cypress Tree. The "Real Life" section is sometimes replaced by a work like Lady Han, which presents a character's descent into madness and often features the performer wearing a Hannya mask. For 10 points, name these plyas popularized by Zeami in the fifeenth century, a traditional form of Japanese drama that preceded Kabuki.;;No(h) (plays)|Nogaku (dramas)
United States History;;One participant at this event said that federal subsidies, rather than local property taxes, should pay teacher salaries and called for the imprisonment of Jimmy Hoffa. Occurring at the WBBM studio in Chicago on September 26, it featured a man who had recently gotten over the flu and wore an unnapealing gray suit, leading to those who watched it on television and listened on the radio to report different winners. For 10 points, identify this 1960 event, the first such meeting of two Presidential candidates in a general election.;;(The) (first) Nixon-Kennedy debate
Biology;;It is diagnosed by the presence of four conditions out of a certain list; among those conditions are a "feeling of unreality," numbness, and chest pain, which can make this phenomenon resemble a heart attack. A disorder in which this occurs frequently is correlated with depression and agorophobia and can be treated with imipramine. It can also be triggered by marijuana or by a specific phobia. For 10 points, sweating and nausea are also common in what often randomly-striking event caused by anxiety?;;Panic (attack)
Chemistry;;Tetrahydrofuran is a five-member ring example of this sort of compound. Cyclic members of this class of compounds that contain a three-member ring are known as epoxides. These Lewis bases can be created by the Williamson synthesis and often form low boiling-point liquids at STP. These compounds have general formula R O R-prime, where R and R-prime are aryl or alkyl groups. For 10 points, name this class of chemical compounds, the diethyl variety of which is a notable anesthetic.;;Ether(s)
American Literature;;He translated Yevtushenko in the collection Stolen Apples and wrote a final novel about a pilot named Muldrow who is shot down in Japan, To the White Sea. He issued an epic poem in twelve parts, The Zodiac, and read his poem "Strength of Fields" at Jimmy Carter's inauguration, but he may be more famous for a novel about Bobby, Drew, Lewis, and the narrator, Ed, who are assaulted during a canoe trip. For 10 points, identify this author of Buckdancer's Choice and Deliverance.;;(James) (Lafayette) Dickey
Biology;;Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome and Chediak-Higashi syndrome can cause the condition throughout the body, while Waardenburg syndrome may only cause it in the eyes. Its most common form is caused by a mutation in the P gene, which alters pH to an extent that a certain molecule cannot be formed. Often accompanied by hypersensitivity to light, it can be caused by mutations in the enzyme tyrosinase, which is critical in the derivation of melanin in the body. For 10 points, name this condition in which a lack of pigmentation causes an organism to have pale-colored eyes and appear very white.;;(Hypomelan|albin){1}?ism
World History;;After an early attempt on his life during high mass, he traveled to meet with one of his antagonists, King Ferdinand, angering Sixtus IV. Succeeded by a son nicknamed "the Unfortunate," his power grew after seizing control of the city's treasury. His court musicians included the Flemish Heinrich Isaac and his advisors included Luigi Pulci and Poliziano, while another son, Giovanni, would eventually become Pope Leo X, but he is best remembered as a patron of such figures as Savonarola and Michelangelo. For 10 points, identify this Renaissance statesman and member of a Florentine ruling family.;;Lorenzo (de Medici|the Magnificent){1}?
Physics;;The namesake period of one of these can be estimated by an inhour equation and their namesake property is measured in a unit called the dollar, the amount needed to reach prompt criticality. The VHTR, SCWR, and MSR are postulated Gen IV (jen four) devices of this type; currently operating types include the CANDU, PWR, and LMFBR, the last of which produces more fuel than it uses as a breeder. For 10 points, name this type of device that uses neutron-induced fission in plutonium or uranium to produce power.;;(Nuclear) (fission) reactor(s)
Art;;His Purple and Rose depicts a woman admiring a vase, while Wapping shows patrons at a bar on the Thames River. His time in Chile inspired his 1866 landscape The Port of Valparaiso. For Frederick Leyland, he decorated "The Peacock Roomm" and that man suggested the title for this man's abstract series the "Nocturnes". Most famous for portraits such as The White Girl, for 10 points, identify this man whose Arrangement in Grey and Black No. 1 depicted his mother in a rocking chair.;;(James) (McNeill) Whistler
Biology;;Luteoviruses specifically attack this tissue, causing collapse and necrosis of other tissue. The sucrose-proton symport mechanism and the wound-clogging fibrous protein validate its pressure flow model. It grows on the outer surface of the vascular cambium, and forms the cork layer of the bark. Often controlled by companion cells, they make up the outer stele. Neighboring cells are joined by sieve plates and a continuous layer of cytoplasm forming the sieve tubes. For 10 points, name this plant tissue that conducts food produced in mesophyll cells to various parts of the plant, an analog of xylem.;;Phloem
Religion;;This student of Rabbi Gamaliel was first exposed to Christianity when he witnessed the martyrdom of St. Stephen. He is the patron saint of Malta and was a tent-maker by profession who stated that "women should be silent in the churches" in First Corinthians. This native of Tarsus is the credited author of 13 books of the New Testament. For 10 points name this apostle who persecuted Christians as a Pharisee, prior to his conversion on the road to Damascus.;;(P|S){1}?aul
British Literature;;The title character of this novel agrees to give a lecture on "Merrie England" and spend a weekend with the Welches in an attempt to save his job. Over the weekend, he meets Bertrand's girlfriend Christine and, weeks later, sees her at the Summer Ball, taking her home early as Bertrand is mistreating her. Prior to giving the end-of-term lecture, the title character fights with Bertrand and gets drunk; the next day, he is fired from his academic post. For 10 points, fortune prevails for Mr. Dixon in what novel by Kingsley Amis?;;Lucky Jim
World History;;His grandson was the founder of Luanda, Angola, while his ancestor is sometimes credited with discovering the Cape Verde islands. This man sailed aboard the São Cristóvão with the remnants of Diogo Cão's crew and visited an area which he named the Bay of St. Blaise. For 10 points, identify this first European to sail around the Cape of Good Hope, which enabled him to plan a subsequent expedition with Vasco da Gama to India on behalf of Portugal.;;(Bartolomeu) Dias
Biology;;They are collapsed by nocodazole and colcemid. In plants, they control newly synthesized fibers of the cell wall. In animals, proteins like kinesin and dynein move vesicles and other cargo by moving on top of them, and they also distribute chromosomes to daughter cells. Radiating from an organizing center, they are made up of 13 protofilaments of alpha and beta polypeptides. For 10 points, flagella are composed of what components of the cytoskeleton, made up of subunits of tubulin dimers?;;Microtubule(s)
Mythology;;One of the rulers of this group, Otrere, is credited with building the temple of Artemis at Ephesus. Cyme, Myrine, Ephesus and Smyrna were also founded by them. Podarces and Meriones killed some of them at Troy, where Penthesilia likewise died there at the hand of Achilles, who fell in love with the corpse. Another one attacked the wedding of Theseus and Phaedrea. For 10 points, Hippolyte was the queen of what group, which was said to remove the right breast in order to aim arrows and comprised a race of female warrios?;;Amazon(s)
United States History;;This group collected "alienation fees" on all land sales and received a tenth of all crops until they were prohibited from leaseholding under the constitution of 1846. Governor Silas Wright had declared martial law the previous year to quash the Anti Rent War targetting this group. Peter Minuit established many of their privileges of this group, which included the Archers, Van Cortlands, and Rensselaers. For 10 points, name these holders of Dutch land grants who formed the aristocracy of antebellum New York.;;Patroon(s)
American Literature;;A Jewish man named Simon Rosedale wishes to break into the upper class by marrying this novel's protagonist. That woman lives with Mrs. Peniston and believes she can improve her own social circle enough to seduce Percy Gryce if only she can acquire enough money to gamble on bridge. Gus Trenor pretends to make ten thousand dollars off of investments, and Lawrence Selden discovers that the main character has overdosed on chloral. For 10 points, socialite Lily Bart rises and falls in what Edith Wharton novel?;;(The) House of Mirth
Mythology;;This name may be derived from an epithet given to the severed but still-living head of Bran. This figure made an expedition to Ireland with a mystial friend in order to find the Giants' Ring after joining with his brother Aurelius Ambrosius to overthrow Vortigern. He received a gift made at Carduel and then gave it to Leodegrance, who in turn transmitted that prize possession to this man's son, convceived after this man impersonated Gerlois in order to impregnate Igraine. For 10 points, name this father of King Arthur.;;Uther Pendragon;;Uther|Pendragon
Geography;;Because they were once part of the Duchy of Normandy, French is still an administrative language on these islands. Their traditional dairy industry has led one member of this group to become the namesake of a cream and a cow. They were also the only part of Britain occupied by Germany during World War II. For 10 points, give the collective name of Guernsey, Jersey and Alderney, located just off the French coast in a certain body of water.;;Channel Islands
British Literature;;His The Celestial Omnibus is a collection of short stories, and he wrote about the orphan Rickie Elliot in The Longest Journey. He distinguished between flat and round characters in Aspects of the Novel and used Virginia and Vanessa Stephen to model the Schlegel sisters in a later work. He also created Lucy Honeychurch and the title character of Maurice. For 10 points, name this author of Howard's End and A Room With a View.;;(Edward) (Morgan) Forster
Biology;;The intensity-mediated breakdown of these cells is the mechanism of the so-called opponent process. These entities function via the transducin G-protein by switching the configuration of 11-retinal, which joins with opsin to create their namesake protein. The most numerous and sensitive cell serving their function, these cells are depleted from the fovea and perceive size, brightness, and shape using rhodopsin. For 10 points, name the photoreceptor cells of the retina; the compliments of cones.;;Rod(s)
Art;;Its designer donated woodblocks by Hokusai, Picasso paintings, and hundreds of other art objects to decorate this building. It also required designs for a 159-piece furniture set and a custom order of red paint for the doors and windowframes. Pottsville sandstone from a local quarry is used in the walls, which are attached to cantilevered concrete stretching over Bear Run. For 10 points, name this house designed for the Kauffman family's country estate sixty miles southeast of Pittsburgh by Frank Lloyd Wright.;;Fallingwater
Biology;;A lack of Duffy antigens or a genetically deficient version of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase can confer immunity to it, as can a disease which prevents the merozites of its causative agent from invading red blood cells. This obviates the need for drugs that treat it such as cotrifazid, doxycycline, and quinine. For 10 points, name this blood disease common in tropical areas and not affecting sickle cell carriers, caused by four species of the Plasmodium protozoan that are transmitted by the Anopheles mosquito.;;Malaria
Psychology;;It can be diagnosed with the Brown Scale or the Connors Rating Scale, and those with it have assymetrical caudate nuclei. APA criteria diagnose it when six or more traits on a checklist are observed to a "maladaptive" degree in two environments, and it is often treated with methylphenidate, which increases norepinephrine levels only in those with this condition. For 10 points, identify this disorder which may be treated with Concerta, Strattera, or Ritalin and is often diagnosed in children who have trouble focusing in school.;;A(ttention) D(eficit) H(yperactivity) D(isorder)
Art;;He argued for a truly national art in his manifesto Revolt against the City. A year later he would illustrate Lewis' Main Street, while a John Ford film would inspire his Sentimental Ballad. He utilized a bird's eye-view in his Midnight Ride of Paul Revere and though he would eventually exhibit in New York he chose to found his art colony at Stone City near Anamosa, Iowa, where he was born. His most famous work featured the artist's sister Nan standing next to B.H McKeeby, the family dentist. For 10 points identify this creator of American Gothic.;;(Grant) Wood
Geography;;The special school, or "Calmecac," was found near the House of Music in its center. Its fall was precipitated by the "Sad Night" which saw Pedro Alvarado's commander escape, only to return with thirteen brigantines and an army of Tlaxcalans to take his revenge. According to legend, its location was chosen after wandering tribes saw an eagle eating a snake on an island in the middle of Lake Texcoco. For 10 points, identify this city conquered by Hernan Cortes, the capital of the Aztec Empire.;;Tenochtitlan
United States History;;After succeeding "Ol Buck" Buchanan as congressman in 1941, he gained the nickname "Landslide" for allgedly rigging his eighty seven vote victory over Coke Stevenson for a seat in the U.S. Senate, and Robert Caro's biography Master of the Senate details this man's stint as majority leader. and he said "There goes the South for a generation" after signing the Civil Rights Act. Deciding not to seek re-election following the surprising success of his insurgent primary opponent Eugene McCarthy in 1968, for 10 points name this President whose Great Society was undermined by the unpopularity of the Vietnam War.;;(Lyndon) (Baines) Johnson|L(.)B(.)J(.)
American Literature;;In one poem, this man addresses smoke as an "Icarian bird" and a "lark without song," while another of his poems begins "I am a parcel of vain strivings tied / By a chance bond together". One book by this man collects essays which describe his trips to Chesuncook, the Allegash and East Branch, and Mount Ktaadn [ka-TAHD-in]. In addition to the volume The Maine Woods, he wrote a book about a week on the Concord and Merrimack Rivers, though his best-known book includes chapters on "Higher Laws," "Economy," and one entitled "Where I Lived, and What I Lived For". Name this transcendentalist author of Walden.;;(Henry) (David) Thoreau
Mythology;;The reason that Agamemnon could not get favorable winds at Aulis was because of a boast made after killing one of these, and a large one took the place of Iphigenia in the sacrifice made to reverse the weather. One of them was had golden horns and lived in Cerynitia, where Apollo and Artemis confronted Heracles for wounding it. Another man was tranformed into this in the vale of Gargaphia as punishment for seeing Artemis naked. For 10 points, name this animal in whose form the unfortunate hunter Actaeon was then killed by his own dogs.;;(Red) (deer|stag|hind){1}?
British Literature;;One woman in this play claims to be twenty-nine years old when pink lampshades are present, and thirty otherwise. That woman breaks and then reforms her engagement with the gossipy Duchess of Berwick's brother, Augustus Lorton. For 10 points, the title character attempts to move out after finding check stubs made out to Mrs. Erlynne, but all is solved shortly after Erlynne's explanation for a certain object's presence in Lord Darlington's apartment, in what Oscar Wilde play?;;Lady Windermere's Fan
Physics;;The failure of this equation under certain conditions is described by Saint-Venant's Principle. It was extended to three dimensions by Cauchy, incorporating a compliance matrix. Its elementary isotropic form may include a term for Poisson's ratio, and it often includes the Young modulus as a constant of proportionality. Most simply expressed as F equals k times x, this law is inapplicable to zero-length springs. For 10 points, name this basic law of physics which says that stress is proportional to strain within the elastic limit.;;Hooke('s) (law)
European Literature;;In one of his more unusual works Pridamant consults a magician to find his lost son. He also wrote about a conspirator against Augustus Caesar who is unexpectedly pardoned by the emperor in his play Cinna. In one of his tragedies, an Armenian nobleman converts to Christianity and is martyred by the Romans. In addition to Polyeucte, his classical works include 1640's Horace and a 1637 play which sparked a literary controversy over its failure to observe the three unities. For 10 points, name this French dramatist of Le Cid.;;(Pierre) Corneille
Chemistry;;Along with the distance between atoms of a diatomic hydrogen molecule, this value can be calculated using the Heitler-London covalence theory. The gravitational variety is the work that must be done to separate an object into widely scattered dust. Iron is the most stable element because this energy of its nucleus is highest, and in terms of electromagnetic forces, it takes the form of ionization energy. For the hydrogen atom, it is 13.6 electron volts. For 10 points, what is this energy released when a composite system is separated into constituent parts?;;Binding energy
Philosophy;;The founder of this school was a student of Gorgias named Antisthenes. Another member of the school was a man who tried to live "according to nature" and adhered to a principle of independence known as autarkeia. That man was a native of Sinope (sin OH pee) who walked around with a lantern looking for an honest man, Diogenes (dye AH juh neez). For 10 points, name this school of ancient philosophers whose name comes from a Greek word for "dog".;;Cynic(s|ism)
World History;;His mysterious death came shortly after an uprising in which his subjects branded him a traitor and pelted him with stones. After his death, his daughter was rechristened as Isabel, and he was succeeded by his brother Cuitlahuac, who in turn was succeeded by Cuauhtemoc. This man's downfall began when he misinterpreted the arrival of conquistadors as the return of Quetzlcoatl and welcomed them into Tenochtitlan. For 10 points, name this Aztec ruler who was captured and put down by Hernando Cortez.;;Mo(n|c){1}?tezuma (II)
Geography;;Usually associated with low pressure, high humidity, and severe weather such as thunderstorms, they occur north of the equator off the African and Central American coasts. Carl Gustaf Rossby modified Hadley's interpretation for their existence by comparing them to the horse latitudes, which by contrast have high pressure. They are the source of hurricanes, and are found between belts of northeasterly and southwesterly trade winds. Caused by rising hotter air, they are also called intertropical convergence zones. For 10 points, name these equatorial regions of relative calm.;;(The) doldrum(s)
Art;;He produced illustrations for the National Police Gazette of prizefights and circuses, as well as the sculpture group Romulus and Remus. His acoustical ceiling for the auditorium of the Universidad Central de Venezuela is a large example of the type of work for which he is most famous, which also included his Mercury Fountain for the Spanish pavilion at the 1937 world's fair. For 10 points, name this creator of Lobster Trap and Fish Tail who invented the art forms of stabiles and mobiles.;;(Alexander) Calder
Astronomy;;A flare star was discovered 6 arc minutes south of it in 1983, and Alvan Clark discovered its companion star, which is located 20 astronomical units away from it, in 1862. A member of the Winter triangles with Betelgeuse and Procyon, it was while studying this white dwarf that Edmund Halley discovered that stars move relative to each other. For 10 points, name this brightest star in the nighttime sky, the alpha star of the constellation Canis Major, known as the "dog star".;;Sirius|canicula|HR2491|HD48915
British Literature;;The streams Alpheus and Arethusa are not allowed to mingle in this work, whose title character rides an eagle into the depths and comes upon the Garden of Adonis. Indifference is expressed in the "Cave of Quietude," while the Indian Maiden turns out to be Cynthia. The first book follows title mythical figure and his sister Peona as they gather to worship Pan. For 10 points, identify this poem in four books by John Keats, which informs us that "a thing of beauty is a joy forever".;;Endymion(: A Poetic Romance)
Mythology;;Also known as Yinepu, this god's cult was centered in Cynopolis, and he is sometimes said to have a daughter, the "cooling water" goddess Kebechet. He serves as the "ruler of the bows," and a mask depicting him was worn by priests while performing "the opening of the mouth". He compares the feather of Ma'at to the human heart in order to determine the destiny of each human soul. For 10 points, name this Egyptian god with a doglike head.;;An(ubis|pu){1}?
Music;;Its first use in an orchestra was in the 1675 opera Theseus, and it is one of the seven obbligato soloists in Benjamin Britten's Nocturne. It is the first instrument heard in Beethoven's Violin Concerto and engages in call-and-response with the orchestra in the scherzo of the Ninth Symphony. In Berlioz's Requiem, ten performers on eight pairs of them execute fully voiced chords. Fo 10 points, both pedal and chain varieties exist of what tunable percussion instrument also known as the kettledrum?;;Timpani
Geography;;Among the notable churches in this city are the Tyn and Loreta, as well as the Saints Peter and Paul Church at Vyšehrad (vee-shay-hrahd). A palace built in 1630 by Wallenstein is home to the Senate of the country where this city is found, and its Hradcany district houses the tombs of St. John Nepomuk and the St. Vitus Cathedral. For 10 points, the Vltava River runs under the Charles Bridge through what city, a capital located less than a hundred miles from both the German and Polish borders?;;Pra(gue|ha){1}?
European History;;His early years were dominated by his advisor Humphrey, the Duke of Gloucester, who eventually gave way to William de la Pole, the Earl of Suffolk. Events during his reign include the rebellion of Jack Cade and the founding of Eton College. His marriage to Margaret of Anjou led to his conflict with Richard of York, and, after being imprisoned in the Tower following the battle of Barnet, he was killed and Edward IV became king. For 10 points, what British monarch's rule saw the start of the Wars of the Roses?;;Henry (VI|the Sixth){1}?
American Literature;;In this novel, Jack and the central character watch a double feature of The Gay Woman and Trader Horn, and there is an ironic poster for corrupt state's attorney Buckley. Buddy envies his brother's job as a chauffeur, and Reverend Hammond fails in an attempted prison conversion. The communist Jan Erlone is framed for one murder, while Boris Max defends the title character after another. For 10 points, the murders of Mary Dalton and Bessie Mears occur in what novel about Bigger Thomas by Richard Wright?;;Native Son
Mythology;;This king of Cyprus had such children as Paphosm who founded the city of the same name. He is often called the grandfather of Adonis, because his daughter Metharme married Cinyras. Another figure of this name was the murderer of Sychause, his brother in law through his sister Dido. For 10 points, Aphrodite animated the bride of what man, who created and then married the statue Galatea?;;Pygmalion
United States History;;The Lacey Act expanded the scope of this previous bill by providing for the allotment of communally owned trust funds. Heavily amended by the Burke Act, its effects were studied by the 1924 Merriam Survey. Expanded in 1893 to the "Five Civilized Tribes," it ultimately exposed its subjects to land speculators. For 10 points, name this law intended to end tribal ownership and distribute titles to reservation land among individual Native Americans, a status known as "severalty".;;Dawes (General Allotment|Severalty) (Act)
Chemistry;;The best known example of them can be obtained from sulfuric acid in the Degussa-Weissenstein process, or from acid ammonium sulfate in the Münchner process. One example of this class of compounds is MEKP, which is used as a catalyst in plastics polymerization because it decomposes into a free radical. They can precipitate out of ether solutions forming explosive shock-sensitive solids. For 10 points, the hydrogen-containing HOOH is a variety of what class of compounds that contain two oxygen atoms linked by a covalent bond, best known for their use as bleaching agents?;;Peroxide(s)
United States History;;Fifty years later, this decision was overturned in the case of Brandenburg v. Ohio. The central concept of this decision was modified in the case of Whitney v. California, which introduced the so-called "bad tendency" test. The defendant in this case was a General Secretary of the Socialist Party, who was accused of violating 1917's Espionage Act. For 10 points, name this 1919 Supreme Court decision which established the "clear and present danger" test for whether speech was protected by the First Amendment.;;Schenck (v)(.) (United States)|(United States) (v)(.) Schenck
Biology;;The majority of the class Adenophorea is found in a marine environment, and thrashing movement in this phylum of animals results from contraction of longitudinal muscles. Containing a complete digestive tract, but no circulatory system, it has a thick cuticle that sheds four times in its lifetime. Including the cause of trichinosis and the cause of river blindness, it reproduces sexually by internal fertilization and has a body cavity not completely lined by mesoderm derived tissue. For 10 points, name this pseudocoelomate phylum of pinworms, hookworms, and roundworms.;;Nematod(a|es){1}?
United States History;;The man who assumed this post in 1936 went on to undermine the Ludlow Resolution and almost received a presidential nomination in 1940 thanks to the unpopularity of Henry Wallace. In addition to William Bankhead, it was held during the Civil War by future vice president Schuyler Colfax. Twentieth century occupants included Joseph Martin, Sam Rayburn, Tip O'Neill, and Newt Gingrich. For 10 points, name this position in the legislative branch, which was held until January 2007 by Dennis Hastert.;;Speaker of the House (of Representatives)
British Literature;;The title character's first wife, whose chief amusement in life is playing with her dog Jip, is the annoying Dora Spenlow. While at Salem House, the he befriends the duplicitous James Steerforth, who seduces Emily before dying in a shipwreck. Other characters in this work include the unpleasant Edward Murdstone, the protagonist's stepfather, and Betsy Trotwood, the protagonist's aunt and guardian after he runs away from home. The novel also features the flighty Mr. Micawber and the unctuous Uriah Heep. For 10 points, name this first-person-narrated work of Charles Dickens.;;David Copperfield
European History;;The first ruler of this dynasty was threatened by the Main and Bye Plots, and another ruler of this dynasty was a field commander at the Battle of the Dunes. The Convention Parliament brought its rule to an end, though its restoration in the persons of the Old and Young Pretenders was advocated throughout the eighteenth century by the Jacobites, who sought to reverse the Glorious Revolution. For 10 points, name this dynasty which moved out of Scotland to succeed the Tudors in England in the person of James I.;;Stuart(s) (Dynasty)
American Literature;;The main character of this novel loses a job digging tunnels and receives a hundred dollars from a drunk, and, after he is jailed for attacking a bartender who tries to steal his money, he meets safecracker Jack Duane in prison. That character says "I will work harder" when his wife Ona expresses financial concerns, but the death of Antanas causes the protagonist's turn to petty crime and then the Socialist Party. For 10 points, name this novel set in Packingtown and featuring Jurgis Rudkis.;;(The) Jungle
Religion;;Branches of this movement include the Gurneyites and Wilburites. Early leaders of this movement included Richard Farnsworth and James Nayler, and its birthplace was located at Swarthmore Hall in Lancashire. They were founded by the man who described "openings" in his Journal, George Fox, and known for their belief in non-violence and for living according to one's "the Inward". For 10 points, name this Christian group that founded the colony of Pennsylvania.;;(Society of) Friends|Quaker(s|ism){1}?
Physics;;Muons can shield repulsive electrical forces, allowing a muon-catalyzed variety of this process to occur at room temperature. One device that aims to utilize it in a controlled manner is named after Farnsworth and Hirsch, though a better-known device for it, which can contain conductors named Ioffe bars to control a magnetic field, is called a tokamak. For 10 points, name this mechanism that powers both the stars and the h-bomb, the coming-together of two light nuclei to form a heavier one.;;(Nuclear|atomic) fusion
Computer Science;;A deterministic one uses at most the square of the space a nondeterministic one uses to solve the same problem, according to Savitch's Theorem. The Wang B-model, despite only having four "instructions" can be shown to be equivalent to one, as can Emil Post's 4-tuple model. Rice's theorem states that non-trivial questions about one's behavior are undecidable, and Church's thesis states that any computable function can be computed by one of these. For 10 points, name this theoretical device which consists of some states, a read/write head and an infinitely long tape, named for a British computer scientist.;;Turing machine
United States History;;In the late 1966, she attempted to found a cooperative homestead for elderly women in Athens, Georgia, and Fiorello La Guardia tried to marry her in the 1920s. In 1968, at the age of 87, she led a group of women to Washington to protest the Vietnam War, and her statue represents Montana at the United States Capitol. For 10 points, identify this woman who gained notoriety for being the only member of Congress to vote against United States entry into World War II and was the first female Congress member.;;(Jeannette) Rankin
American Literature;;He met H.L. Mencken while working at the Baltimore American and secured that editor's help to publish "Pastorale". His novels include Butterfly, about incest in Kentucky, and Mignon, set during Reconstruction. He created the Twin Oaks Tavern, Phyllis Nirdlinger, and the attorney Katz, who defends Cora Papadakis and Frank Chambers after both are charged with the murder of Cora's husband Nick. For 10 points, identify this writer of Double Indemnity and The Postman Always Rings Twice.;;(James) (Mallahn) Cain
Art;;Designed by J.W. Mould and Calvert Vaux, the Thomas J. Watson library was added by McKim, Mead, and White. Noted contributors through the years included Andre Meyer and Robert Lehman and it features a Costume Institute. Robert Campin's Merode Altarpiece is housed in its other branch, The Cloisters, while the permanent collection includes David's The Death of Socrates and the Temple of Dendur. For 10 points identify this institution that opened in 1880 and sits on Central Park facing Fifth Avenue.;;(The) Met(ropolitan) (Museum) (of Art)
Chemistry;;First developed in 1908 to study acidosis, caused by the presence of carbonic acid in the blood, it is incorrect in the presence of additional species, as the change in ionic activity affects solubilities. It does not hold for weak acids and bases, as they dissociate too easily, and it only works for polyprotic acids if a certain value disparate for all acids involved. For 10 points, name this equation which states that the pH of a solution is equal to the sum of the acid dissociation constant and the logarithm of the quotient of the molar concentrations of a base and an acid.;;Henderson(-)Hasselbalch (equation)
Religion;;His name is formed from the vowels on the word "shame" being added to the root for "king," and he is one of several sun gods in his pantheon, being specifically responsible for the deleterious effects of the sun, in addition to his role as patron of wealth. Ahaz, Amon, and Manasseh upheld the worship of this god at Topheth, in Gehenna, until Josiah destroyed that site. For 10 points, name this Caananite god to whom children were sacrificed in a cult that earned stern dissaproval from the Hebrew monotheistic reformers.;;Moloch|Makkal|Milcom
Religion;;"The Poets," "The Spider," and "Smoke" are some of them. This classification system is sometimes ignored in favor of thirty equal-length divisons called juz. They are divided into "ayahs," and about a quarter of them are preceeded by the "fatihah". They are usually transcribed with the place they were received at the start, as well as the "basmalah". For 10 points, name these length-ordered chapters of the Quran.;;Sura(h)(s)
Physics;;Unlike its companion quantity, the true value of this quantity is linearly proportional to its engineering value. The state of this can be determined using Mohr's circle. The yield strength is the maximum amount of this that can be applied to a material before it becomes inelastic, beyond which this causes plastic deformation. For 10 points, name this quantity having units of pressure that is symbolized sigma; that causes strain; and that measures roughly how much pressure a material experiences.;;Stress
Geography;;Notable monasteries may be found in the Troodos Mountains, of this island's west. The cities of Gazimagusa (GAH-zee-mah-OO-sah) and Famagusta survived the Venetian, Genoese and Lusignan periods. Its main port is located in Limassol, while the usual English name for its capital is an Italian word, rather than the name used by both major ethnic groups here. For 10 points, name this island split into a little-recognized Turkish republic and an EU member that speaks Greek and whose capital is Nicosia.;;Cyprus|Kypros|Kibris
World Literature;;His time in the United States was the subject of his The City of the Yellow Devil. He wrote of his self-education in My Universities and penned social realist works such as Mother. His final work, The Life of Klim Samgin, was unfinished, and he earlier wrote about a group of pretzel bakers who idolize Tanya and about the thief Vaska Pepel's existence in a slum run by Mikhail Kostilyoff. For 10 points, name this author of "Twenty-Six Men and a Girl" and The Lower Depths.;;(Maxim) Gorky|(Aleksey) (Maksimovich) Peshkov
Chemistry;;The negative gradient of this quantity is known as the chemical force. The differential of this property multiplied by the concentration appears on one side of the Gibbs-Duhem relation, which demonstrates that it is not independent of a system's other properties. Posited by Gibbs, it can be understood as the increase in a system's internal energy due only to the addition of an infinitesimal amount of a substance. For 10 points, name this chemical property that is equal for substances in equilibrium and that is symbolized mu.;;Chemical potential
Music;;Following a stroke, he stopped writing for piano and created such harp works as The Death of Saint Narcissus and Eight Folk Song Arrangements. This composer of the Cello Symphony and the Sinfonia da Requiem wrote the Bridge Variations, while another of his works takes a theme from Henry Purcell's Adelazer to demonstrate the sound of several symphonic instruments. For 10 points, name this composer who used Wilfred Owen's poems in his War Requiem and wrote the Young Person's Guide to the Orchestra.;;(Baron) (Edward) (Benjamin) Britten (of Aldeburgh)
Mythology;;This process was paused midway through so that the jellyfish-shaped god of juvenile health, Hirugo, could be born. At the same time, the Central August Pillar was built as a home for those who conducted it. This feat was accomplished from Amano-ukihashi, a floating bridge, by stirring the ocean with the "celestial jewel spear". Onogoro was the first of the nine islands to appear during this process. For 10 points, name this feat accomplished by Izanami and Izanagi, which gave the kami of Shinto a place to reign.;;Creation of Japan(ese islands)
British Literature;;One of her works follows Miss La Trobe's staging of a historical pageant at Pointz Hall for the Olivers, while another features the suicide of Septimus Smith. She experimented with her trademark style in Night and Day and also wrote Jacob's Room and The Voyage Out, but the most prominent example of her method might be the story of an Isle of Skye vacation by the Ramsay family. For 10 points, name this member of the Bloomsbury Group who used the stream of consciousness technique in the novel To the Lighthouse.;;(Adeline) (Virginia) Woolf
United States History;;She claimed to receive a vision of Demosthenes instructing her to start a brokerage firm with Cornelius Vanderbilt's money. Using the profits, she hired Stephen Andrews to write in favor of the free-love movement Pantarchy. Her magazine also exposed the infidelity of Henry Ward Beecher and publised the first English translation of the Communist Manifesto. For 10 points, name this rival of Susan B. Anthony who founded the National Radical Reformers and received the Equal Rights Party's 1872 presidential nomination.;;(Victoria) (Claflin) Woodhull
Chemistry;;In the fractional quantium Hall effect, the Hall conductance plateaus at this value squared divided by Planck's constant, and it is multiplied by two, then divided by a particle's mass in the Child-Langmuir equation, which dictates the current density between two diodes in a vacuum. The Faraday constant is simply this value multiplied by Avogadro's number, as it describes the electromagnetic interaction of a mole of a certain particle. For 10 points, name this physical constant whose value was approximated by the Millikan oil drop experiment, equal to 1.602 times 10-19 Coulombs and symbolized by a lowercase 'e'.;;Electron charge
World History;;Some of these people fought the Musket Wars, in which the Ngati Whatua tribe defeated the Ngapuhi. In the 1840s, another group of this people fought the Flagstaff War around the Bay of Islands. They were also involved in the Taranaki Wars, the Waikato War, and Te Kooti's War, all of which were fought after William Hobson and their leader Hone Heke signed a treaty in 1840. For 10 points, Britain signed the Treaty of Waitangi with what native inhabitants of New Zealand?;;Maori
Miscellaneous;;Vernon and Cattell hypothesized a hierarchical model for it that involves fluid and a crystallized components. Its heritability was traced by Galton, the Wechsler scale attempts to measure it, and Howard Gardner found "multiple" types of it. Stephen Jay Gould argued against a popular way of quantifying it in The Mismeasure of Man, while Terman's scale for it revised a quotient used by Simon and Binet. For 10 points, name this general mental capability often expressed as a "quotient" by the controversial IQ test.;;Intelligence
Music;;The finale of his first string quartet contains a high E flat representing the effects of tinnitus. He composed of forty-two operas, including the nationalistic Dalibor and Libuse, but the only one remaining in the repertory is the tale of title character Marenka ending up with Jeník. This composer of From My Life and The Bartered Bride also wrote a suite of tone poems, My Country, which contains a section about a Bohemian river. For 10 points, name this composer of The Moldau.;;(Bedrich) Smetana
Miscellaneous;;He displaced the Alexander Wilson text as a standard reference, after he collaborated with William MacGillivray on a book that was published by Robert Havell. His later works include a collaboration with John Bachman on a book about "viviparous quadrupeds" after this Haiti-born namesake of a current conservation group fled the French draft. For 10 points, name this author of Ornithological Biography and The Birds of America.;;(John) (James) Audubon|(Fougere|Jean) Rabin
United States History;;He collaborated with Petroleum Nasby on a series of writings that satirized the South. His early days were spent popularizing Garibaldi's mission to unify Italy and he later lived in Ecuador as consul under Teddy Roosevelt. Lincoln called his work the best recruiting tool of the Civil War, and this man's depiction of the Americus Fire Company as a rapacious tiger helped to bring down Boss Tweed. For 10 points, name this Harper's illustrator who invented the party symbolism of the elephant and donkey.;;(Thomas) Nast
Chemistry;;If this quantity is held constant, the value of the partial derivative of temperature with respect to pressure can be used to find a compound's Joule-Thomson coefficient. Held constant in throttling processes, it is equal to the maximum possible energy change in isobaric processes. The Legendre transform of internal energy with respect to PV, changes in this quantity can be indirectly calculated using Hess' Law. Equal to a system's internal energy plus its pressure times volume, for 10 points, name this thermodynamic quantity abbreviated H.;;Enthalpy
American Literature;;This author of the anti-war Aria da Cappo wrote about "The Merry Maid" and "MacDougal Street" in a poetry collection and also penned The Murder of Lidice and Wine From Those Grapes. Her Distressing Dialogues came out under the pen name Nancy Boyd, and another of her poems notes to "ah, my foes, and oh, my friends" that "My candle burns at both ends". For 10 points, name this author of "Renascence," The Ballad of the Harp-Weaver, and A Few Figs From Thistles.;;(Edna) (St. Vincent) Millay
Mythology;;He fathered Rti with Aramati, which identifies this god with Dyaus Pitar and therefore Jupiter and Zeus. His messenger Sraosha lives in a thousand-pillared house and must be present at all rituals, and Vohu Manah is among the other amesha spentas who aid his work. He is variously called the creator god or one of the twin sons of Zurvan. For 10 points, name this patron of the good who combats Ahriman in Zoroastrianism.;;Ahura Mazda
Biology;;The presence of this material leads to a rare phenomenon known as the Bishop's Ring, a faint bluish corona. One form of it is called pozzolana, and it is often a main component of lahars along with mud and water. It can be called lapilli when it becomes larger in diameter, since it is the smallest basic form of tephra. Its presence in the atmosphere led to the "nuclear winter" experienced after Tambora in 1815. For 10 points, give the term for the fine particles of rock ejected during a volcanic eruption.;;(Volcanic) ash
Art;;One of the three figures depicted in this work carries a fur blanket over her left shoulder and stands in front of two tapestries. She watches another woman on the floor who is wearing a white dress and is kneeling in front of a chest. In the foreground, the title figure's hair is draped over her shoulders and she holds flowers in her right hand. Commissioned by Guidobaldo de Rovere for his young bride, perhaps its most notable feature is the frankness with which the unclothed woman on the bed looks out at the viewer. For 10 points identify this 1538 depiction of a nude as the namesake goddess, a work by Titian.;;(The) Venus of Urbino
British Literature;;The preface to this work discusses such figures as Tito Pagliardini and Alexander J. Ellis. In the final act, one character laments that Ezra D. Wannafeller has left him money, on the condition that he lecture on moral reform six times a year. The play opens in Covent Garden, where Freddy Eynsford-Hill runs into a flower girl who comes to the attention of Colonel Pickering and another expert on phonetics. Name this work about Professor Henry Higgins and Eliza Doolittle, a play by George Bernard Shaw.;;Pygmalion
Mythology;;Pictures of the "ba" or deceased soul in Egyptian art often resembled these. One of these creatures retrieved a ransom of a cup of amrita in order to rescue his mother Vinata from the snakes of Patala. That one is the king of these animals in Hindu myth and was the steed of Vishnu, named Garuda. Heracles killed the Stymphalian kind, while in Arabian myth the rocs are very large examples. For 10 points, name this class of animal whose bodies joined the heads of women to form the Harpies.;;Bird(s)
Biology;;It is theorized that RNA interference may have evolved as a mechanism to limit their activity, and in Drosophila melanogaster they are known as P elements and are commonly used for sequence insertion, having only emerged within the last 50 years. Some use reverse transcriptase to ensure their transmission, while others are cut and pasted in, with DNA polymerase assisting. First discovered in 1948 and known to make up about 50% of the corn genome, for 10 points, what are these mobile genetic elements responsible for the varying colors of corn and associated with Barbara McClintock?;;Transposon(s)
World History;;It was to occur in Hoddesdon at Richard Rumbold's namesake estate, but its failure resulted in the Earl of Essex committing suicide. Precipitated by the dissolution of Parliament after the introduction of the Exclusion Bill, it was foiled by a fire that cancelled the Horse Races at nearby Newmarket. The most prominent executions in its aftermath involved Whig leaders Lord William Russell and Algernon Sydney. For 10 points, identify this 1683 event, a conspiracy to assassinate Charles II.;;Rye House (Plot)
Biology;;The hydrostatic pressure of the false kind of this entity, defined by its lack of endothelial lining, provides a primitive skeletal structure in Kinoryncha and similar animals. In protostomes it undergoes split body development from solid masses of mesoderm, while in deutorostomes it develops from the archenteron of the gastrula. Platyhelmenthes is the most developed phylum without one, instead featuring parenchyma tissue. For 10 points, name this thign located between an organism's endoderm and mesoderm tissue, a body cavity common to all complex animals.;;Coelom
Religion;;Cereal magnate John Kellogg served this religious movement as the superintendent of their Western Health Reform Institute, whose patients included fellow cereal mogul C.W. Post. This movement is heavily influenced by the Book of Daniel's reference to the "cleansing of the heavenly sanctuary". The failure of the end of the world to occur on October 22, 1844 is referred to by members of this movement as the Great Disappointment. For 10 points, name this William Miller-founded sect which believes that the end of the world is imminent and keeps the Sabbath on Saturday.;;(Seventh Day) Adventism|Millerites
Religion;;A Christian offshoot called the Kardecian Spiritism movement greatly changed this religion's theology in the 1880s, and one becomes initiated into the devotional part of this religion at a bembé. The goal of this system is to manipulate ashe (AH-shay), and methods of doing so such as the sacrifice of chickens during services has been constitutionally protected in the U.S. since 1994. For 10 points, name this syncreitc religion of Yoruban and Catholic beliefs, which venerates the Lukumi or Orishas.;;Santeria
World Literature;;In his short story "The Madman" a once proud civic leader is robbed of his clothes and, subsequently, of his status. "Dead Man's Path" considers the struggles of modernity and is collected in Girls at War. His criticism of V.S. Naipaul's continental vision can be found in Home and Exile, while his own novels include the tale of Nanga, a Minister of Culture, and the teacher, Odili, who opposes him. That work, A Man of the People was preceded by his critique of missionary schools, Arrow of God. For 19 points, name this author of a 1951 work about the tragic life of Okonkwo, Things Fall Apart.;;(Chinua) Achebe
Music;;Since 2000, he has created A Flowering Tree and Dharma at Big Sur. He large-scale orchestral compositions include Naïve and Sentimental Music, a Violin Concerto, and My Father Knew Charles Ives. Smaller works include the fanfares Tromba lontana and Short Ride in a Fast Machine. One of his operas inspired his related piece "The Chairman Dances," while another was inspired by a ship hijacking. For 10 points, name this American composer of The Death of Klinghoffer and Nixon in China.;;(John) Adams
Geography;;This body of water contains the islands Texel (Tessel) and Heligoland, acquired by Germany in 1890 in exchange for a withdrawal of claims on Zanzibar. In this body of water's Dogger Bank, the Russian Baltic fleet nearly caused an international crisis by firing upon fishing trawlers during the Russo-Japanese War. Lindisfarne Island in this sea was the site of a major Viking raid, and among its outlets are The Wash and Skaggerak. For 10 points, name this sea surrounded by Britain, Norway, Germany, and Holland.;;(The) North Sea
British Literature;;One character becomes enraged when addressed as "Simey," while another attempts to find the true answer to why the chicken crossed the road. A deckchair attendant leaves the title event early to play chess, and the central character's glasses are broken during a game of blindman's bluff. Nat Goldberg and Dermot McCann eventually drive the protagonist insane with vague accusations. For 10 points, the boardinghouse of Meg Boles is where Stanley Webber celebrates a personal anniversary in what Harold Pinter play?;;(The) Birthday Party
Earth Science;;Lesser known mineral forms of this chemical compound include ikaite, vaterite, and aragonite. Known in the ceramics industry as whiting, it can be used as an ingredient in glazes as well as to neutralize the effect of acid rain in river ecosystems. When formed from its corresponding hydroxide, it can be used to sequester carbon dioxide from the atmosphere, making it useful for underground repositories. For 10 points, identify this substance responsible for the formation of stalagmites and stalactites in caverns and hard water, which is also known as limestone or chalk.;;Calcium carbonate
World History;;One writer produced by this ethnic group was Paul the Deacon, who wrote their namesake history. Their notable kings included Alboin, who destroyed the rival Gepidae; Rothari, who assembled their law codel and Agilulf, who negotiated peace with the Byzantine exarchate. Via the local gostalds, this group ruled from Pavia for two centuries until Charlemagne conquered them in 774. For 10 points, identify this Germanic tribe whose occupation of northern Italy gives that region its name.;;Lombard(s)|Langobardi
United States History;;A militia sent by governor John Reynolds was turned back by forces under this man, who were attempting to sow crops. However, his ultimate defeat led to the confiscation of Winnebago lands and the Bad Axe River massacre. A British ally in the War of 1812, this man endured a long struggle for leadership with the American-backed Keokuk before resisting an attempt to remove Native Americans from the Rock River valley in Illinois. For 10 points, name this Sauk and Fox leader who lends his name to an 1832 war.;;Black Hawk
Astronomy;;A surprising 1998 flare from this object has led to its classification as BY Draconis variable V2500 Ophiuchi. Van de Kamp claimed that this M4 object has two satellites, making it the target of Project Daedalus. It should replace Proxima Centauri as the Sun's nearest neighbor within the next 10,000 years, and this red dwarf's proper motion of over 10 arcseconds per year is the largest known. For 10 points, name this faint star that is currently fourth closest to the Sun and is named for an English astronomer.;;Barnard(')(s) Star
Music;;He was inspired by Beethoven's Ninth to write "music fertilized by poetry, not merely poetry set to music". After writing a work based on a Bulwer-Lytton novel and an operetta based on Measure for Measure, he moved on to adapt the story of a pair of lovers in Celtic myth. He made use of a theme that labels characters and gave dramatic meaning called the leitmotif. For 10 points, name this composer of The Ban on Love, Rienzi, and Tristan and Isolde who created the four-opera Ring cycle.;;(Wilhelm) (Richard) Wagner
Math Theory;;The lensmaker's formula is derived by inserting the small angle approximation with respect to the phase change into this physical rule. Variational in nature, this lemma is equivalent to the principle of stationary action for a ray of light. This optical principle can be used to derive Snell's law or Huygens' principle by inserting proper assumptions. For 10 points, name this principle from optics which states that a ray of light takes the path that minimizes its transport time and is named for a French polymath.;;Fermat(')(s) (principle) (of) (least) (time)
United States History;;This decision discusses a passage from the Aeneid in which the battles of Troy are depicted in Carthage. The act under review granted rights to John Fitch and then transferred the privilege to Robert Livingston, who licensed another man to run between Elizabeth Point and New York City. That conflicted with Congress's licensure of a competing service. For 10 points, name this 1824 Supreme Court decision which ruled that Congress's power over interstate navigation covered steamboat monopolies.;;Gibbons (v)(.) (Ogden)
United States History;;Their first "castle" was organized in Cincinnati by George Bickley, and this group advocated filibustering in Mexico. Before they were curbed by Governor Morton of Indiana, they were attacked by the Loyal Publication Society and accused by General Burnside of violating General Order 38. George McClellan was forced to disavow their platform in the 1864 election. For 10 points, name this group let by Clement Vallandigham and comprised of northern Democrats who opposed the Civil War.;;Copperhead(s)
World Literature;;The protagonist of this book insults a female acquaintance by comparing her to a "broom tree" before doing the "Waves of the Blue Sea" dance. The story continues through such sections as "A Wreath of Cloud" and "The Bridge of Dreams" until the protagonist marries a girl he raised who shares her name with the author. The title character is the son of Kiritsubo and has affairs with Lady Aoi, Yugao, and Utsuemi. For 10 points, name this book often called the world's oldest novel, which was written by Murasaki Shikibu.;;(The) Tale of Genji
United States History;;This phrase appeared two times in a speech that also encouraged the defenders of communism to come and see its effects. Delivered at the Rudolph Wilde Platz in front of the Schöneberg Rathaus, that speech described an eighteen-year siege and claimed that the phrase described all "free men" much as the invocation of Roman citizenship once did. For 10 points, name this grammatically unassailable declaration by John F. Kennedy which few native speakers would mistake for equivocation with a jelly doughnut.;;Ich bin ein Berliner
European History;;Plutarch pairs this man with Fabius Maximus, and he is usually portrayed wearing a helmet, because he was sensitive about his overlong head. His own law revoking Athenian citizenship from those with foreign parents led to his shady relationship with Aspasia, and he developed the "island on land" method for dealing with Sparta. For 10 points, name this rebuilder of the Parthenon who gave a certain funeral oration while leading Athens through the first part of the Peloponnesian War.;;Pericles
European History;;His Letter to Coroticus was a denunciation of British mistreatment of Christians, and he received the tonsure at the monastery at Lerins. The son of Calpurnius, he took the place of St. Palladius in 432, and his gained his first converts at Tara. He wrote the spiritual autobiography Confessio, and in that work he discusses how a letter from Victoricus convinced him to travel to a certain country where he supposedly drove out all the snakes. For 10 points, name this pirate-captured man who became the patron saint of Ireland.;;(St)(.) Patrick
American Literature;;This writer's final work focused on the troubled courtship of the educated Jim Meserve and Arvay Henson, a poor rural woman, while, in this author's first novel, John Buddy Pearson becomes the pastor of Zion Hope Church. Perhaps best known in her lifetime for the anthropological works Tell My Horse and Mules and Men, another of her novels follows Joe Starks, Logan Killiks, and Tea Cake, the husbands of Janie Crawford. For 10 points, identify this writer of Their Eyes Were Watching God.;;(Zora) (Neale) Hurston
Philosophy;;A noted twentieth-century commentary on this man's work was the product of a lecture course given in the 1930s by Alexandre Kojève. A group of thinkers which included Bruno Bauer and David Strauss was known as the "young" followers of this man. His own writings, which follow the rise from "mere consciousness" to true spiritual being as Geist, include the Science of Logic and the Philosophy of Right. For 10 points, name this German author of the Phenomenology of Spirit who influenced Karl Marx.;;(Georg) (Wilhelm) (Friedrich) Hegel
Current Events;;Abbot Laboratories announced the 2007 end of shipments of Kaletra to this country, which announced that it will ignore patents for that AIDS medication. Currently ruled by the Council for National Security, it is embroiled in a controversy over whether Buddhism should be state-sanctioned in order to challenge an Islamic insurgency in the south. For 10 points, name this country where the TRT party was overthrown in a September 2006 military coup that deposed prime minister Thaksin Sinawatra.;;(Kingdom) (of) Thailand
Math Theory;;They often have a Hausdorff dimension that exceeds the topological dimension in which they are drawn by a non-integer value; that value is 1.0686, for the Gosper island, and 1.974 for Penrose tiling. An example of them is created by dividing a cube into 27 smaller cubes and removing the center 7 cubes, then performing the same operation on each remaining cube ad infinitum, resulting in the Menger Sponge. For 10 points, name these recursively defined, self-similar geometric objects, examples of which include the Koch Snowflake, Sierpinski gasket, and Mandelbrot set.;;fractal(s)
Music;;Its "tone holes" are manipulated by keys based on the Oehler, Müller (MEELL uh) or Albert systems. In the finale of Alban Berg's Violin Concerto, four of them play the chorale "Es ist genug," using Bach's original harmonization. When its name is not modified, it usually refers to the variety in B-flat, although it can also exist in E-flat, A, bass, and contrabass varieties. For 10 points, name this instrument which possesses the largest range among woodwinds and supplants the oboe in a marching band.;;clarinet(s)
Philosophy;;One of this author's works is addressed to a woman named Marcia, and advises her to be consoled for the death of her son. This man's friend Paulinus is the addressee of the essay On the Shortness of Life, while his other philosophical works include the dialogue On Providence. He satirized the Roman emperor Claudius in a work which describes that ruler's "pumpkinification," though he may be better known for his eight surviving tragedies, including Thyestes and a Latin version of Medea. For 10 points, name this Roman author and Stoic philosopher who was compelled to commit suicide by Nero.;;(Lucius) (Annaeus) Seneca (the) (Younger)
Biology;;One of its catalysts has a phospho-histidine binding site for a precursor of porphyrins and hemes. Except for succinate dehydrogenase and the alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase complex, all of its enzymes are dissolved in the mitochondrial matrix. 140 kilocalories per mole of energy are released, a third of which is captured in ATP, FADH2, and three NADHs for each acetyl coA molecule entered. For 10 points, name this cycle following pyruvate oxidation that generates reduced carriers for the electron transport chain.;;(Krebs|Citric Acid){1}? (cycle)
Geography;;Its plains and highlands were united by Amyntas III and a king here named Perseus waged unsuccessful war against Rome in the second century BCE. Antigonus II Gonatas established a namesake dynasty here after defeating the Galatians, and Antipater and Cassander controlled it from the capital of Pella. For 10 points, name this land located north of Greece on the Balkan Peninsula, whose kings included Philip II and Philip's son, Alexander the Great.;;Macedon(ia)
Art;;The painter's lost love Anna Landolt is often called the model for the woman in this painting. That woman tosses her head and arms back and wears a yellow locket as well as a flowing white garment, though the red curtain in the background and the yellow-and-pink blanket on which the woman is lying are less notable than an animal and a demonic creature. For 10 points, a glowing-eyed horse at the left and the succubus sitting on the woman's chest stand out from what 1790 grotesque painting by Henry Fuseli?;;(The) Nightmare
Physics;;This quantity is the first adiabatic invariant for the motion of a charged particle in a uniform induction. The potential energy due to one of these is minus the dot product of it with the B-field, while the torque on one is the cross product of it with the B-field. The one associated with the electron is quantized in a unit named for Bohr and the one due to a current loop is equal to the current times the directed area. For 10 points, name this vector quantity symbolized mu [mew] and indicating the strength of a magnetic dipole.;;magnetic (dipole) moment
Geography;;The capital of this country hosts the so-called Republic of Uzhupis. Occupying the northern part of the Curonian Spit, its main port was once known as Memel. Its current second city, Kaunas, was an interwar capital, as the current capital was in the hands of Poland. For 10 points, name this country on the north of Kaliningrad, northeast of Poland, and northwest of Belarus, whose other border on the south of Latvia makes it the southernmost of the three Baltic republics.;;(Republic) (of) Lithuania
United States History;;This man moved to the Femme Osage district of Missouri after the Spanish governor offered him a large grant of land and the title of syndic. After being adopted into the Shawnee tribe, he was given a name which meant "Big Turtle" by Chief Blackfish. A book describing his exploits was published by John Filson in 1784, which described his work for the Transylvania Company to create the Wilderness Road. For 10 points, name this American frontiersman who pioneered the settlement of Kentucky.;;(Daniel) Boone
American Literature;;Farnley and Ma Grier are forced to drive horses away in this novel, in which Major Tetley and Gerald kill themselves and Davies blames himself for what happened. Judge Tyler is unable to stop the events arising from a ride to the town of Bridger's Wells, when news about the supposed death of the cowboy Kincaid causes Art Croft and Gil Carter to join the posse. For 10 points, name this novel in which Donald Martin is lynched, written by Walter van Tilburg Clark.;;(The) Ox(-)Bow Incident
Mythology;;A bounty was placed on her, to be paid in seven kisses, and she was dissuaded from killing herself by a talking tower. Because of a hot drop of oil which this woman spilled from a lamp, Wit, Grace, and Pleasure left the world. The Oracle of Miletus predicted that she would marry a monster atop a mountain, and her sisters told her to stab her mysterious husband whom they thought was a snake. For 10 points, name this woman whose beauty was so great that she distracted the worshippers of Aphrodite and caused Eros to fall in love.;;Psyche
Chemistry;;It was discovered numerous times during the nineteenth century when its monomer was left exposed to sunlight. Commercial applications failed due to its brittle nature, caused by dipole interactions between chains, until Waldo Seemon discovered that exposure to certain boiling solvents would make the compound more flexible and durable. The phthalate esters now most often used for that purpose are suspected carcinogens. For 10 points, free radical polymerization is used to make what substance, denoted by resin identification code 3 and often used in house siding, pipes, and shower curtains?;;p(oly)v(inyl) c(hloride)
British Literature;;This author lamented "How fast has brother followed brother / From sunshine to the sunless land" in his "Extempore Effusion upon the Death of James Hogg". He wrote "My hopes no more must change their name" in a poem addressing the title concept as "Stern Daughter of the Voice of God," the "Ode to Duty". He began one sonnet with the line "Earth has not anything to show more fair" to describe a view from Westminster Bridge, while another sonnet proclaims "It is a beauteous evening, calm and free". For 10 points, name this Romantic poet of "Lines Composed a Few Miles Above Tintern Abbey".;;(William) Wordsworth
Mythology;;His wife left him to become the ruler of the fifth netherworld. Fisaga was the only wind he left free, and he also captured and beat up the sun in order to extort a longer day. His attempt to gain immortality was derailed by the laughter of a songbird, which caused the goddess of death to crush him, while his mother was the inventor of cooking, Taranga. His most visible exploit was using a fishing line to bring the New Zealand's North Island to the surface. For 10 points, name this Polynesian trickster god.;;Maui
Religion;;It was founded in Connecticut in 1882 by Michael J. McGivney and is currently led by Carl Anderson. It operates United in Charity and was responsible for popularizing an October holiday. Its equivalent for women is the Daughters of Isabella, and this group operates the missionary Information Service, and financed the 1980s restoration of St. Peter's. Its organization was inspired by the Freemasons. For 10 points, identify this Catholic fraternal society named for an explorer.;;Knights of Columbus
Biology;;John Cairns visualized this molecule by autoradiography, and it can be purified by phenol extraction. Its B version has anti beta glycosidic bonds, while its Z version has syn deoxyguanylate glycosidic bonds. Its snapback regions interact during denaturation, while its 2-fold rotationally symmetric segments form into hairpins. With ends joined into knotted loops, it can be studied by hybridization. Its major and minor grooves form because its sugar-phosphate backbones are offset in anti-parallel configuration. For 10 points, name this double helical genetic molecule.;;d(eoxyribo)n(ucleic) a(cid)
American Literature;;This work notes that Henry Hudson and Vitus Bering achieved great success with inferior equipment and opens three epigraphs, including a quote from Beaumont and Fletcher's The Honest Man's Fortune. Traditional prayer is dubbed a "disease of the will," society is called "a conspiracy against the manhood" of all, and Copernicus, Galileo, and Socrates are listed among the great and therefore "misunderstood". For 10 points, America is called upon to develop its own culture in what Ralph Waldo Emerson essay?;;Self(-)Reliance
Mythology;;These people believed that the god of death turned all of humanity into rocks and created a new race from three eggs, and that another god would send rain if a black dog was tied up to starve. Their sun god Inti swims underneath the Earth each night, while their chief god had a name meaning "sea foam" and created miniature clones of himself to aid in creation. For 10 points, Viracocha was the head of the pantheon for what group, who believed that Manco Capac founded Cuzco?;;Inca(n)(s)
Economics;;It exists when the Herfindahl index is just above 1800, or when a firm's demand curve shows a discontinuity due to price increases being subject to elastic demand but prince decreases being inelastic. That is known as the "kinked demand curve" characterizing this situation, where non-price competition dominates and each firm can affect but not control the market. The American steel and automobile industries are common examples. For 10 points, name this situation that exists when four firms control more than forty percent of the market, but no one firm does.;;oligopoly
World History;;This group conquered Masyaf castle under the command of Rashid ad-Din, who took the title "mountain chief". They arose during a succession crisis upon the death of al-Mustansir, a Fatimid caliph. Based in Iran near Kazvin at the fortress of Alamut, they killed two Abassid caliphs and wounded Saladin. For 10 points, name this group from the Nizari Ismailite sect of Shia Islam, whose name, derived from their alleged use of an intoxicant, has come to refer to anyone who commits political murder.;;assassin(s)
Music;;He wrote the play The Leper as well as an opera about an alien invasion called Help, Help, the Globolinks! He founded the Festival of Two Worlds at Charleston, South Carolina and Spoleto, Italy and wrote libretti for operas by others, including A Hand of Bridge and Vanessa by his good friend Samuel Barber. On his own, he wrote about a character who donates a crutch to the baby Jesus in the first opera to premiere on television. For 10 points, name this composer of Amahl and the Night Visitors.;;(Gian) (Carlo) Menotti
European History;;Key moments leading up to its date with destiny included the attacks at St. Vincent and Portland and the decision to wait at Calais for the duke of Parma. When the Dutch made the rendezvous impossible and a fire caused confusion, Charles Howard's contingent sprang into action, overwhelming Medina-Sedonia's cannons. Ultimately it was attacked at Gravelines, where Frobisher and Drake dispersed it. For 10 points, name this force that failed to overthrow Elizabeth I even though Philip II assembled 30,000 men on 130 ships.;;(Spanish) Armada
British Liteature;;Sylphs guard the dress of the main character against coffee stains in this work, which begins when Shock awakens his mistress upon spying a letter. The wrath of Thalestris is obtained in order to demand that Sir Plume confront the villain, after a journey to the cave of Spleen by Umbriel. All begins during a game of ombre on a cruise on the Thames, when Lord Petrie performs the title action on Belinda. For 10 points, identify this mock-epic by Alexander Pope about the taking of a tuft of hair.;;(The) Rape of the Lock
Physics;;The Poincaré group contains these and space-time translations as these operations are rotations of Minkowski space. Their namesake factor, gamma, is one over the square root of one minus the square of the speed parameter and is the factor by which lengths are divided in the FitzGerald contraction. By correspondence, these reduce to the Gallilean transformations as the speed vanishes. For 10 points, name these transformations between reference frames fundamental to special relativity and named for a Danish physicist.;;Lorentz (transform)(s)
United States History;;Arkansas Senator Joseph Robinson was expected to be one of the first beneficiaries of this program, which was made unnecessary by the retirement of Willis Van Devanter and a surprise vote by Owen Roberts. Targeting anyone who did not retire at age seventy, it was a response to the overturning of the Bituminous Coal Conservation Act and to the decision in the Sick Chicken case. For 10 points, name this New Deal scheme to counteract conservative influence on the Supreme Court by creating new judicial seats.;;(Franklin) (Delano) (Roosevelt)(')(s) court packing (plan)
Art;;One of his paintings features a man reading the newspaper in the center while a tophatted gentleman inspects a product in the foreground and several others lean against windows. In another, an unhappy-looking woman with a large piece of headgear sits with a disheveled man around a glass of green liquid. For 10 points, name this painter of The Cotton Exchange at New Orleans and The Absinthe Drinker who used recurring themes in such works as The Morning Bath, The Steeplechase, and Dance Class.;;(Hillaire) (Germain) (Edgar) Degas
Chemistry;;Gordy suggested it could be seen as the potential at an atom's surface defined as the effective nuclear charge over atomic radius. It can be approximated from work functions of metals or from force constants from IR spectrographs. These approximations can be adjusted via approximate scales such as the Allred-Rochow, Mulliken, or Pauling scales. Francium has the lowest value of, for 10 points, what measure of an atom's ability to attract electrons, for which fluorine has the highest value?;;electronegativity
Religion;;Those who obey it strictly will never eat in the dark and will wear the mukhavastrika, a facemask. The anuvrata only must practice it towards animals, but the mahavrata must pay attention to all jiva with this principle, including insects, plants, and atoms. For 10 points, name this principle of "noninjury" which dominates Jainism and is important to Hinduism and Gandhi's satyagraha.;;ahimsa
Chemistry;;This technique can result in an enhancement known as the Overhauser Effect. HETCOR and COSY are examples of two-dimensional types of this process, which often uses TMS as a reference compound. The coupling constant is denoted J in this technique, and its Carbon-13 type requires cross polarization and a strong pulse. Developed by Purcell and Bloch, For 10 points, name this method of chemical analysis which produces a graph of absorption peaks created by chemical shifts from an applied magnetic field, abbreviated NMR.;;Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
United States History;;Under Dwight Eisenhower, this position was held by James Hagerty. The first man to hold it was Stephen Early, who took the job in 1937 and stayed with it for eight years. More recently, it has been held by Marlin Fitzwater, Mike McCurry, and Ari Fleischer. For 10 points, name this position in the executive branch held by Scott McClellan until he was replaced in 2006 by Tony Snow.;;(White) (House) Press Secretary
American Literature;;He coined the name "Servant Girl Annihilator" for a serial killer in Austin, Texas, and he wrote such books as The Voice of the City and Strictly Business. His 1906 collection took its title from the population of New York City at the time and was called The Four Million. That work included his tale about the poor Jim and Della who make sacrifices to buy one another gifts on Christmas. For 10 points identify this short story writer of such works as "The Last Leaf," "The Gift of the Magi," and "The Ransom of Red Chief".;;O(.) Henry|(Sidney) Porter
Geography;;Of the three countries which border the Gulf of Fonseca, this one has the longest shoreline on that body. The ruins of Copán and Mount Las Minas may be found in this country, which has several prominent cities beside the capital, including the capital's twin city of Comayagüela and the industrial center of San Pedro Sula. For 10 points, name this country which borders Guatemala, El Salvador, and Nicaragua.;;(Republic) (of) Honduras
Mythology;;In Zorastrianism, the Chinvat is one of these and is protected by Rashnu. In Islam, one called Jehennam or al Sirat is as sharp as a sword and thin as a spider's thread. Samebito and Totaro fought on one in Shinto, and the Roman hero Horatus Cocles defended one from invading Etruscans, while one named Ram Sethu was built in the Ramayana. For 10 points, name these structures that often link the Earth to the afterlife in various mythologies and will cause impure souls to fall off while crossing.;;bridge(s)
British Literature;;In one of his plays, Mellefont and Lord Touchwood are targeted by the scheming Jack Maskwell. In another, Angelica ultimately married Valentine Legend. He also wrote a play, Lady Wishfort's amorous desires complicate Mrs. Millamant's plan to keep honest under the influence of Mirabell. For 10 points, Love for Love, The Double Dealer, and The Way of the World were written by what author who also penned lines about music soothing a savage breast and scorned women having hell-like fury?;;(William) Congreve
Geology;;The fine laminated structure of this class of rocks results from a slow lithification which, if disrupted, results in mudstone. Fissile rocks of grain sizes between those of siltstones and mudstones, these composites are composed of at least one forth clay. Phyllite and schist are second and third metamorphs of this type of rock, which is directly metamorphosed into slate. For 10 points, name this most common form of sedimentary rock, some of which are known to contain oil and the Burgess example of which contains many Cambrian fossils.;;shale(s)
United States History;;He and James Noe to create the Win or Lose Oil Company, which funded his political campaigns. Both his son Russell and wife Rose served in the Senate, which he did not do until his flunky Oscar Allen filled his vacated state-level position. For 10 points, name this "Share the Wealth" advocate who was assassinated by Carl Weiss in Baton Rouge, a Louisiana populist known as the "Kingfish".;;(Huey) (Pierce) Long
Philosophy;;He quotes Tacitus in order to address the importance of pricking one's thumbs to make a pact in a section titled "Of Thumbs," which follows "On Tasting Nothing Pure". He also wrote "On the Power of the Imagination" and "Of Cannibals" in that collection, whose longest chapter discusses a theologian from Toulouse in the "Apology for Raymond Sebond". For 10 points, identify this man who wrote "to philosophize is to learn to die" and created a new literary genre in his Essays.;;(Michel) (Eyquem) (de) Montaigne
Mythology;;The regent of this kingdom, Bunus, died powerless, allowing Epopeus to conquer this city. Braereus the Hecatoncheire decided which god was to be worshipped in this city, with the sea-level going to Poseidon and the towers to Helios. One of its kings told Asopus where to find Aegina, while another, along with his queen Periboea, adopted the abandoned Oedipus. For 10 points, name this city ruled by Polybus and by a man who chained down Death and had to roll a stone up a hill forever, Sisyphus.;;Corinth
Biology;;Specialized RNA molecules called snoRNAs (snow-R-N-A) are found in it, where they cleave the internal transcribed spacer ITS1. The protein fibrillin is associated with it, as are structures such as paraspeckles, Cajal bodies, and Sam68 bodies. Divided into the densely packed granular component and the fibrillar centers, condensed chromatin is often seen at its periphery. For 10 points, name this organelle found in plant and animal cells, the location of ribosomal RNA transcription that is actually a sub-compartment of the nucleus.;;nucleolus
Music;;Several of this man's piano works have been recorded in recent years by his son Maxim; his pieces for the piano include the Merry March and Seven Dolls' Dances. After running afoul of censors with his nihilistic Fourth Symphony, this composer salvaged his career and life with his Fifth Symphony, subtitled a "Soviet Artist's Reply to Just Criticism". For 10 points, name this composer of The Nose and fifteen symphonies, including the First of May, Babi Yar, and Leningrad.;;(Dmitri) (Dmitryevich) Shostakovich
European History;;A Spanish army defeated Austria at the Battle of Bitonto during this conflict, which led Don Carlos to take the crown of the Two Sicilies under the name Charles III. The Confederation of Dzików supported one claimant in this conflict, which was precipitated by the death of Augustus the Strong and the discordant resolutions of rival sejms. For 10 points, name this 1733 to 1738 war between supporters of Frederick Augustus II and supporters of Stanislaw Leszczynski for a vacant Eastern European throne.;;(War) (of) (the) Polish Succession
United States History;;He led his forces to victory over Simon Kenton's frontier raiders in 1792, and he routed General Arthur St. Clair's troops in 1791. He was blamed for the actions of Henry Proctor's troops at the River Basin, and he led a British attack with Proctor on Fort Meigs in 1813. The son of Pucksinwah, he predicted the New Madrid earthquake of 1811, and Colonel Richard Johnson claimed to have killed this Shawnee chief during his run for the Vice Presidency. Killed at the Battle of the Thames, for 10 points identify this brother of The Prophet.;;Tecumseh
British Literature;;"The Salutation" and "They Are All Gone Into the World of Light!" were produced by this literary movement, while another member wrote "The Pulley" and "The Temple". Other poems from this group, which was later named by T.S. Eliot, include "The Mower Against Gardens" and the Holy Sonnets. Henry Vaughan and George Herbert were part of it. For 10 points, "To His Coy Mistress" by Andrew Marvell and "Death be not Proud" by John Donne are examples of work from what British poetic school?;;(the) metaphysical (poets)
Geology;;These formations result from the creation of an R-Channel by erosion. They are known as concertina when they become crumpled into a zig-zag pattern; they may contain multiple crests and typically feature cross-bedding. They are generally thought of as more sinuous than kames or drumlins, and are exposed after ablation reveals material deposited in the channel, as they are essentially a type of ground moraine. Often mined for sand and gravel, for 10 points, name these windy ridges left behind by advancing glaciers.;;esker(s)
Linguistics;;A symbol that looks like the top of a question mark with a bar instead of a period on the bottom is the IPA notation for this sound. The letter "q" in Maltese and the "ayin" or "ayn" in Hebrew and Arabic stand for this plosive. It is heard from those who drop the "t"s in "bottle" or "little" and is a distinguishable phoneme in such Native American languages as Nahautl. For 10 points, name this sound produced by closing the back of the throat.;;glottal stop
American Literature;;His lesser known works include the play Watch Your Thirst and the society novel Lady Baltimore. Philosophy 4 traced the lives of four college friends, while Romney was influenced by his support for the Progressive Party. By the time he released Red Men and White and Lin McLean he'd found his preferred subject matter: the West. His most popular work was dedicated to his Harvard classmate Teddy Roosevelt, subtitled "A Horseman of the Plains," and featured the first showdown in literary history. For 10 points identify this author of a novel about a cowboy with no name, The Virginian.;;(Owen) Wister
Mythology;;The female warrior Scáthach trained him in the use of the gáe bolg harpoon, and he is proclaimed a hero by Cú Roi at the end of Bricrui's Feast, a tale in the Book of the Dun Cow. This leader of the Knights of the Red Branch fought for King Conor against Queen Maeve. For 10 points, name this Irish hero whose exploits are described in The Cattle Raid of Cooley and other parts of the Ulster cycle.;;Cu Culainn
Music;;It uses a baritone solo to celebrate the power of love in the first section, devoted to nature, then moves on to a tenor solo representing a swan that is being roasted in a passage set in a tavern. It is the first section in a triptych which also includes Songs of Catullus and The Triumph of Aphrodite and is based on the medieval Latin poems compiled by Johann Andreas Schmeller, including a hymn to the goddess of fate. For 10 points, name this Carl Orff musical drama which begins and ends with "O Fortuna".;;Carmina Burana
World Literature;;The early prime minister of Laos, Katay Don Sasorith, used this animal's name as a pseudonym to publish pro-independence writings. In addition to "jeep," this was a nickname for saxophonist Johnny Hodges. A fictional character by this monniker works a linotype for the Verity Press who becomes wealthy running a Toyota dealership. For 10 points, the Fibonnaci sequence was discovered during a study of reproductive rates in what animal, whose name is shared by the former basketball star Harry Angstrom in a John Updike series?;;rabbit(s)
World History;;His confidantes included his attorney general, Godfrey Lule, and his head of anti-corruption, Bob Astles. He gained power after disposing of his rival, Pierino Okoya, creating the Public Safety Unit.. The excesses of his regime formed the basis for expatriate Henry Kyemba's book A State of Blood. A successful boxer during his initial stint in the army as part of the King's African Rifles, he deposed his one-time partner, Milton Obote, in a coup. For 10 points, name this man who may have collaborated with the Palestinians at Entebbe and eaten people, a former dictator of Uganda.;;(Idi) Amin (Dada)
Biology;;L-leucine inhibits its production in the liver, and quinolinate also inhibits its formation from alanine. In solution, its linear and furanose forms are rare, while its hemiacetal-forming pyranose form exists mostly in the beta anomer. With its only L-hydroxyl on carbon 3, it exists as a D isomer in living organisms and differs in configuration around only one carbon with allose, galactose, and mannose. Cupric Fehling's reagent can be used to oxidize its aldehyde group to a carboxyl group, changing it into a gluconic acid. For 10 points, name this aldohexose, a six-carbon sugar, broken down to form energy cellular respiration.;;glucose
Art;;His works include Members of the Club and a painting of children playing in the East River, Forty-Two Kids. His urban realism was influenced by his teacher at the New York School of art, The Eight's Robert Henri. In one his paintings, two nearly naked man grapple, with one using his elbow and lowered head on the other as a swarthy referee tries to pull them apart and a rambunctious crowd looks on. For 10 points, name this creator of the boxing scene Stag at Sharkey's.;;(George) (Wesley) Bellows
Physics;;Schuler designed one of these that can always locate the local center of gravity and Kater invented one to facilitate measurement of the acceleration of gravity. Simple chaotic systems include these with strictly positive kinetic energy and a coupled system of two of them. The ballistic type can be used to determine the velocity of a projectile while the Foucault one demonstrates the rotation of the Earth. For 10 points, name these interesting physical systems that consist in the simplest cases of massive bobs swinging on strings.;;pendul(um)(a)(ums)
European History;;Sarah Jennings Churchill dominated her early reign, before she appointed the ministers Sidney Godolphin and the Duke of Marlborough. Her death sparked passage of the Act of Settlement, which transferred the throne to the descendents of Sophia of the Palatinate. In practice, that meant she was succeeded by the first Hanoverian king, George I. For 10 points, name this British monarch who lent her name to an American conflict which coincided with the dominant event of her reign, the War of the Spanish Succession.;;(Queen) Anne (the First|I)
Mythology;;He sometimes was called the Turquoise Prince, after the "turquoise snake," a weapon which he used to kill most of his family. His brothers, the Four Hundred Stars, attempted to kill his mother while he was in the womb, but he was able to arm himself at birth and kill all of them, plus the sister behind the plot, throwing her onto Templo Mayor. His priests re-enacted the events by sacrificing humans in the same way. For 10 points, name this hummingbird war god of the Aztecs.;;Huitzilopochtli
United States History;;Ronald Reagan's first nominee to this post had just finished a term as governor of South Carolina, while Clinton nominated a former Transportation secretary who had served eight years as mayor of Denver, Federico F. Peña. During the first George W. Bush administration, a former Republican senator from Michigan held this position. For 10 points, name this office between Transporation and Education in the presidential succession order, now held by Samuel Bodman following the retirement of Spencer Abraham.;;(United States) Secretary of Energy
European Literature;;In an early work by this man, Anna Balicke's parents pressure her to marry the wealthy Murk rather than her true love Andreas Kragler. In addition to Drums in the Night, he wrote an allegory about a Chicago mobster who tries to take over the cauliflower market in The Resistible Rise of Arturo Ui. He wrote about a scientist who is persecuted by the Catholic Church in Life of Galileo, while a Chinese prostitute is the title character of his The Good Woman of Setzuan. Name this German dramatist of Mother Courage and her Children.;;(Bertolt) Brecht
British Literature;;His prose output includes the "Romance" St. Irvyne; Or, the Rosicrucian and the gothic novella Zastrozzi. He wrote a "Song- To the Men of England" and addressed the fallen at Peterloo as "lions after slumber" in his "The Masque of Anarchy". His longer visionary works include "The Revolt of Islam," but he is probably best known for pieces inspired by nature including "Mont Blanc". For 10 points, name this author whose 1818 work about "a traveler from antique land" was called "Ozymandias".;;P(ercy) (Bysshe) Shelley;;Shelley
Geography;;Forming the divide between the Hudson and St. Lawrence watersheds, they were uplifted a mere five million years ago. Forty-six summits above four thousand feet have made this range popular with climbers, who scales Mounts Marcy and Tahawus. For 10 points, a six-million acre state park bounded to the east by Lake Champlain is coterminous with what range, the southernmost part of the Canadian Shield, located in New York and New England?;;Adirondack(s) (Mountains)
European History;;This author of Political Testament negotiated the treaty of Angouleme and convinced the Duke of Rohan to sign the Peace of Alais. Early on in his career he survived an attempt to remove him from power on the "Day of the Dupes". His agents included Father Joseph, but his fate was sealed when he introduced the traitor Cinq-Mars at court. For 10 points, name this eventually-disgraced chief minister to Louis XIII, a French clergyman and politician called "the Red Eminence".;;(Cardinal) Richelieu
Mythology;;One of them was a teacher of witchcraft, while another was the husband chosen by a bride who could only look at the feet of suitors. That one lived in Noatun and was married to Skadi. Another gave a self-directed sword to Skirnir and owns the collapsible boat Skidbladnir. Two of them arrived in Asgard as hostages. For 10 points, Njord and Freyr belonged to what group and moved to settle their war with the Aesir?;;Vanir
Chemistry;;They are less hydrogen bonded, more acidic, and more nucleophilic than alcohols. Present in black tea, skunk odor, and less than a part per billion in grapefruit, these compounds are oxidized by hydrogen peroxide to sulfonic acids, and oxidized by iodine to disulfides. For 10 points, name this functional group found in cysteine but not methionine, with formula R-SH.;;thiol(s)
Music;;He wrote three Sacred Concerts around age seventy, and other late works include the Far East and New Orleans suites. With saxophonist Johnny Hodges, he recorded the albums Side by Side and Back to Back. His frequent collaborator, Irving Mills, co-wrote such works of his as "I Let a Song Go" and "Prelude to a Kiss". For 10 points, Such Sweet Thunder, The Queen's Suite, and Sophisticated Lady were written by what American jazz bandleader whose signature pieces included "Mood Indigo" and "Take the 'A' Train"?;;(Edward) (Kennedy) (Duke) Ellington
American Literature;;Ed Mosher seeks to return to the circus. Willie Oban left Harvard Law after his father was ruined, but wants another shot at the legal profession. The second section takes place during a birthday party that is compared to Belshazzar's Feast and features a scuffle between two veterans of the Boer War. Its final scene reaches a climax when the policemen Moran and Lieb show up to arrest the central character for murdering his wife, Evelyn, leaving the former syndicalist Larry sitting at the bar contemplating his death. For 10 points, identify this play set in Harry Hope's saloon, a work by Eugene O'Neill.;;(The) Iceman Cometh
Religion;;He repeatedly fought Ben-Hadad of Damascus and allied himself with Jehoshaphat of Judah against the Arameans to free Ramoth Gilead. Four hundred and fifty of his prophets of Baal were defeated by Elijah and killed on Mount Caramel, after they could not call down fire for a sacrifice. He was warned by Micah he would die in battle, and Elijah prophesized dogs would lick his blood after his wife had Naboth stoned to obtain a vineyard. For 10 points, identify this king of Israel married to the notorious Jezebel.;;Ahab
Biology;;Mutations affecting this molecule's gene can cause epidermolysis bullosa, or severe, chronic blistering. Cross-linked by norleucine, histidine, and hydroxylysine residues, this protein is a right-handed supertwisting of left-handed strands. Ehlers-Danlos syndrome and osteogenesis imperfecta result from the substitution of a large R group for glycine in glycine-X-proline or glycine-X-hydroxyproline tripeptide units in this protein. A coil of three alpha helices, it is secreted by fibroblasts and osteoblasts. For 10 points, name this fibrous protein found in gelatin, tendons, cartilage, and bone, the most abundant protein in mammals.;;collagen
United States History;;It passed the House after the defection of what John Randolph called "doughfaced" representatives. Its proposed Taylor Amendment failed and was later replaced with the Thomas Amendment. Another amendment to it called for the freeing of slaves at twenty-five, but James Tallmadge's proposal failed in the Senate. For 10 points, name this attempt to balance free and slave states by admitting Maine along with the namesake state in 1820.;;Missouri (Compromise)
United States History;;This state of affairs was presaged by the Wakarusa War and ended with the ratification of the Wyandotte constitution. In one notable incident during this conflict, the so-called "Franklin County Court," including Allen Wilkinson and the Doyle family, was killed. It heated up when the fraudulent Lecompton constitution was brought before Congress. For 10 points, name this 1856 to 1861 conflict which included John Brown's Pottawtomie Massacre and determined that slavery would not be permitted in a new Plains state.;;Bleeding Kansas
Art;;The fifth entry in this series uses a pair of dogs to mock the marriage taking place in the picture, where Sarah Young is being kept out of Marylebone Church. "The Gaming House," "The Prison," and "The Arrest" are other members of this set, which was produced after a similar work about a harlot but before Marriage a la Mode. For 10 points, name this series of engravings about a dissolute young man, by William Hogarth.;;(The) Rake's Progress
American Literature;;He began growing his famous beard following the death of his wife Frances in a house fire that scarred his face, an event described in his sonnet "The Cross of Snow". Although he created the first American translation of Dante, he also wrote original poetry about the "spreading chestnut tree" under which "the village smithy stands" as well as "the forest primeval". For 10 points, name this poet of "Evangeline" and The Courtship of Miles Standish, whose Tales of a Wayside Inn includes "Paul Revere's Ride".;;(Henry) (Wadsworth) Longfellow
Physics;;In relativistic situations, it generalizes to the Klein-Gordon or Dirac equations. In general, this equation can be written down by equating the operation of the Hamiltonian on a function with multiplying the function's derivative with respect to time by "i minus h-bar". For a time independent Hamiltonian, solving it completely gives the energy eigenstates allowed in a given system as well as the allowed wave functions. For 10 points, identify this central equation of quantum mechanics named after an Austrian scientist who also had a thought experiment about cats.;;Schrodinger ((wave) equation)
United States History;;Governed by Rule 23 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, these have been used to contest the merger of the NBA and ABA and to win a hundred and eighty million dollars for Vietnam veterans exposed to Agent Orange. Commonly used against tobacco firms, they are allowed only if there are common questions of law or fact among the parties involved and joinder is impractical. For 10 points, name this type of lawsuit in which a representative plaintiff sues or a representative defendant is sued on behalf of a group.;;class action (lawsuit)
European Literature;;His last poems include "Alchemy of the Verb" and he instructed a "gracious son of Pan" to "walk through the night, gently moving that thigh, that second thigh, and that left leg" in his "Antique". He stated "Now is the time of the assassins" at the end of his "Morning of Drunkenness," which along with "After the Flood" appears in his 1874 collection Illuminations. His prose works include A Season in Hell, while his best known poem is The Drunken Boat. For 10 points, name this French Symbolist who was shot by his lover, fellow poet Paul Verlaine.;;(Arthur) Rimbaud
European History;;The "Sandbag Battery" proved key to one battle in this war, while another pivotal victory was led by Armand de Saint-Arnaud. In addition to the Battles of Alma and Inkerman, this war included a clash where Colin Campbell's 93rd Sutherland Highlanders became known as "the thin red line" and a horrible miscommunication between Lords Raglan and Cardigan led to the "charge of the light brigade". For 10 points, name this war that included the Battle of Balaklava and the siege of Sevastopol.;;Crimean (War)
Chemistry;;The American William Kelly devised this technique at about the same time as its more famous developer. The Thomas-Gilchrist converter, often made of burnt limestone or dolomite, helped remove phosphorus contamination. It has now been largely replaced by the basic oxygen process, which utilizes many of its principles, such as removing impurities like silicon and manganese through oxidation to form a less dense slag. These oxidation reactions also maintain a high temperature to keep the product molten. For 10 points, name this first successful large-scale method of converting pig iron into steel.;;Bessemer (process)
Astronomy;;Otto Struve supposedly observed one of these objects, but it has not been seen since, so it is referred to as his "lost" one. Herbig-Haro Objects are emission types of these formed in shock regions by the collision of fast moving jets of material. The "Lump Star" is a blue reflection one of these, Trifid is a diffuse one, and the best example of a dark one may be the Coalsack, but a more famous one is M1 in the Messier Catalogue. For 10 points, name these astronomical objects, which also include the Horsehead and Crab.;;nebula(e)
Sociology;;This author of The Measure of Value Stated and Illustrated was Britain's first-ever professor of political economy. About twenty years after Thomas Paine, he published a pamphlet called The Crisis, which advocated for the Poor Laws that he later opposed. Though he thought that self-restraint, vice, and misery were the only ways to head off a crisis, the Agricultural Revolution proved him wrong. For 10 points, name this man who predicted mass starvation due to population growth outstripping food supply in his Essay on the Principle of Population.;;(Thomas) Malthus
European Literature;;Its allusion to "the ceremony of innocence" can be linked to its author's work "A Prayer for my Daughter," while the description of a shape "moving its slow thighs, while all about it/ Reel shadows of indignant desert birds" seems to refer to veneration of the sphinx. This text characterizes the worst as "full of passionate intensity" and the best as lacking all conviction. For 10 points identify this work in which a falcon turns in a gyre, ending with a question about a slouching rough beast, a poem by William Butler Yeats.;;(The) Second Coming
Physics;;It is equal to minus the constant entropy derivative of internal energy or the constant temperature derivative of Helmholtz energy with respect to volume. Its derivative with respect to temperature is negative at the solid-liquid curve for water. When it is held constant, the heat capacity is equal to the derivative of enthalpy with respect to temperature; work is change in volume times it, the nRT term only depends on volume, and the process is isobaric. For 10 points, name this thermodynamic quantity that Gay-Lussac posited is directly proportional to temperature at constant volume, which is also measured in atmospheres.;;pressure
Music;;Its sixth and penultimate movement is a trio for mezzo-soprano, tenor, and baritone. Those parts were not included in the finale, "Libera me," written five years earlier. The "Sanctus" is a fast march for double chorus, while the preceding Offertorio is a dramatic ensemble number for the solo quartet. An additional brass band of eight players figures prominently in the "Dies irae". For 10 points, name this liturgical work written in memory of Alessandro Manzoni by the composer of Tosca and Rigoletto.;;Messa da Requiem
World History;;Though often considered a left-wing party, this group has called for an end to the taxation of "essential goods". It was able to trigger the 2006 election by siding with a no-confidence vote against the former Liberal government, which it had previously helped fend off a challenge from a separatist third party led by Giles Duceppe. This group then gained ten seats in the 2006 election under the leadership of Jack Layton. For 10 points, name this party which currently holds 29 seats, the fourth-largest section in the Canadian parliament behind the Conservatives, Liberals, and Bloc Quebecois.;;N(ew) D(emocratic) P(arty)
United States History;;The Lowell Committee was organized by Governor Alvan Fuller to investigate this case. In 1925, Celestio Madeiros confessed to killing F.A. Parmenter and Alessandro Beradelli for the Joe Morelli gang, and fifty years later Michael Dukakis exonerated these men of the crime. This murder case arising out of Braintree, Massachusetts led to one of the most protested executions in American history. For 10 points, identify this case which sent two Italian anarchists to the electric char.;;Sacco(-)Vanzetti (case)
Physics;;The energy liberated by this process obeys van't Hoff's equation. The Langmuir isotherm gives the ratio of the rate at which this reaction occurs over the rate of the inverse reaction as a function of the occupancy fraction of sites available for it. The process underlying the function of molecular sieves, it has chemi- and physi- types, may be assisted by plasma and is essential for the deposition of thin films. For 10 points, name this physical process in which a gas or liquid becomes stuck to the surface of a solid.;;adsorption
Geography;;Among the islands in this body of water is Bois Blanc Island, and across the Main Channel from Cape Hurd are Fitzwilliam and Manitoulin Islands, bordered on the northeast by the Georgian Bay. Cities on this body of water include Alpena, Port Austin, and Tawas City. Its namesake river empties into this lake's Saginaw Bay, coming through Flint. For 10 points, Lake Michigan is separated by the Straits of Mackinac from what other Great Lake, which borders Michigan and Ontario?;;(Lake) Huron
British Literature;;A common courtship activity in this book is walking to Meryton. In this novel, Catherine de Bourgh urges the minister Collins to find a wife, and Charlotte Lucas accepts the second proposal that Collins puts forth. The protagonist's mother is sent into a tizzy when Netherfield Park is rented by Mr. Bingley, and sympathies for officer Wickham are reversed midway through the story. For 10 points, Fitzwilliam Darcy and Elizabeth Bennett overcome two barriers to understanding and get engaged in what Jane Austen novel?;;Pride and Prejudice
Mythology;;She was the mother of a comical figure in the Iliad whose horses could have won the Trojan War merely by eating the grass, Rhesus. With Oeagrus, she was also the mother of a group of ectstatic Rhea-worshippers, the Corybantes, and is often called the mother of Marsyas and Orpheus. Born first of all her sisters, just before Clio, she was responsible for judging ownership of Adonis between Aphrodite and Persephone. For 10 points, name this muse whose area of patronage was epic poetry.;;Calliope
Music;;Minor characters such as the Sorceress, the Spirit, and two Witches are found in the score to this opera, whose male lead was brought in secret to the premiere performance, which took place at a girls' school. Short arias for Belinda and a Sailor are found in the score, which concludes with the lament "When I am laid in earth". For 10 points, identify this opera set in Carthage and featuring a queen who dies of a broken heart, which was composed to a Nahum Tate libretto by Henry Purcell.;;Dido and Aeneas
European History;;It abolished the use of trope melodies and banned common-law marriages. It concluded that a child's godparents cannot be of the same sex and put forth a new foundation for the development of canon law in the Capita de reformatione. The nature of original sin and the number of sacrements were also re-affirmed at this 1545 to 1563 meeting. For 10 points, identify this ecumenical council of the Roman Catholic Church that attempted to stem the tide of the Protestant Reformation.;;(Council of) Trent (Council)
United States History;;This man and Chandler Owen founded The Hotel Messenger, a magazine of the Headwaiters and Sidewaiters Society of Greater New York. The organizer of a march against discrimination in the defense industry during World War II, he founded a league aimed at desegregating the army shortly afterwards. For 10 points, a major contract with the Pullman Company was signed in 1937 by what civil rights leader, who founded the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters?;;(Asa) (Phillip) Randolph
American Literature;;In this novel, Lena and her husband Harold have separate bank accounts, and Lena is eventually pulled out of the marriage by a woman who had previously killed her baby. Waverly is a prodigy whose championship skill in chess diminishes after she rebels against her mother. For 10 points, Lindo got out of an arranged marriage by taking advantage of a servant's pregnancy and Huang Tai Tai's gullibility in what novel about the past stories of a group of Chinese-Americans, written by Amy Tan?;;(The) Joy(-)Luck Club
Biology;;It is closely packed in sperm cells, due to the replacement of its normal proteins with arginine-rich protamines that help it transform into a crystal-like structure. Its differing forms consist primarily of B and Z-DNA, the latter of which may be implicated in transcriptional regulation. Methylation and acetylation are common forms of down and up transcriptional regulation respectively, and it is often organized in histone octamers called nucleosomes. The hetero- form and the eu- form are distinguished by the latter's lesser packing and greater likelihood of transcription. For 10 points, name this organizational form of DNA.;;chromatin
Mythology;;The Telchines mixed it with sulfure in order to create a chemical weapon. With a name meaning "hateful," only ships made of equine hooves could sail on it, and a penalty of one year of muteness and nine years of banishment was imposed on any god who broke an oath sworn by it. For 10 points, name this river which Achilles was dipped in to acquire immortality and which encircles Hades.;;Styx
Chemistry;;They include resazurin and salts like erythrosine. The anthocyanins are easily made from cabbage or beet, and more sophisticated versions include SBFI, PBFI, fluo-4, fura-2, and BAPTA, the latter three specific for calcium. Their properties are based on a specific dissociation constant, and some less common ones include tropeolin, nitramine, alpha-naphtholbenzein, dinitrophenol, and azolitmin. The universal version of these are usually mixtures of weak acids and bases, and they famously include congo red, phenolphthalein, and litmus. For 10 points, name these chemicals used to gauge the pH of a solution.;;(pH) indicator(s)
Music;;Tiger Brown congratulates this 1928 opera's protagonist, and recalls old army days in "The Cannon Song". After the hero sings the "Ballad of Good Living," his previous flames battle in "The Jealousy Song". Singing the "Solomon Song," Jenny Diver gives away the secret that Suky Tawdry's bawdy house is the location of Mackie Messer. The marriage of Polly Peachum to the outlaw Mac the Knife is found in, for 10 points, what opera by Kurt Weill and Bertolt Brecht?;;(The) Threepenny Opera
British Literature;;The third stanza repeats the word "happy" numerous times to describe an unwearied "melodist," "boughs" that cannot shed, and love "forever warm and still to be enjoyed". Its fourth section speculates about the "little town by the river" whose folk have left to come to the sacrifice. Purportedly inspired by its author's visit to an exhibit of the Elgin Marbles, it begins "Thou still unravish'd bride of quietness". For 10 points, identify this 1820 work that concludes "Beauty is truth, truth beauty," a poem by John Keats.;;Ode on a Grecian Urn
Economics;;Scarcity of natural resources can lead to it, as can a rise in the corporate tax rate, and it is the phenomenon ultimately caused by a price-wage spiral. When raw material prices and employee wages go up, the aggregate supply goes down, and this results. For 10 points, identify this type of inflation which does not act as an increase in aggregate demand and is thus distinguished from demand-pull inflation.;;cost push (inflation)
World History;;It resulted in the A Through Z Review, which concluded that errors resulted from becoming "mesmerized by statistics of known doubtful validity". Sections of the ancient capital of Hue were captured and suicide squads attacked the U.S. embassy during this event, which included the siege of Khe San after diversionary attacks at Quang Tri. For 10 points, Pham Hung coordinated what psychological, if not military victory, for the Viet Cong that took place on the 1968 Vietnamese lunar new year?;;Tet (Offensive)
World Literature;;This adjective is used in the title of a play about Fortunatus by Thomas Dekker and also names the type of Creole Days that George Washington Cable wrote about. When it precedes Manse, it identifies the origin of certain mosses in a Hawthorne collection. It is also used to describe a certain "Curiosity Shop" in a Dickens title and a fisherman named Santiago who struggles with sharks. For 10 points, give this temporal word which identifies a certain "man" who is paired with the sea in a work by Hemingway.;;old
Biology;;The enzyme dopamine beta-hydroxylase requires it to convert dopamine to noradrenaline, and it Haworth and Karrer were the first to synthesize this chemical, which has formula C6H8O. The first line of defense against oxidative stress caused by free radicals, a lack of it causes underhydroxylation of lysine and proline in collagen, one of the major symptoms of its deficiency, which often affected sailors. Linus Pauling recommended massive doses of, for 10 points, what water-soluble vitamin abundant in limes and oranges that prevents scurvy?;;(Vitamin) C
European History;;Konrad Henlein aided its passage by convincing Lord Runciman that it fulfilled "justified claims". After signing this, President Eduard Benes resigned and went into exile in London. Poland was allowed to take the Teschen district and Hungary was given parts of Slovakia under this agreement, signed by Edouard Daladier for France with Britain, Italy, and Germany, For 10 points, identify this 1938 agreement which purported to secure "peace in our time" by permitting Hitler's occupation of the Sudetenland.;;Munich (Pact)
Geography;;In 1977, it was the subject of two treaties signed by a general who would die in a mysterious plane crash a year later, Omar Torrijos. John Findlay Wallace was the original leader of its development, but was replaced by John Stevens. However, George Goethals is credited as the main overseer of this project, which was placed under American control by the Hay-Bunau Varilla Treaty. For 10 points, name this structure that connects the Pacific to the Atlantic by means of its namesake country.;;Panama Canal
American Literature;;After the protagonist's plane crashes into Sugarbush Mountain in Vermont, he repeats the title phrase to some Austrian ski instructors who come to save him. He then finds himself in the same hospital as Professor Rumsfoord, who doesn't believe that he has become "unstuck in time". Punctuated throughout by the declaration "So it goes," the novel's most bizarre encounter involves the actress Montana Wildhack, who has been kidnapped by the Trafalmadorians. For 10 pooints, the firebombing of Dresden starts what novel about Billy Pilgrim by Kurt Vonnegut?;;Slaughterhouse Five
Astronomy;;The Unruh Effect results in the creation of energy in this space. It is the inner boundary of the ergosphere and an observer can toss an object through it to extract energy by way of the Penrose Process. The Bekenstein-Hawking Formula relates entropy to the area of this null hypersurface, while pair production occurs on both sides of it in Hawking radiation which has the ability to tunnel through it. The escape velocity exceeds the speed of light in, for 10 points, what boundary most easily thought of as the area around a black hole?;;event horizon
Religion;;Members of this group believe in a kind of "saintly power" called walayah, which is a reflection of the "prophetic light". They seek to emulate the Night Journey and the saying "poverty is my pride," even referring to themselves as "al-fuqara" or "the poor". With a name derived from their wool garments, their practice of dhikr has earned them the nickname of "whirling dervishes". For 10 points, what is this popular mystical view of Islam?;;Sufi(sm)
World History;;Rwanda and Burundi war refugees from the Hutu ethnic group settled in this country but were massacred during a 1996 coup. Its eastern Kivu provinces are the site of new unrest, and election scandals led to its parliamentary leader Mbeza Thubi losing his seat. After May 2007 elections, five hundred were killed by the forces of losing candidate Jean Pierre Bemba. For 10 points, name this country where declared election winner Joseph Kabila is attempting to consolidate the power once held by Mobutu Sese Seko.;;D(emocratic) R(epublic) (of) (the) C(ongo)
Physics;;In the reference frame named for this entity, two-particle systems can be analyzed as one-particle systems because the total linear momentum is always zero. Any set of forces and torques on a body can be replaced by a single torque and a single force acting through it. Its location is given by the volume integral of position times density, divided by the volume integral of the density. It can be found for plane figures by the method of plumb lines. For 10 points, name this point through which a uniform gravitational field acts.;;c(enter) (of) m(ass)
Music;;This English name is given to Sergei Rachmaninov's only cantata, and another musician's work by this name was based on an Adolph Bottger poem and written after its composer married Clara Wieck. This word also names the first of twelve concertos in a work called The Contest Between Harmony and Invention. For 10 points, give this English name shared by Robert Schumann's first symphony and the concerto preceding "L'estate," "L'autunno," and "L'invierno" in Antonio Vivaldi's "Four Seasons".;;spring
Geography;;Its lowest point is the St. Francis River at 230 feet, while its highest point is the modest Taum Sauk Mountain.  Visiting baseball fans might enjoy a Farmington Firebirds game before taking I-55 and I-70 to see the River City Rascals of O'Fallon; however, this trip would pass through this state's most populous metropolitan area.  It has a panhandle called the "heel of the boot". For 10 points, name this state that is home to Columbia, Springfield, Independence, and St. Louis.;;Missouri
Mythology;;He is often seen on the lekythen, and usually carries an upside down torch and a butterfly. Along with his brother, he cleaned the body of Sarpedon and transported it to Lydia. The Keres are the entourage of this deity, who agreed to find Alcestis instead of Admetus on one occasion. The Romans knew him as Mors, and he is sometimes given a second brother, Moros, or destiny. However, he is more often depicted as the twin of sleep. For 10 points, name this son of Nyx, a brother of Hypnos and god of death.;;Thanatos
United States History;;He said that Douglas MacArthur's proposal to enlarge the Korean War into China was "the wrong war, at the wrong place, at the wrong time and with the wrong enemy". Earlier, he captured Bizerte in Tunisia while serving under Patton in the North Africa campaign. Known as "the Soldiers' General," his Twelfth Army was the largest group of American soldiers ever commanded by one man. For 10 points, identify this last American five-star general.;;(Omar) Bradley
Mythology;;The Polynesian goddess Toi-Mata had one for an eye, while the Yoruban deity Shango wears two of them on his head. A figure who sacrificed the whole world to Kasyapa was the son of Jamadagni and has this item in his name; he also used one to kill Karrta Verrya Arjuna, who had stolen a cow. For 10 points, that is the sixth avatar of Vishnu, who is known as Parasurama or Rama "with" one of what weapons?;;axe(s)
Art;;His Wisdom of the Earth is a disturbing representation of a seated woman, while the project King of Kings combines mill screws and mugs made out of wood. In 1935 he was commissioned by the Jaswant of Indore to build a Temple of Deliverance that would be decorated with his sculptures. Although his most ambitious work may have been the Endless Column, he was better known for animal works like Turtles and The Seal. For 10 points, name this man who sought to capture the essence of flight in his abstract series Bird in Space.;;(Constantin) Brancusi
British Literature;;A subplot in this work involves the affair between the servant Miss Derek and the Superintendent of Police, Mr. McBryde. In Chapter VII ,two of the main characters see a Green Bird after they decide to break off their engagement. The most resonant symbol in this work, which features the wise characters Professor Godbole and Mrs. Moore, is the sound "Boum" that overwhelms the British tourists. For 10 points, an ill-fated trip to the Marabar Caves leads to Adela Quested's false accusation against the once hopeful Dr. Aziz in what novel by E.M. Forster?;;(A) Passage to India
World History;;His political career was marked by factional strife with José Miguel Carrera, who was the first president of this man's home country. He simultaneously served as militia general and governor of Concepción, a distraction which may have led to his armies losing at the Battle of Rancagua in 1814. Three years later, in cooperation with José de San Martín, he won a decisive victory at Chacabuco. For 10 points, name this son of the Irish-born viceroy of Spanish Peru, who becane the founder of an independent Chile.;;(Bernardo) O'Higgins
European Literature;;One character in this novel sends for Princess Avdotya Stepanovna, who takes over the estate until that character and Katya move away. Later, a harmless kiss for Fenichka prompts a duel in which Pavel Petrovich is wounded. After staying at Marino twice, the protagonist contracts typhus at home, calling for the cold Madame Odintsova on his deathbed. For 10 points, the aristocrat Nikolai Kirsanov is contrasted with Arkady's new friend Bazarov, a nihilist, in what Ivan Turgenev novel about generational conflict?;;Fathers and Sons
Geology;;This geological process leads to the creation of Wadati-Benioff areas, characterized by highly variable strain rates. It also results in the formation of accretionary prisms and wedges, like those found off of Barbados. This process may initiate orogenic activity. For 10 points, name this process that often occurs when denser oceanic material at a convergent boundary is forced under continental crust and consists of the sinking of one tectonic plate under another.;;subduction
Chemistry;;Its discoverer, Joseph de Lassone, isolated it from a heated mixture of zinc oxide and coke, but confused it with hydrogen because of its blue flame. Its three resonance forms include a double bond and a dipolar molecule, although its dominant structure unexpectedly has a partial triple bond. It can react directly with ionically charged organic species, but otherwise requires the presence of a metal catalyst for reaction. For 10 points, coal gas is another name for what toxic diatomic molecule, which, when found in organic compounds, is called a carbonyl group?;;carbon monoxide
United States History;;William Blackstone recorded its first use in 1305, and it was invoked during England's Five Knights' case in 1627. Fort McHenry's commander George Cadwalader refused to obey it despite Justice Roger Taney's decision in Ex Parte Merryman, and it was also an issue in Ex Parte McCardle and Ex Parte Milligan after Abraham Lincoln suspended it in 1861. For 10 points, identify this common law writ directing one who holds another in his custody to produce the body of that person before the court.;;(writ of) habeas corpus
European Literature;;Short stories by this author include "The Childhood of Lovers" and "The Last Summer," both of which were collected in his Aerial Ways. His short poem "Winter Night" describes a candle that would not go out in a blizzard, while his "Margarita" compared a nightingale to a dead woman and was included in the collection, Themes and Variations, which made his name. Other important poems include the longer works Lt. Schmidt and 1905, but his best known work, first published in 1957, centers on the title character's rivalry with the evil Komarovsky for the hand of fair Lara. For 10 points identify this Russian author of the novel Dr. Zhivago.;;(Boris) Pasternak
United States History;;As Speaker of the House, he proposed an amendment barring federal support of religious schools, which, like a later gaff by his supporter Samuel Burchard, was interpreted as anti-Catholic. Robert Ingersoll nicknamed him "The Plumed Knight," and this leader of the Half-Breeds was also known as the "continental liar from the state of Maine". For 10 points, name this Secretary of State under Garfield and Harrison who unsuccessfully ran against the "rum, Romanism, and rebellion" of Grover Cleveland.;;(James) (Gillepsie) Blaine
Physics;;When an ionic compound is dissolved in a liquid-filled container, this quantity manifests itself as the work done in raising the water level in that container. It is defined as the Legendre transform of the internal energy U that introduces temperature and pressure as independent variables. Its formula reflects the struggle between entropic and enthalpic factors in its determination, and its sign and magnitude denotes the spontaneity of a reaction, although kinetic factors are necessary to ascertain the actual rate. For 10 points, name this thermodynamic potential function denoted by G.;;Gibbs free energy
Music;;Beethoven wrote a set of variations based on this opera, which has an octet in the finale of Act One. It also features the "Catalog aria" and "Finch'han dal vino" (feen KAHN dahl VEE no), also known as the "Champagne aria". At the end of the opera, Ottavio (aw TAH vee oh) postpones marriage to Donna Anna for a year and Donna Elvira vows to retire to a convent. For 10 points, the statue of a murdered Commendatore drags the title character down to hell in what opera featuring the role of Leoporello, by Mozart?;;Don Giovanni
European History;;It was followed by the Treaty of Vervins and was comprised of four sections and 148 total articles. It allowed for both places of "security" and "refuge," which were later undermined by the directed deployment of dragoons. Its guarantees, such as mixed courts and full liberty of conscience, were especially weakened after the fall of La Rochelle and it was officially nullified at Fontainebleau in 1685 by Louis XIV. For 10 points, identify this agreement promulgated by Henry IV that defined the rights of French Protestants.;;Edict of Nantes
American Literature;;Katie and her brother Johnnie search for the title object in the allegorical Finding the Green Stone. The stories "Olive Oil" and "The Brotherhood of the Saved" were included in the collection The Way Forward is With a Broken Heart. A proponent of "womanism," her encounters with literary pioneers are addressed in the essays Finding Langston and In Search of Our Mother's Gardens. Best known for fiction including Meridian and The Third Life of Grange Copeland, her most famous work is an epistolary novel that revolves around the sisters Nettie and Celie. For 10 points identify this author of The Color Purple.;;(Alice) Walker
Religion;;This movement was brought to the United States via Charleston, South Carolina by Isaac Wise. Its first service was conducted in German by Israel Jacobson, who called for the end of belief in the moshiach and the disavowal of wearing tallit. This denominational group sparked great opposition when it advocated men and women praying together and the abandonment of kosher laws. For 10 points, name this strain of Judaism which sought to remove most Orthodox trappings and was tempered by the compromise Conservative movement.;;Reform (Judaism)
Biology;;The effect of one class of these is modeled by the KNF and concerted MWC models; another class is comprised mostly of transition-state mimics. All of these chemicals increase the slopes of Lineweaver-Burk plots, and Ritonavir acts as one of these for the HIV protease. One class of these molecules occupies the active site, while the other changes the conformation of the associated catalyst. For 10 points, name these molecules that come in competitive and allosteric types and that reduce the activity of enzymes.;;inhibitor(s)
Math Theory;;One of this man's results says that every odd prime can be expressed as the sum of two squares while another states that, if given a prime and an integer, the integer raised to the power of one less than that prime will have a remainder of 1 when divided by the prime. Another problem he proposed erroneously claimed to have a result that proved that the Pythagorean-like expressions are not valid for powers greater than 2. For 10 points, name this French mathematician, the namesake of a set of primes who has both a "little" theorem and an Andrew Wiles-proven "last" theorem.;;(Pierre) (de) Fermat
European Literature;;This author's shorter poems include several about a "Stone Lady," including a sestina which begins "I have come, alas, to the great circle of shadow". His prose works include the philosophical Convivio and an essay On Vernacular Speech, as well as the political treatise De monarchia. In the 1290s he wrote a short book which contains 25 sonnets, several other poems, and the author's commentaries on his own poetry, a collection known as The New Life. That book commemorates his love for Beatrice Portinari. Name this Italian poet who also wrote The Divine Comedy.;;Dante (Alighieri)
Art;;An exploding live chicken was omitted from the final staging of one depiction of him. That photo taken by Philip Halsman showed three cats and a bucket of water in the air as this man jumped in front of his own painting Leda Atomicus. Halsman later created a volume of photographs featuring conversations with this man's mustache. A painting by him is set at Port Ligat, where a barren tree, a strange animal, and a fly all touch oddly behaving timepieces. For 10 points, name this painter of The Persistence of Memory.;;(Salvador) Dali
Biology;;Deformation of it is accompanied by tooth hypoplasia in Rieger syndrome, and Axenfeld anomaly occurs when its processes are inserted into the Schwalbe line. Supplied by the short ciliary nerve branch of the third cranial nerve, it consists mostly of a stroma. The Crypts of Fuchs allow the aqueous humor to access it, and its collaret region is where a sphincter and dilator muscle overlap to allow more or less light into the organ in which it is found. For 10 points, name this tissue that surrounds the constricted or dilated pupil, the pigmented part of the eye.;;iris
United States History;;It is given responsibility for redrawing state boundaries, administering federal prisons, and overseeing antitrust law and the Patent Office. The only newly elected 110th Congress members assigned to this body were Sheldon Whitehouse and Benjamin Cardin, and its current leader is in his third term as chairman after long serving as ranking Democrat under Orrin Hatch and Arlen Specter. For 10 points, Vermont's Patrick Leahy chairs what Senate committee whose functions include vetting Supreme Court nominees?;;Senate Judiciary (Committee);;Judiciary (Committee)
European History;;One of its first tasks was locating supporters of Beria, and its military counterpart was the GRU. Established after the dissolution of the Ministry of Internal Affairs, its chairman became head of state in 1982, and another of its chairmen, Kryuchkov, helped lead a failed coup against Gorbachev in 1991. For 10 points, identify this successor to the OGPU, NKVD, and Cheka which was the foreign intelligence and domestic police agency of the Soviet Union.;;KGB
Religion;;Drawing on certain writing of Patañjali, its philosophy is quite similar to Samkhya, another one of the orthodox darshans. This system emphasizes achieving samadhi through the eight "astanas," which include such routines as the "asana" or "seat" and the "pranayama" or regulated breathing. Its name represents the goal of "union" with God or the universe and is the root of a word for a device that controls oxen. For 10 points, name this system of Hindu practice which has found additional popularity as a health activity.;;yoga
Philosophy;;This author of A World of Propensities dedicated one of his books to all the victims of regimes which believed in exorable laws of human development. That book, The Poverty of Historicism, came out after he fled the Nazi occupation of Vienna. His political treatise The Open Society and its Enemies is a prime influence on the pro-democracy activities of George Soros. For 10 points, name this man who challenged the verificationism model for the working of science by proposing that science is distinguished from pseudoscience by falsifiability in his The Logic of Scientific Discovery.;;(Karl) (Raimund) Popper
United States History;;This law was strengthened by the passing of the Hatch Act, which provided funds for "experimental stations". The original bill was vetoed by Buchanan, but passed by Lincoln five years later. Its creator, a Vermont Republican, wanted each state to be given thirty thousand acres to be sold off as a permanent endowment for the teaching of "useful knowledge". For 10 points, identify this 1862 law that spurred the creation of schools dedicated to the study of "agricultural and mechanic arts".;;Morrill (Land-Grant) (Act)
Art;;He designed his own burial temple at Possango, as well as tombs of Pope Clement XIII and Clement XIV. The Scottish painter Gavin Hamilton guided this man's studies towards ancient Greece and Rome, and his sculptures were so realistic that he was accused of making plaster casts from live models. An exponent of Neoclassicism, for 10 points, name this Italian sculptor whose "Venus Victrix" is a reclining statue of Napoleon's sister Paullina Borghese.;;(Antonio) Canova
Geography;;James Geddes and Benjamin Wright were two of its chief planners, and work on it was delayed after problems in the Montezuma Swamp. Incorporating the Mohawk River at parts, its border became the location for towns such as Rome, Troy, and Utica, and it was finished after Black Rock lost a competition to be its terminus. For 10 points, name this passage which was constructed between 1817 and 1825 from Buffalo thanks to the efforts of DeWitt Clinton, linking the Hudson River and a Great Lake.;;Erie (Canal)
European Literature;;For some reason, this man appended an essay on portraits of John Knox to a book on the early kings of Norway. He was also the first person to translate Goethe's Wilhelm Meister's Apprenticeship into English. He had to rewrite the first volume of his history of the French Revolution after one of John Stuart Mill's friends used it in the fireplace, and other historical works include a study of hero worship. For 10 points, name this author who described a fictional philosophy of clothing in his 1836 novel Sartor Resartus.;;(Thomas) Carlyle
Religion;;He asks whether he is a dog who should be approached with sticks, then threatens to offer flesh to the birds of the sky. His opponent was transporting ten cheeses when told about this man, whose death led the battlefront to move to Gai and Ekron. This brother of Lahmi appears at Socah, in the valley of Elam, with a sword that is later used during the flight from Saul. For 10 points, the First Book of Samuel describes what "six cubits and a span"-measuring Philistine champion, who fell before the slingshot of the smaller David?;;Goliath
Biology;;The ratio of nuchal thickness to its length is often used to identify Down syndrome sufferers. One groove on it, the radial sulcus, allows the passage of the radial nerve, and its head is notably large compared to the depth of the glenoid cavity in which it lies. The supinator and the extensor carpi digitorum muscles connect at its lateral epicondyle, while a namesake tuberosity connects to the deltoid muscle of the shoulder. For 10 points, name this bone found between the scapula and the ulna, the major bone of the upper arm often called the "funny bone".;;humerus
World History;;In his youth, this man was mentored by Omar Said Tjokroaminoto, whose daughter Siti Utari became his wife. After working for the Japanese during World War II, he enunciated the doctrine of Pantjasila, or the Five Principles. He later established the so-called "Guided Democracy" and declared himself Lifetime President, but after withdrawing from the United Nations in 1965 he was overthrown in a military coup. For 10 points, name this man, the first president of Indonesia, who was deposed by Suharto.;;Sukarno
American Literature;;In this play, Lyons's jazz is derided as "Chinese music" by his father, and the Tallahassee native Alberta has an affair with the main character. The main character tries to downplay the accomplishments of Hank Aaron and Roberto Clemente, and his brother Gabriel believes that he can talk to Saint Peter and tries to blow a trumpet at a funeral. It centers on Troy Maxson, a former Negro League ballplayer whose age prevented him playing in the Majors following desegregation. For 10 points, name this August Wilson play.;;Fences
Physics;;The massive GUT defects called dyons are these with electrical charge. Examples of these entities are named for 't Hooft (tuh-WHO-uft) and Polyakov; Wu and Yang; and for the person who hypothesized that their existence to explain angular momentum quantization, Dirac. The homogeneity of Gauss' law for the B-field implies that none exist, since the total magnetic field out of a closed surface is proportional to the number of them inside. For 10 points, name these hypothetical particles: point sources for the magnetic field.;;(magnetic) monopoles
Biology;;A chemical similar to it, allantoin, is often converted into glyoxylic acid in animals, and it can be produced commercially by removing a water molecule from ammonium carbamate in the Bosch-Meiser process. The Krebs-Henseleit process describes a namesake cycle in which intermediaries such as citrulline and arginine are used to convert ammonia to ornithine and it. For 10 points, name this chemical first produced inorganically in 1828 by Friedrich Wohler, filtered from the blood into the urine, a form of nitrogenous waste produced by mammals.;;urea
United States History;;The appropriations needed for its enforcement were approved by one vote after Fischer Ames delivered a speech supporting it, and Alexander Hamilton attempted to garner support for it with the "Camillus" papers. It was ratified after the suspension of a provision of Article XII relating to West Indian trade and was necessitated by British refusal to evacuate military posts in the American Northwest. For 10 points, name this 1794 treaty with Britain negotiated by the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court.;;(John) Jay('s) (Treaty)
Anthropology;;"Fictive" types of this include the blood ritual of the Zande and the compadrazgo in Mexico. The canonical names for its various systems include Hawaiian, Omaha, Sudanese, and Eskimo. A Claude Levi Strauss study of this phenomenon is titled for its "elementary structures," and it can either be unilineal or bilineal. Whether genders, degree of relationship, birth order, or other factors are described in each terms determines what system is at work. For 10 points, this is what area of anthropological study that involves the terms used to describe family members?;;kinship
Art;;The West, North, and South facades feature representations of the Virtues and Vices, Labors of the Months, and Signs of the Zodiac, respectively. The eastern section of the carved screen depicts The Life of Joseph. The final changes to the project were made in 1864 when Viollet-Le-Duc modified the nave gallery windows and built a spire over the crossing. Its cornerstone was laid by Pope Alexander III in 1163 and to this day it stands on the Ile de la Cite (see-tay). Well known for its rose windows, for 10 points, identify this Parisian cathedral.;;Notre Dame (de Paris)
World History;;He fell out with Vladimir Jabotinsky over tactics at the 1938 Betar World Convention. He later compromised after defeating Yigael Yadin in an election by naming Yadin deputy prime minister. Earlier, he spent five years as the leader of Irgun and placed the phone call evacuating the King David Hotel prior to Irgun's bombing of that building. Though he founded the Herut party, he was the first Likud premier. For 10 points, name this Israeli leader who signed the first peace treaty with Egypt.;;(Menachem) (Wolfovitch) Begin
British Literature;;He compared "Laughing" and "Sentimental Comedy" in his Essay on the Theater. A poem by this man which asks "what art can wash her guilt away"? when a "lovely woman stoops to folly" appeared in his best-known novel. A longer poem by this man concludes that "self-dependent power can time defy" as "rocks resist the billows and the sky," and deplores the fate of "Sweet Auburn," the "loveliest village of the plain". In addition to The Deserted Village, this man wrote a play about Charles Marlow and Kate Hardcastle entitled She Stoops to Conquer. Name this English author who wrote the novel The Vicar of Wakefield.;;(Oliver) Goldsmith
Philosophy;;This man based his philosophy on the "law of the multiplication of effects". His autobiography dispels rumors that he intended to marry George Eliot and discusses his attempt to collect and revise all of his works in a magnum opus entitled The Synthetic Philosophy. He decried the social engineering of the Liberal Party in his The Man Versus the State, which drew on his analysis of the purpose of society in his earlier Social Statics. For 10 points, name this man who coined the phrase "survival of the fittest" to describe both the biological and social Darwinism he advocated.;;(Herbert) Spencer
Physics;;A vector quantity whose time derivative is always perpendicular to it and is of constant magnitude will undergo this phenomenon, which can be modified by nutation. This behavior is commonly observed in angular momentum; in a prominent example, the force of gravity on a gyroscope will create a horizontal torque to change the direction of its angular momentum. For 10 points, name this mechanical phenomenon in which the axis of a rotating object changes cyclically, describing a cone.;;precession
United States History;;One man by this surname wrote The Morality of Stage Plays Seriously Considered and Essay on the History of Civil Society as part of the Scottish Common Sense school. Another was a British commander who designed a rapid-firing rifle before he was killed at Kings Mountain. Another man by this name was a judge who upheld the Separate Car Act. For 10 points, give this name listed as the respondent in an 1896 Supreme Court case which established the "separate but equal" doctrine and was brought to court by Homer Plessy.;;Ferguson
British Literature;;He composed such carefree verses as "Song to a Fair Lady Going out of Town in Spring" but also tackled serious subjects like his Anglicanism in Religio Laici. As a member of Thomas Killigrew's theater company he wrote the tragedies Tyrannick Love and The Conquest of Granada, before finding success with the comedy Marriage a la Mode; yet his greatest drama remains his retelling of Antony and Cleopatra. For 10 points identify this British writer of All for Love and the satires Absalom and Achitophel and MacFlecknoe.;;(John) Dryden
American Literature;;She quit business college to wander locations like the greenhouse called The Jewel Box and is symbolized in the final monologue as a candle that must be extinguished. Nicknamed "Blue Roses," she listens to her father's record collection and breaks a unicorn when the "gentleman caller" to her St. Louis residence turns out to be engaged. For 10 points, name this pleurosis-crippled daughter of Amanda and sister of Tom who collects figurines in Tennessee Williams's The Glass Menagerie.;;Laura (Wingfield)
Biology;;Among its many uses are as a signal activated by the first sperm to enter an egg that closes the egg to further fertilization and starts mitosis. Its tendency to bind to albumin must be accounted for when measuring its blood levels. Parathyroid hormone regulates its resorption and it plays a central role in muscle contraction, diffusing through the sarcoplasmic reticulum and binding to troponin and tropomyosin. For 10 points, name this divalent ion, an alkaline earth metal that helps form bones and teeth.;;calcium
Music;;Twentieth-century examples of this genre include Franz Schmidt's Book of the Seven Seals and Edward Elgar's The Kingdom. Although it died out on the Continent during the mid-nineteenth century, following Liszt's Christus, it flourished in Great Britain, where the triennial Three Choirs Festival is devoted to performances of this form. For 10 points, name this genre of dramatic, often religious music which is distinguished from a cantata by the use of a unifying plot and is the form of Handel's Messiah.;;oratorio
World History;;His supporters chanted "He killed my ma. He killed my pa. I will vote for him" during his rise to power following the civil war against Charles Doe. His reign was supported by Pat Robertson, and he is accused of funding al-Qaeda and Hezbollah with diamond profits. For 10 points, name this man whose four-year exile in Nigeria was ended by his International Criminal Court trial in 2007, which charged him with committing war crimes in Sierra Leone during his six years as dictator of Liberia.;;(Charles) (Ghankay) Taylor
European History;;It was preceded by a fruitless campaign in Naxos and the realization that one side's traditional allies would not fight until the Carneian festival ended on a full moon. Two Ionian defectors informed the defenders that the opposition's cavalry had left the Takabara, or lightly armed archers, exposed on the namesake plain. The key maneuver during the encounter occurred when the center, led by Aristides and Themistocles, retreated, drawing in Datis' men and allowing the Plataeans and Athenians under Militiades to win. For 10 points, identify this 490 BC victory of the Greeks over the Persians, a battle that gives its name to a long race.;;(Battle of) Marathon
Religion;;Passages excised from this text are known as the "exclusions" or 'baraitot" and are preserved in the Tosefta. One part of it was assembled by the tanniam until closed by Judah ha-Nasi, and is divided into sixty-three massekhtaot, arranged in sections such as "Festivals," "Seeds," and "Women". Another part of this text annotates the prior sections with the writings of the amoraim. For 10 points, what collection of rabbinical laws which supplement the Bible is made up of the Mishna and the Gemara?;;Talmud
Physics;;The dynamics of classical ones can be specified by Lagrangian densities, while two of the main theories describing quantum ones are quantum chromodynamics and electroweak theory. They are almost always at least twice differentiable, and usually continuously differentiable. They can be random, scalar, vector, tensor, or spinor. Examples of them include the metric tensor in general relativity, velocity in fluid mechanics, and temperature in meteorology. The assignment of a variable quantity to every point in space, this is, for 10 points, what physical object, whose best known varieties are electrical and magnetic?;;field(s)
Art;;The group piece Aeronauts and Pigeon Trainers was completed posthumously. This sculptor gained fame with the contrapposto work General Jean Rapp and the patriotic Curse of Alsace. He used blocks of sandstone set into the cliff below the namesake town in his enormous Lion of Belfort. His greatest work was based on a design he made for the Suez Canal while visiting Egypt with Gerome. Although the Khedive rejected his vision of a giant figure, a completed version was erected on top of Richard Morris Hunt's pedestal on Bedloes Island. For 10 points identify this French sculptor of the New York harbor landmark Liberty Enlightening the World.;;(Frederic-Auguste) Bartholdi
Geography;;George Whitefield founded one of America's first orphanages here in 1740. The first steamboat to cross the Atlantic shared its name with this city and left here in 1744 for Liverpool. The Polish Revolutionary War officer Casmir Pulaski was mortally wounded here in 1779, and his namesake fort is located fifteen miles south on Cockspur Island. For 10 points, name this city founded by James Oglethorpe in 1773, the terminus of William Tecumseh Sherman's March to the Sea.;;Savannah
Mythology;;The river-island Philae contained the chief temple to this deity, who is credited with writing The Book of Breathing. One text claims that she had a child with Sopedu in that god's guise as the star Sirius. She gave birth to another son while hiding in the swamp of Khemnis and later blackmailed her way into learning the secret name of Ra by threatening Ra with a snake. For 10 points, who joined with Nepthys to find the dismembered body of her husband, saw her child overthrow Seth, and then reigned happily ever after with her son Horus and husband Osiris?;;Isis
Astronomy;;Observation of SGR 1806-20 has revealed that some of these are caused by magnetar flares, though the collapsar model better accounts for the majority of them. BeppoSAX detected the afterglow from one of these in 1997 to establish that they originate in distant galaxies; that afterglow consists of fading optical and x-ray components, but very little of the namesake radiation. For 10 points, name these very powerful, sporadic emissions of a namesake radiation that puzzled astronomers for decades.;;g(amma)(-)r(ay) b(urst(s))
European Literature;;The plays Niobe and Gob and Genoveva are examples of it, and it took its name from the subtitle of the play Wirrwarr. Writers such as Lenz and Klopstock were part of this movement, which began with Götz von Berlichingen and reached its height with a novel about a man who loves Albert's wife Lotte. For 10 points, The Sorrows of Young Werther is part of what romantic literary movement, spearheaded by Goethe, that deals with the unease and drama of existence by depicting powerful emotions?;;sturm (und) drang
United States History;;He was a plaintiff before the Supreme Court three times during a twenty-year-long lawsuit against the New York Central Railroad, which he sued for overcharging his wife by nine dollars. He won the Grand Prize at the London Great Exhibition with a device originally produced jointly with Chicago mayor William Ogden. That invention displaced the similar product of Obed Hussey by joining a reel, platform, and vibrating blade. For 10 points, name this man who founded the precursor to International Harvester to market his mechanical reaper.;;(Cyrus) (Hall) McCormick
Geography;;Four of this state's southern counties joined with the north of a neighboring state in a 1941 attempt to found the "State of Jefferson". Home to the Malheur and Umatilla National Forests and the noteworthy John Day Fossil Beds, its Deschutes National Forest is the site of the Three Sisters peaks. Fort Clatsop in this state hosted the Lewis and Clark expedition and is close to the site of the present-day city of Astoria. For 10 points, name this state home to Mt. Hood, Crater Lake, and cities such as Eugene, Salem, and Portland.;;Oregon
British Literature;;A plot crossroads in this book occurs at a ball in Brussels hosted by the Duchess of Richmond, while a subplot concerns Betsy Horrocks being cut out of a will. One character becomes a widow after George Osborne dies at Waterloo and then remarries to William Dobbin. For 10 points, name this novel featuring Miss Pinkerton's School for Girls, a marriage to Rawdon Crawley, and the friendship of Amelia Sedley and Becky Sharp, which was written by William Makepeace Thackeray.;;Vanity Fair (A Novel Without a Hero)
European History;;First erupting at Stühlingen, it issued the Twelve Articles to elaborate its demands, which included popular election of pastors and the reversal of enclosure. The former duke of Württemberg and Florian Geyer aided this movement, which was focused in Thuringia and Franconia. Its suppression by the Swabian League involved atrocities such as the Weinsberg massacre. For 10 points, Anabaptist leader Thomas Münzer led troops against nobles supported by Martin Luther in what class conflict of 1520s Germany?;;(the) Peasants' Revolt
Physics;;The specific version of this quantity is a figure of merit in rocket science. If Newton's second law is expressed as F equals d p by d t, time integrating it and applying the integral mean value theorem to the left-hand size yields this quantity, since it is equal to the mean force applied over a time interval times the duration of that interval. For 10 points, name this quantity from classical mechanics equal to the total change in linear momentum, according to its namesake momentum theorem.;;impulse
United States History;;This ruling was overturned by a federal court in 1983 after the plaintiff, who was working as a florist upon his arrest, appealed his original conviction on new grounds. Justice Murphy's dissent in this case condemned the language in the Final Report for using such terms as "undiluted strain". Arising from Executive Order 9066, this case allowed the continued operation of such facilities as Manzanar. For 10 points, name this 1944 supreme court case which the dissenters said fell into the "ugly abyss of racism" by upholding the World War II internment of Japanese-Americans.;;Korematsu (v) (USA)
United States History;;An event involving this object was investigated by the Mangrove and the Sampson Board and later by Hyman Rickover, who noted that Consul Fitzhugh Lee and Charles Sigsbee had expected no problems to come to it from Valeriano Weyler. Its 275 casualties were taken to Colón Cemetery, and the "yellow journalism of the day" seized on the events of February 15, 1898 surrounding it. For 10 points, name this ship that exploded in Havana Harbor, leading to the Spanish-American War.;;(USS) Maine
European Literature;;One character in this work declares that "the bad end unhappily, the good unluckily". A pirate attack follows the discovery of several actors playing music from inside of barrels in this play. After failing to "glean" a mentally unstable youth or amuse themselves by flipping improbable coins, the title characters are given a letter instructing the king of England to kill their companion. For 10 points, name this play in which the two title characters witness the corpse of Polonius being hidden, written by Tom Stoppard.;;Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are Dead
Mythology;;His wife is worshipped at a holiday called the "festival of the inkstand". Pushkar is the only remaining temple of this god, who rides a swan called the hamsa. Over time, his legend subsumed the older god Prajapati, and this husband of Sarasvati was born from either a golden egg or a lotus in Vishnu's navel. For 10 points, name this member of the Trimurti, the creator god of Hinduism.;;Brahma
Biology;;Their activity and secretions are often determined using the ELISPOT technique, and go into apoptosis due to inability to express their TCR receptors or lack of positive selection. Only about 2 percent of those created actually mature and differentiate, and their receptors are constantly searching for fragments of the major histocompatibility complex, or MHC. Divided into three major types, they maintain homeostasis, activate cytokines, and destroy certain antigens. For 10 points, name these lymphocytes formed in the thymus, which can exist in the suppressor, helper, or cytotoxic varieties.;;T cells
Music;;His ten completed concertos are the most of any nineteenth-century composer. Late in his career, he was derided for polemical writings such as "Anarchy in Music," but he earlier won approval with such works as the Christmas Oratorio and Prometheus's Wedding. His fifth piano concerto used a Nubian folk song and was nicknamed "Egyptian," while his third symphony served as a treatise on the use of the organ. For 10 points, name this composer of Samson et Délila, Danse macabre, and Carnival of the Animals.;;(Charles) (Camille) Saint(-)Saens
British Literature;;This man's ward keeps cutting the linen that tied her to the house and is put into the coal hole for punishment. His beloved Sarah marries the man who framed him for robbing a dying deacon, William Dane. Jem Rodney caught him during one of his visitations, and is later blamed for the disappearance of some gold, which ends up in the bottom of a pit and was really stolen by Dunstan Cass. He only talks to Dolly Winthrop, who helped raise his adopted Eppie. For 10 points, name this titular weaver in a George Eliot novel.;;Silas (Marner)
European History;;This event was preceded by the formation of the "Patriot League" and precipitated by a young man's frequent trips to visit his sick father in Mulhouse. It ostensibly revolved around the creation of a 75mm field gun that was secretly being developed, but was notably left off of the handwritten note that was found in Major Schwartzkoppen's trash. Even after being exposed by Colonel Picquart, the true author of the letter, Captain Esterhazy, was acquitted. Meanwhile, its innocent namesake was court-martialed and sent to Devil's Island. For 10 points, identify this event that prompted Zola to write "J'Accuse," a controversy about the illegitimate imprisonment of a French-Jewish military man.;;Dreyfus (Affair)
Astronomy;;There are six features named for Dawes on this planet, and its surface plains include the Amazonian, the Arabian, and the Hellas. Its polar caps shrink in the summer, and it was visited by the Express Orbiter and the Beagle 2 in 2003. Goethite was found in the Columbia Hills by the Spirit Rover, and hematite was discovered on Meridiani Planum by the Opportunity Rover. Its atmosphere is primarily carbon dioxide, and it was mapped by the Gobal Surveyor. For 10 points, name this planet whose canals were described imaginatively by Percival Lowell, the red colored planet just beyond Earth.;;Mars
Chemistry;;Because it does not bind with other metals, it is the most easily extractable of all metallic ores; the metal is then obtained by heating in air, a process that also produces sulfur dioxide. Of its seven isotopes, the mass-202 nucleus is the most stable, while its mass-194 radionuclide has a half-life of approximately 444 years. Its selenide and telluride salts can be used in semiconductor manufacturing. A dimethyl compound of it causes death by inhibiting the enzyme pyruvate dehydrogenase, while a methyl variety can build up in the food chain, especially in fish. Once widely used in hat manufacturing, this is, for 10 points, what element whose name comes from Greek for "liquid silver"?;;mercury
Biology;;A recorder of several Meteorological Annuals, he earned the title of assistant to the royal botanist and traveled widely, but his mature work truly began after his observations of mollusks. His subsequent writings, including the three-volume Flora and his Zoological Philosophy, championed the thesis of a "tendency to perfection" and explained and popularized his theories of "use and disuse" and of "acquired characteristics". For 10 points, identify this French pioneer of evolutionary theory.;;(Jean) (Baptiste) Lamarck
European History;;Among this ruler's successes were the hospital reorganization carried out by Gerhard van Swieten. This monarch also established a "chastity commission" to reform public morals and oversaw Count Haugwitz's caps on forced labor. That was more successful than the "Diplomatic Revolution" which alienated the British and caused her to lose lands in such conflicts as the War of the Bavarian Succession. For 10 points, name this mother of Marie Antoinette and Joseph II, the alleged "enlightened monarch" of Austria.;;Maria Theresa
European Literature;;He wrote of "an extraordinary incident" involving Ivan Matveitch and Elena Ivanovna in "The Crocodile" and wrote "The Little Hero" while in prison. His journals The Epoch and Vremya were both condemned by the authorities, and while he was awaiting execution, he was spared by Nicholas I and sent to Siberia. There, this author of Poor Folk began The House of the Dead. For 10 points, name this Russian author of The Possessed and the story of Rodion Raskolnikov, Crime and Punishment.;;(Fyodor) (Mikhailovich) Dostoevsky
Biology;;Many materials of this type, including C32, have recently been used to deliver DNA for use in gene therapy. Atactic ones are amorphous, while ones with greater tactility are more crystalline. Random, block, and graft are the three main co-varieties, while condensation and addition are their two main mechanisms of formation. They require an ionic or free radical initiator, often produced with the help of Ziegler-Natta catalysts. For 10 points, name this kind of material that is formed from numerous separate monomers, common examples of which include starches and polyethylene.;;polymer(s)
Art;;A silver tuba resting on its bell emits orange flame in his The Discovery of Fire. In one of his paintings, well-dressed men fall from the sky, while in another, an apple hovers in front of a man's face. Bowler hats and misplaced naked women dominate the work of this man who also showed a train emerging from a fireplace in another piece. For 10 points, name this painter of Golconde and Time Transfixed, whose The Treachery of Images is a picture of a pipe with the words "this is not a pipe" written under it.;;(Rene) Magritte
Geography;;Quiberon Bay and the megalith sites of Kerzerho and Carnac lie in this region, which is bounded on its north and east by the Gulf of St. Malo. The départments (day-par-mon) of Ille-et-Vilaine (eel-ay-velahn), Cotes-d'Armor, Morbihan, and Finistère are found here, though it no longer contains a city known in this region's historical language as Naoned and to others as Nantes (nans). Cities such as Quimper, Rennes, and Brest are still found here. For 10 points, identify this peninsular, westernmost region of France, named for its longtime connection to England.;;Brittany
World History;;The last one began as a reaction to the murder of Auguste Chapdelaine, a French missionary, and an illegal boarding of a British ship, the Arrow. The original had its roots in the breakup of the British East India Company and began as a response to the burning of an import good by trade commissioner Lin Zexu (zuh-soo). They were ended by the Treaty of Tianjin (tee-an-zing) and the Treaty of Nanking, For 10 points, what wars were fought between Britain and China over the trade of an intoxicant?;;Opium (Wars)
Physics;;This rule may be derived by applying the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality to the expectation value of the commutator of two operators, which leads to an intermediate form known as the Robertson-Schrödinger relation. It does not apply when the commutator of two quantum mechanical operators is zero. A form of this principle was extended to energy and time in 1945, but its standard version applies to position and momentum. For 10 points, name this principle of quantum mechanics which states that the values of two incompatible observables cannot simultaneously be known exactly.;;(Heisenberg((')s)) Uncertainty (Principle)
Art;;Though Giuseppe Ceracchi lost his commission for a larger monument to this man, his busts were created during this man's lifetime. Thomas Crawford featured him astride a horse while Horatio Greenough's depiction was inspired by Phidias. The most famous statue of this man depicts him standing and includes a plough in the background—an allusion to his retirement as a farmer. That 1788 work was placed in Richmond and created by Jean Antoine Houdon. For 10 points identify this oft-sculpted subject, the first President of the United States.;;(depictions of) (George) Washington
British Literature;;Honor's voice can't provoke the silent dust, nor can "Flattery soothe the dull cold ear of Death". This poem mentions Charles I's opposition then suggests "some Cromwell guiltless of his country's blood," and "some mute inglorious Milton here may rest". Some "hoary-headed swain" babbles some "wayward fancies" then reads (for thou canst read): "fair science frowned not on his humble birth, and melancholy marked him for her own" marked on an epitaph. For 10 points, "far from the madding crowd's ignoble strife" is the titular location in a poem by Thomas Gray.;;Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard
Mythology;;A figure with the same name preceded Agamemnon as the husband of Clytemnestra. This king of Sipylus was the father of the woman who was turned to stone for boasting of her children to Apollo, Niobe. His greatest crime was giving ambrosia to mortals and gossiping about the goings-on at Olympus. For 10 points, name this man, who is also punished in Hades for causing the gods to eat his son Pelops, and who is surrounded by moving trees and a quick-drying lake which prevents him from eating or drinking.;;Tantalus
American Literature;;Most of his ear was bitten off by a dog named Bonkers, but he got his revenge years later by biting off the dog's ear. After the failure of his novel Second Wind of the Cuckold, he befriended the transsexual Philadelphia Eagle Roberta Muldoon, but he was ultimately assassinated by Ellen Jamesian. Conceived by a brain damaged technical sergeant at Boston Mercy and radical feminist Jenny Fields, he later became a wrestling coach. For 10 points, a John Irving novel tells of "the world according to" what character?;;(T(.)) (S(.)) Garp
American Literature;;He defeated a youth clothed in green and yellow garments and then buried that opponent, who regenerated as an ear of corn. This character won a fight against a wizard named Pearl Feather, and he gave the woodpecker its color. His friends Chibiabos and Iagoo sang of his victories, and he welcomed white men to the wigwam of Nokomis and listened to their stories of Jesus. For 10 points, name this son of the West Wind and husband of Minnehaha, who lives "by the shining big sea water" in a Longfellow "song".;;Hiawatha
Mythology;;A dead one will act as a charm against spiders, and weasels are immune to its powers. It dines only on rue, since its breath withers all other plants. A toad must sit on an egg laid by a seven-year-old rooster when Sirius is in the sky in order to create one of these monsters, which can only be killed by seeing its own reflection and dying of fright or by hearing a rooster crow. Spearing this creature from horseback resulted in imminent poison for both the rider and the horse. For 10 points, name this mythical snake with a bird's head.;;basilisk
Biology;;Usher syndrome causes one version of it to fail, preventing cilia from forming, and Griscelli syndrome is also caused by an abnormality in a gene that codes for it. Its rod-shape was explored by Albert Szent-Gyorgyi in 1940, and it consists of two 20 kilodalton peptide chains intertwined at their middles by alpha helices, which form ATP-cleaving "heads" at each end. The central portion of an A band in a sarcomere, known as the H zone, is defined by the presence of this molecule. For 10 points, name this protein that accounts for about 60 percent of muscle protein, the larger counterpart of actin.;;myosin
European History;;Its position was recognized by the Peace of Stralsund, which ended its war with King Valdemar IV of Denmark, and its decline was signaled twenty-four years later when Ivan III closed its "Kontore" in Novgorod. Governed by the "law of Lubeck," it sent agents from a base at Visby to help found such cities as Tallinn, Riga, and Gdansk. For 10 points, identify this group which derived its name from a medieval German word for "guild," and comprised a league of Northern European trading communities.;;Hanseatic (League)
Philosophy;;He declared that actors who are the greatest imitators are the least sensitive humans in his essay Paradox of Acting. In one of his writings, Mademoiselle de L'Espinasse hears a discussion of the continuity of living matter, while he also wrote a novel about convent life. Jacques the Fatalist, The Nun, and Rameau's Nephew build on ideas he explored as the major contributor to a twenty-eight volume work on which he collaborated with Jean d'Alembert. For 10 points, identify this chief editor of the Encyclopedie.;;(Denis) Diderot
Mythology;;One figure by this name betrayed Megara to Minos by pulling a purple hair from the head of King Nisus. Another character with this name fell in love with a fisherman who achieved immortality by chewing on a mysterious plant, Glaucus. When Circe fell for Glaucus as well, this woman's bathwater was poisoned with an agent that caused her to change shape. For 10 points, name this woman with six dogs' heads attached to her, who pestered sailors at the Strait of Messina along with the whirpool Charybdis.;;Scylla
Biology;;A recent PNAS paper examining the distribution of global genetic diversity cited a serial occurrence of these outwards from Africa as an explanation for the geographic distribution of heterozygosity. Common in island habitats, examples include the relatively high rate of polydactyly among the Amish and a type of skull defect among South African Muslims. Originally defined by Ernst Mayr, populations formed by it often exhibit inbreeding due to a reduced gene pool. For 10 points, name this phenomenon which is often caused by a population bottleneck and consists of a small fraction of a larger population exhibiting vastly different genetic diversity.;;founder effect
Music;;Stendahl once contrasted the storm music in Der Freischutz to the storm music in this opera, which features many arias in the Lesson Scene. The composer intended to insert a coloratura section there after this work premiered under the title of "The Useless Precaution". In it, Bartolo demonstrates what good old-fashioned music is, crying down Rosina, who is amorously involved with a disguised Count Almaviva. For 10 points, name this Rossini opera about Figaro's adventures in Spain.;;(The) Barber of Seville
World History;;It names a kingdom that was overrun by the Almoravids, during the reign of Tunka Menin, and had grown rich through its domination of the salt trade from its capital at Kumbi. The first important European settlement in what became the country of this name was founded in 1471 at Elmina. More recently the part-Scottish John Jerry Rawlings overthrew then President Hilla Liman and served as leader until 2001. It achieved independence from England in 1951 when the leader of the Convention People's Party, Kwame Nkrumah, was elected premier. For 10 points, identify this West African republic that was formed from the merger of Togoland and the Gold Coast.;;Ghana
Economics;;A 1990 experiment showed that rats treat food pellets laced with quinine as these, while this model has also been applied to explain why lower-income families have more children. These items have negative income elasticity of demand, and a subtype of them which actually sees a decreased income cause increased demand is known as a Giffen good. For 10 points, name this goods which, unlike "normal goods," suffer from a decreased demand when income rises because they are not preferred by consumers who have a choice.;;inferior (good(s))
American Literature;;A close friendship with an instructor at St. Andrew's School led to his early work Letters to Father Flye. One of his novels ends with a tirade against religion after a butterfly lands on the coffin of Rufus Follet's father. Fortune magazine gave him an assignment in 1936 that led to his account of the lives of sharecroppers, and he also collaborated with Walker Evans on Let Us Now Praise Famous Men. For 10 points, name this author who created Rufus Follett in A Death in the Family.;;(James) Agee
Astronomy;;The evolution of this object was subjected to a Monte Carlo simulation by Heisler in 1990, while Hut and Tremaine earlier determined that atomic clouds have little effect on it. Jack Hills postulated an extension of it in 1981, one half century after it was conceived by Ernest Opik. The discovery of Sedna offered a possible object with its inner area, and it was postulated after observing peaks at 10,000 and 50,000 AU in the aphelia of long period comets. For 10 points, name this hypothetical spherical distribution of comets surrounding the solar system.;;(Orik)(-)Oort (Cloud)
Chemistry;;In 2006, it was shown that the response of actin filaments to osmotic stress is governed by it, as osmotic stress causes a reaction that decreases water's chemical potential in an actin solution. The common ion is a consequence of it, as the common ion suppresses the ionization of a weak acid or base, which causes an equilibrium shift. For 10 points, name this chemical principle that states that changes in concentration, temperature, or pressure will yield a change in equilibrium state that partially counteracts that change.;;Le Chatlier's (principle)
Religion;;The Canadian government paid them restitution for lost estates in 1888, while Portugal charged them with complicity in the 1759 Tavoras conspiracy. During the Chinese Rites Controversy, they argued that ceremonies honoring Confucius could be compatible with Christian beliefs. Led by the "Black Pope," their founder advocated believing that "black is white," and they started institutions such as Fordham and Georgetown universities. For 10 points name this Catholic order founded by Ignatius Loyola.;;Jesuit(s)
British Literature;;His final work describes his adventures with Captain Veal on board the Queen of Portugal, while another tells of a young man who is nearly corrupted by the bumbling Lady Booby. This part time crime fighter founded the Bow Street Runners detective agency and used his wife, Charlotte Craddock, as the model for both the title heroine in Amelia and Sophia Western in another work. For 10 points, name this man who wrote Jonathan Wild and Joseph Andrews as well as the "history of a foundling," Tom Jones.;;(Henry) Fielding
United States History;;It called for extending a line of security as far as Cairo, Illinois, and had the ultimate goal of encouraging loyalists to turn on governors. Its slowness and reliance on ships which were not yet built led many commanders to oppose this strategy after it was proposed by Winfield Scott, though Secretary of the Navy Gideon Welles did his best to implement it. For 10 points, name this strategy of holding the Mississippi and blockading ports in order to "strangle" the Confederacy, which was abandoned early in the Civil War.;;Anaconda (Plan)
Geography;;Their interests are forcefully pursued by a group now named KongraGel, which was led by the notorious Abdullah Ocalan under a former name. In another country, this group is clustered near Dahuk, Erbil, Kirkuk, and Mosul. For 10 points, twenty-three percent of the Iraqi population belongs to what ethnic group, often considered a strong U.S. ally, which seeks to carve out its own state from portions of Iraq, Iran, and Turkey?;;Kurd(s)
Physics;;This equation yields the wave equation for the vector potential in the Lorenz gauge, since one side of it contains the Laplacian of the vector potential. The prediction of radiation required the emendation of this rule by the addition of the displacement current. The Biot-Savart (BEE-yo suh-VAR) law gives a static solution to this equation. For 10 points, name this law that gives the magnetic induction resulting from a current density; one of Maxwell's equations named for a French schoolteacher and electric current researcher.;;Ampere('s) (Law)
Music;;The original title of this fifteen-movement work was to have been "Hartmann," after a friend of the composer who created the objects in its published title. The movement "Con mortuis in lingua mortua" develops themes from the two "Promenades" in this piano suite, which was later arranged for full orchestra by Maurice Ravel. For 10 points, name this suite based on watercolors and sketches, including "Baba Yaga" and "The Great Gate of Kiev," and composed by Modest Mussorgsky.;;Pictures at an Exhibition
Biology;;Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome leads to a reduction in these cells' adhesiveness, and Sjogren's syndrome alters their ability to differentiate. Interleukin 4 was originally noted for its ability to stimulate their differentiation and growth, and interleukin 7 acts mostly on their most immature forms. The "plasma" variety secretes antibodies, while the "memory" variety is antigen-specific to provide long-lasting immunity. For 10 points, name these lymphocytes that are produced in the bone marrow, though they are actually named for the avian bursa of Fabricius, and are often contrasted with T-cells.;;b cell(s)
Art;;In one of his works, green- and red-clad women look to the side while sitting at the feet of the title figure, who is being crowned by an angel while another man holds up a lyre. In another painting by this man, a nude woman with her back to the viewer holds a blue curtain and a fan in her right hand while curving her very long spine. For 10 points, name this student of Jacques-Louis David who painted The Apotheosis of Homer and The Grand Odalisque.;;(Jean) (Auguste) (Dominique) Ingres
Geography;;The cities of Kilinochchi and Mullaittivu are found in the semi-independent Vanni region of this country, and its government controls an enclave including of Point Pedro, Jaffna, and the Dutch-named island of Delft. Pilgrimage sites here include Adam's Peak and the Temple of the Sacred Tooth Relic in the cultural capital of Kandy. For 10 points, name this island country known to medieval Arabs as Serendib and twentieth-century English speakers as Ceylon, which has a capital called Colombo.;;Sri Lanka
American Literature;;One member of this circle wrote "Elegy on the Times" about the Boston Port Bill and the satire McFingal, while another wrote "The Vision of Columbus". Their other works include The Political Greenhouse and The Echo, published in the The American Mercury, as well as The Anarchiad and The Hasty Pudding. For 10 points, Timothy Dwight, Lemuel Hopkins, John Trumbull, and Joel Barlow comprised what group of Federalist writers associated with Yale and named for a city in the same state as that university?;;Hartford Wits
European History;;Beginning as a Corinthian colony on the island of Ortygia, it was ruled by the tyrant Gelon, who defeated Carthage at the Battle of Himera. It defeated an Athenian expedition under Nicias during the Peloponnesian Wars, and its fortunes varied under such rulers as Dionysius I and II. Even the claws and burning mirrors deployed by an innovative employee of Hiero II could not prevent the Roman conquest of this city. For 10 points, name this Greek colony, defended by Archimedes, that is still a large city on Sicily.;;Syracuse
Philosophy;;He ofen railed against Fechner's Law, a psychological principle which relates stimulus and sensation intensities. This "process philosopher" attempted to displace "spatialized" scientific time with "lived time" in his essay "Time and Free Will". This author of Matter and Memory also expounded a philosophy of human development driven by the élan vital and attempted to explain "the meaning of the comic". For 10 points, name this French thinker who wrote Laughter and Creative Evolution.;;(Henri) (Louis) Bergson
Religion;;This category includes anyone who kills for a living, such as fishermen; anyone whose work involved contact with human bodily fluids; and anyone who ate or worked with dead cattle. Their rights were eventually protected in the Poona Pact. Falling below the Sudra on the varna scale, they were dubbed the Harijan, or "Children of God," by Gandhi. For 10 points, name these lowest members of a society that subscribes to the Hindu caste system.;;untouchable(s)
United States History;;Given the patriotic designation HR 1776, the act establishing this was drafted by Treasury Department attorneys Edward Foley and Oscar Cox. University of Chicago President Robert Hutchins said that its passage meant that "the American people are about to commit suicide". Administered by Harry Hopkins, it ultimately delivered forty-nine billion dollars of aid and was extended to the USSR in April 1941. For 10 points, name this system by which the U.S. aided Axis opponents without requiring payment.;;Lend(-)Lease (Act)
World Literature;;One memorable scene involves Mr. Zagallo, the Geography teacher, who rips the hair off of one of his students' heads. The novel ends after an encounter at the Confidential Club and the familiar taste from an old pickle jar. Its last sections describe General Zulfikar's army invading Bangladesh, Shiva's rise to power, and the realization that the titular group has failed to live up to their promise. For 10 points, identify this novel about Saleem Sinai, whose life mirrors India's path as a new nation, a work by Salman Rushdie.;;Midnight's Children
United States History;;This man proposed a plan for the "general arrangement of the militia" which would have instituted military service for all males and created three corps divided by age. During the Revolutionary War, he directed the transfer of the arsenal captured at Fort Ticonderoga to Washington's camp. In 1785, he succeeded Benjamin Lincoln in a position which put him in charge of Indian affairs, and in 1789 he remained in that post in the first cabinet. For 10 points, name this politician from Maine who was the first Secretary of War.;;(Henry) Knox
Physics;;A quantity with this name is equal to the volume times the volume derivative of pressure times minus one and gives the fractional volume decrease of a body with pressure; this is the bulk quantity of this type. The one of these of rigidity is determined by a torsion test. The one of these of elasticity is the constant of proportionality in Hooke's law and is also known as Young's one. For 10 points, name these quantities that characterize materials and that are not to be confused with a mathematical operation involving remainders.;;modul(i|us){1}?
World History;;During it, the so-called "War of the Year of the Dragon" broke out, but that ended following the suicide of a group of young soldiers known as the White Tiger Corps. It began with the Satcho Alliance, which brought together the Satsuma and Choshu leaders and led to the end of the reigning bakufu. It supplanted the Republic of Ezo and was named for the chronological title of Mutsuhito. For 10 points, name this movement that ended the Tokugawa shogunate and "restored" Japanese imperial power.;;Meiji (Restoration)
Art;;One of his portraits shows a man with a shaved head wearing a floppy red cap and a green robe, Nicholas Boylston. His other portraits include Mr. and Mrs. Thomas Mifflin and a picture of a man holding a silver teapot while leaning on a polished table, Paul Revere. In another painting by this man, one of the title characters is about to be speared, while the other is being pulled out of the water by a rescue boat before he can be bitten a third time. For 10 points, name this man who painted Watson and the Shark.;;(John) (Singleton) Copley
Art;;His most accomplished employees weere Michael Perchin and François Berbaum. Taking inspiration from the Louis XVI style, he produced items such as a silver kovsh and a robotic rooster for his patrons. One of his lines was commissioned by Alexander III to celebrate Easter in 1884. For 10 points, name this French jewelsmith working in Russia who created several intricately decorated eggs.;;(Peter) (Carl) Faberge
British Literature;;This group included Colin Wilson, author of The Outsider. Another member chronicled The Death of William Posters and wrote of the factory worker Arthur Seaton in Saturday Night and Sunday Morning. Named for a work by Leslie Paul, their most representative piece featured the dysfunctional marriage of Allison and Jimmie Porter. For 10 points, name this group that produced The Loneliness of the Long Distance Runner and Look Back in Anger and included such authors as Alan Sillitoe and John Osborne.;;Angry Young Men
Chemistry;;Formerly used a starting material of the Wacker process to produce acetaldehyde, an excellent feedstock for aldehydes and ketones, its biosynthesis uses methionine as a starting material and proceeds thorough 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid as an intermediate. Known for a mild anesthetic effect in humans, in plants it has a variety of effects, including inhibition of auxin transportation, encouragement of root growth during flooding, flower opening, leaf abscission and ripening of fruit. For 10 points, name this simplest olefin compound with formula C2H4.;;ethylene
American Literature;;This author wrote about a professor of comparative literature who divorces his wife Elisabeth and falls in love with a woman named Claire in The Professor of Desire. In The Ghost Writer, he introduced a character who would also appear in such novels as I Married a Communist and American Pastoral. Name this author who created the character Nathan Zuckerman, whose other books include The Human Stain and Portnoy's Complaint.;;(Phillip) Roth
Religion;;This group engages in such practices as "overstanding," "I-and-I," and speaking "Iyaric" Their "livity" involves eating the "Ital," a vegetarian diet that avoids certain manufactured foods, and services might involve the drum ceremony called a "bingi". This Jah-worshipping group believes they are being tested in "Babylon" and that Haile Selaisse was the second coming of Christ. For 10 points, name this religion which casts black-white racial conflict in Apocalyptic terms and is commonly practiced in Jamaica.;;Rastafari(anism)
Mythology;;This god was considered responsible for making digestion work and is now a patron of virility. In his most popular period, he mediated all sacrifices. Goats and parrots pull the chariot of this seven-armed god, who is covered in butter. His son was the classical war god, and he is often called the twin of Indra, while Kali is one of his tongues. For 10 points, name this red-colored Vedic god of fire.;;Agni
Physics;;The intensity of this phenomenon is inversely proportional to a Lorentzian function, which is sometimes also known as a Breit-Wigner distribution. The orbital form of this phenomenon is responsible for the 2-to-3 ratio of the orbital periods of Pluto and Neptune. Its linewidth is inversely proportional to the Q-factor, and for an RLC circuit, the fundamental frequency at which it occurs is given by one over the square root of the capacitance times the inductance. Given by the square root of the spring constant over the mass for a mass on a spring, for 10 points, identify this phenomenon which occurs for oscillating systems when they are driven at their fundamental frequency.;;resonance
United States History;;This state is represented in Statuary Hall by the botanist surveyor General Edmund Smith and the "father of refrigeration," Doctor John Gorrie. Its first-ever Senator was also the first Jewish Senator, David Levy Yulee. Jim Davis lost to Charlie Crist in its last gubernatorial election, and this state had a twelve-year period in which it was represented by Senators Connie Mack and Bob Graham. For 10 points, name this state which now sends Bill Nelson and Mel Martinez to the Senate and was formerly governed by Jeb Bush.;;Florida
Geology;;One interesting recent explanation for it is evolutionary pressures produced by true polar wander. The 'snowball earth' hypothesis of massive oxygen concentrations plunging the Earth into an ice age is another possible explanation for it, though molecular clock data seems to indicate a similar event occurred 500 million years before it, as the oldest bilateral animals seem to date back one billion years. Shifts in strontium, sulfur and carbon geoisotopic ratios as well as fossils in such well-known formations as the Burgess Shale and Doushantou formations are taken as signs of, for 10 points, what profusion of animal life about 540 million years ago?;;Cambrian Explosion
European History;;It resolved to revise the Montreux Convention and continue the International Zone of Tangier. Allied withdrawal from Tehran and the joining of Kaliningrad to Russia were also agreed here, as was the naming of the Oder-Neisse line as Poland's western border. It was Winston Churchill's last summit with Stalin and Truman, as Clement Attlee replaced Churchill midway through this meeting, which took place on July 17 to August 2, 1945. For 10 points, name this Allied conference which took place in a Berlin suburb.;;Potsdam (Conference)
Music;;His sister married painter Wilhelm Hensel and wrote half of the work Twelve Songs¸ formerly attributed solely to this man. This composer of the comic opera Comacho's Wedding and the oratorio Paulus conducted the premiere of Schubert's Ninth Symphony, and he created the German form of "songs without words" in his eight books by that name. For 10 points, name this writer of the oratorio Elijah as well as the Scottish and Reformation symphonies.;;(Felix) Mendelssohn
European Literature;;This author of the essay "Contre Sainte-Beuve," the short story collection Pleasures and Days, and the autobiographical Jean Santeuil translated two of John Ruskin's minor works into French. Components of another of his projects include Cities of the Plain, Within a Budding Grove, and Swann's Way. For 10 points, name this author who tasted tea and a biscuit and decided to remember his childhood in great detail in a series that is literally called In Search of Lost Time but is usually rendered as Remembrance of Things Past.;;(Marcel) Proust
British Literature;;An Interpreter shows this work's protagonist a series of pictures including caged Despair, and the main character later battles the scale-covered devil Apollyon and passes the caves of Pope and Pagan. The basis for the e.e. cummings novel The Enormous Room, this novel follows a man who is detained by Mr. Wordly Wiseman and falls into the Slough of Despond on a journey from the City of Destruction to the City of Zion. For 10 points, name this 1678 allegory about Christianity by John Bunyan.;;(The) Pilgrim's Progress
American Literature;;John Newman Edwards was responsible for creating myths surrounding this man, whose mother Zerelda charged visitors a quarter to take pebbles from his grave and whose half-brother Archie was killed in 1875 in a detective raid. He took part in Bloody Bill Anderson's massacre at Centralia, and was later killed by Bob Ford after Governor Thomas Crittenden offered Ford a pardon. For 10 points name this Confederate soldier turned outlaw, whose gang included his brother Frank and the Younger brothers.;;(Jesse) James
Physics;;It can be found as the outward contraction of the stress, tau. Tipping occurs when this must act at the edge of an object to cancel a torque and, for its magnitude goes to zero bodies lose contact. Because the magnitude of this for a body on a plane depends on the angle of elevation, inclined planes can be used to determine coefficients of friction. For 10 points, name this type of force that acts out of the face of two bodies in contact, is proportional to the friction between two bodies, and is symbolized N.;;normal (force)
Geography;;A city in this country is home to Sankore University and Mosque, while its largest river flows past Segou and Mopti. It is also the site of Gao, the onetime Songhai capital, and Djenné, the site of a notable mud-built mosque. Arguably its most famous city is a town now a backwater of 32,000 people and its capital is located, as are many cities in this country, on the Niger River. For 10 points, name this country dominated by the Sahara, a former French colony that is the location of Timbuktu and Bamako.;;Mali
European History;;Following the expulsion in 1868 of Isabella from Spain, a member of this extant dynasty became the controversial candidate for the throne. The 1442 Treaty of Wittstock gave the Mecklenberg lands to this dynasty, split into Swabian and Franconian branches. It later ruled in Romania. For 10 points, name this line that comprised the Electors of Brandenburg, the Prussian royal house of Frederick the Great, and the Imperial German Kaisers.;;Hohenzollern (dynasty)
Mythology;;His shield was made by Tychius and had bronze over seven bull hides, and he used such weapons to kill King Teleutas and married her daughter. In the Iliad, where he is seen to "tower above" the other Greeks, he joins Odysseus and Phoenix in the embassy to Achilles and was the one who retrieved the corpse of Patroclus. He traded a belt and sword with Hector after an inconclusive battle, but eventually fell on his own sword. For 10 points, name this son of Telamon who went mad after he was not given the weapons of Achilles.;;Ajax (the Greater)
Physics;;In 2003, British scientists observed an inverse variety of it, in which frequency increases after reflection from a receding boundary. It also causes a namesake type of broadening, which in nuclear reactors causes power output to decrease as temperature increases. The Ives-Stilwell experiment utilized its transverse variety to test time dilation, and its original version simply states that frequency change is equal to the velocity of a transmitter divided by the wavelength of the transmitted wave. For 10 points, name this effect also responsible for blueshift and redshift that causes an observer to believe that a moving ambulance's siren is changing pitch.;;Doppler (effect) (shift)
Art;;His writings include Projects in Europe, while early work, including his Weatherhead School, was influenced by reading Colin Rowe's Collage City. His commercial ventures include the Kobe Fish Restaurant in Japan and the Joseph Magnin stores in Costa Mesa and San Jose. Barry Diller's IAC headquarters, an all white glass building on the Hudson River, was recently profiled in Vanity Fair, but this architect remains best known for the curving forms that characterize his work for the Walt Disney Concert Hall and a certain museum in Spain. For 10 points, identify this architect who designed the Guggenheim Museum Bilbao.;;(Frank) (Owen) Gehry
European History;;This dynasty suffered sixty-year period of decline that saw its lands ruled by Cicco Simonetta and Ludovico the Moor after one of this group's members, Galeazzo Maria, was assassinated at a Christmas party. The Peace of Lodi recognized the ascension of this group, which was founded by Muzio Attendolo. For 10 points, name this dynasty which was raised from a line of mercenaries to the holders of a hereditary dukedom after Francesco displaced the Visconti as rulers of Milan.;;Sforza (family)
Physics;;The sum of the various components of this quantity trace out an ellipsoid when the frame of reference changes with time. The matrix representing its general tensor form is diagonal when the coordinate axes are chosen to lie along the principal axes. The parallel axis theorem gives this quantity when the mass in question has been displaced parallel to an axis of rotation. This quantity times the angular acceleration gives the torque and its product with the angular frequency is the angular momentum. Given by some a constant of proportionality time the mass times the distance from the axis squared, for 10 points, identify this quantity relating to rigid bodies, the rotational analogue of mass.;;moment of inertia
European Literature;;After moving to California, he wrote "The Pavilion on the Links" and The Silverado Squatters. In another novel, the brothers James and Henry struggle to negotiate the Jacobite uprisings and fight over the title of The Master of Ballantrae. His juvenile work includes A Child's Garden of Verses; a novel that was later continued in Catriona and focused on David Balfour; and the tale of Jim Hawkins. For 10 points identify this Scottish author of Kidnapped and Treasure Island.;;(Robert) (Louis) Stevenson
Mythology;;He was the first person to use both consonants and vowels, and he eventually married the owner of a famous necklace after using the teeth of a dragon to grow warriors. His borthers Thasus, Cilix, and Phoenix likewise founded cities after being dispatched by his father Agenor, who told this man and his brothers to find a woman who had been abducted from Phoenicia by a white bull. For 10 points, name this man whose search for his sister led him to found the Boeotian city of Thebes.;;Cadmus
Music;;. His Suite in E and Christus show his first experimentation with the use of plainsong in modern music. His later works include Concerto in the Mixolydian Mode, Three Botticelli Pictures, and Ancient Airs and Dances. He also wrote three pieces celebrating such sites in his country's capital as the Trevi and the Villa Borghese. For 10 points, name this composer of Roman Festival, The Fountains of Rome, and The Pines of Rome.;;(Ottorino) Respighi
Physics;;The equation for an ideal one assumes that recombination-generation current is not significant, and that only three processes give rise to current within it. That equation, named after William Shockley, is not to be confused with one type which has a low forward voltage drop, and is named after Walter Schottky. The Esaki variety can have negative resistance due to quantum tunneling, while one that can conduct backwards is named after Clarence Zener. For 10 points, name these electronics components that allow current to flow in one direction but not the other, best known for their "light-emitting" variety.;;diode(s)
United States History;;Outrage over this incident was inflamed at the funeral of Robert MacDonald, who was mortally wounded during the exchange of fire. It began after John Meade's rowboat expedition was rebuffed and led to eighteen deaths on one participant, which was commanded by newly promoted captain James Barron. For 10 points, identify this 1807 encounter in which four suspected deserters from the Halifax were seized and impressed after a skirmish near Norfolk between an American ship and a British ship.;;Chesapeake(-)Leopard (Affair)
British Literature;;One character in this novel is humiliated when his book Thirty Years of Misrule is used as wadding paper, and Dr. Monygham is forced to let a gunshot victim die. Pedro Montero and General Sotillo plot to seize the product of Charles Gould's San Tomé mine, so Gian Battista and Martin Decoud are hired to hide the shipment. The onetime fiancée of Antonia Avellanos switches designs to Linda Viola even though he loves Giselle. For 10 points, silver politics in the Republic of Costaguana are the subject of what Joseph Conrad novel?;;Nostromo
Sociology;;He predicted a divergence between the rationality of factories and the irrationality of businessmen in The Theory of Business Enterprise and The Instinct of Workmanship. His proposed solution was a technocracy, which he outlined in The Engineers and the Price System. He explained that much of the economy, especially entertainment and frivolities, are driven by "modern survivals of prowess" in another book. For 10 points, name this man who described "pecuniary emulation" and "conspicuous consumption" in The Theory of the Lesiure Class.;;(Thorstein) (Bunde) Veblen
European History;;After an unpopular third marriage, this regent was confronted by the nobility at Carberry Hill and subsequently lost the battle of Langside. This figure's relationships with two Italians, Roberto de Ridolfi and David Rizzio, were cited by Sir Thomas Bromley and Sir John Popham during a trial for treason. This half-sister to the first Earl of Moray and one-time Queen-Consort of France, was beheaded at Fotheringay castle after she had been imprisoned at Carlisle by her cousin. For 10 points, identify this rival to Queen Elizabeth, the royal daughter of James V of Scotland.;;Mary (I) (Stewart) (Queen of Scots)
Physics;;Serving as the basis behind the optical pyrometer in thermometry, it was obtained by rewriting the law of equipartition of energy so that the average energy goes to zero as frequency goes to infinity. Using the Boltzmann distribution as the probability of an energy state and treating energy as a discrete variable, we find that energy density is proportional to wavelength to the minus fifth power. For 10 points, identify this law that states the energy of a photon is proportional to the frequency, named for a German physicist who applied it as the basis of his quantum theory.;;Planck('s) (Law)
United States History;;He was involved in expeditions against the Spanish to reconquer Louisiana for France, which aroused the ire of Aaron Burr's confederate James Wilkinson, who foiled this man's plan to capture New Orleans. In the American Revolution, he successfully held Fort Nelson and captured Kaskaskia, and he was the victor over Henry Hamilton at the Battle of Vincennes. For 10 points, name this conqueror of the old northwest, who claimed Kentucky for Virginia in 1776.;;G(eorge) (Rogers) Clark
American Literature;;This writer adapted Jean Anoilh's play L'Aloutte to the stage, and the Berniers sisters' obsession with their brother Julian is the focus of this playwright's Toys in the Attic. Her play Another Part of the Forest was a sequel to an earlier work about the conniving Giddens and Hubbard families, and her longtime lover Dashiell Hammett modeled the character Nora Charles after her. For 10 points, name this author of the anti-Nazi play Watch on the Rhine as well as The Children's Hour and The Little Foxes.;;(Lillian) Hellman
Art;;He showed several nudes frolicking around a stone fence in The Swimming Hole and two men in a sharply tilting sailboat in Starting Out After Rail. A kayaker looks, somewhat angrily, at the viewer in his Max Schmitt in a Single Scull, while two other paintings by this man show horrified or disgusted audience members looking away from a masectomy and the excising of gangrene from a leg. For 10 points, name this painter of a portrait of Walt Whitman as well as The Agnew Clinic and The Gross Clinic.;;(Thomas) Eakins
European Literature;;Jack receives a lecture on the difference between wild and tame trees while Frances earns praise for bringing the fishing hooks in this book. Ernest identifies many of the native birds and animals and discovers the presence of potatoes. Fritz captures a pet monkey and later discovers a wounded albatross and Emily Montrose. Francis and Fritz return to England with a manuscript of their adventure in, for 10 points, what Johann Wyss tale about a family shipwrecked on an island?;;(The) Swiss Family Robinson
United States History;;Horace Porter refused to participate in the scheme which led to it, though Daniel Butterfield and Abel Corbin proved less upstanding. It led to a twenty percent decline in the stock market and a fifty percent fall in exports for several months even after it was ended by Treasury Secretary George Boutwell, who convinced President Grant to release four million dollars of reserves. For 10 points, name this September 24, 1869 event sparked by James Fisk and Jay Gould's attempt to corner the gold market.;;Black Friday
World History;;In June 2007, extortion of this country's transportation network of "matatus" was fingered as a leading source of funds for the insurgent Mungiki movement, a quasi-Islamic cult which has been implicated in several violent incidents. The president of this country broke with the National Rainbow Alliance which elected him, dethroning the Kanu party of former ruler Daniel Arap Moi. For 10 points, Mwai Kibaki is the current president of what country, where most votes ceom from the majority Kikuyu ethnic group?;;Kenya
Religion;;Jewish tradition assigns to him responsibility for the destruction of Sennacherib and Sodom, and he is also held to be inscriber of the Tau on the elect. He explained the prediction of the Seventy Weeks to Daniel, and he tells that prophet that the horned ram predicts the destruction of Persia by Alexander. For 10 points, name this archangel whom Christians see as blowing the trumpet on Judgment Day and Muslims as dictating the Quran to Mohammed, also described as conducting the Annunciation to Mary.;;Gabriel
European History;;This author of Crusader Castles collaborated with Leonard Woolley on The Wilderness of Zin. Disillusioned by the Sykes-Picot Agreement, he refused the Order of Bath and served in the Royal Air Force under the name John Hume Ross. Earlier nicknamed "Amir Dynamite," he allied himself with Husayn ibn Ali's son Faysal and organized the taking of Aqaba. For 10 points, name this British author of Seven Pillars of Wisdom who led the Revolt in the Desert against the Ottomans during World War I.;;Lawrence (of Arabia)
Geography;;South of this country lies the Gulf of Amatique, while its north borders the Bay of Chetumal. It is home to such ruins as Lubaantun, Xunantunich (shoo-nahn-TOO-nitch), and Caracol. Tourists flock to coral reefs on offshore islands such as Ambergris Cay, but not to the miniscule city which became its new capital after Hurricane Hattie destroyed the old one. For 10 points, what country, once known as British Honduras, has a mere twelve thousand people living in Belmopan?;;Belize
World History;;The independence movement in this present-day country rallied around the novel The Social Cancer by José Rizal and attempted the Cavite Mutiny. Rebels here later organized the Katipunan and issued the Malolos Constitution under Andres Bonifacio. After these islands were transferred to a new colonial power in 1898, a second war broke out and lasted until Frederick Funston captured Emilio Aguinaldo. For 10 points, name these Spanish and then American islands which were later ruled by Ferdinand Marcos.;;Philippines
Biology;;Members of their superfamily include neuronal cell-adhesion molecule and myelin-associated glycoprotein. They are primarily generated by a form of genetic swapping known as V(D)J recombination, and refine their activity against their targets by a process of selective hypermutation of their generating genes known as affinity maturation. They are composed of light and heavy chains of which there are five and two types respectively. For 10 points, name these glycoproteins known commonly as antibodies, classified into A, B, D, G and M types based on their heavy chains.;;immunoglobulin(s);;antibod(y|ies){1}?
European Literature;;This man's second novel is a fictional biography of a mediocre communist poet and takes its title from Arthur Rimbaud's poem "Life and Living". Short stories such as "The Golden Apple of Eternal Desire" and "The Hitchhiking Game" are collected in Laughable Loves, while later novels include Immortality and Slowness. He also wrote a novel about Tomas and Tereza's affair during Prague Spring. For 10 points, name this author of The Joke and The Unbearable Lightness of Being.;;(Milan) Kundera
United States History;;British commander John Byng was court marshaled for failure at Minorca during the opening of this war, and it led to the Great Upheaval of the ancestors of the Louisiana Cajuns. Touched off by the Jumonville Incident, in which the Half King killed a French commander, it included the battle of Rossbach and siege of Prague, which were victories for Frederick the Great. For 10 points, name this European conflict that was concluded by the Treaties of Hubertusburg and Paris and coincided with the French and Indian War.;;Seven Years' (War)
Chemistry;;They may be detected by Fehling's Test, when it yields a positive brick-red precipitate. The Strecker Synthesis will convert one of these to an imine, and the Nef Synthesis will form one by treating nitroalkane with a base and then sulfuric acid. In a Fischer diagram for a sugar, this functional group is usually represented at the top with an alcohol at the bottom. The reagent PCC will only oxidize an alcohol to one of these, and not completely to a carboxylic acid. For 10 points, name this organic functional group similar to ketones featuring a carbonyl group connected directly to a hydrogen.;;aldehyde(s)
United States History;;Passed under Lord Chatham's ministry, they resulted in Governor Bernard dissolving a legislature after these laws were protested by a Circular Letter. Passed in conjunction with the New York Restraining Act, they were mostly withdrawn by Lord North. They created three vice-admiralty courts which operated without juries and legalized writs of assistance. For 10 points, a board of customs collectors in Boston was also established by what acts, named for a British Chancellor of the Exchequer?;;Townshend (Acts)
Physics;;Ginzburg-Landau parameter is the ratio of penetration depth to coherence length for a material with this property. Type I materials with this characteristic are pure substances and exhibit the Meissner effect, while Type II are alloys, such as perovskites, that have higher critical temperatures. In BCS theory, it occurs when electrons condense into ground-state Cooper pairs. For 10 points, identify this property first discovered in mercury at four degrees Kelvin, the complete lack of electrical resistance.;;superconductivity
European Literature;;In one of his novels, Captain Michales becomes a revolutionary after the death of his friend Nuri Bey. He signed his first work, Serpent and Lily, with the pen name Karma Nivami and later wrote of his journeys in "Traveling". One of his title characters has an affair with Madame Hortense, while another of his characters lives for three years with Mary and Martha in a vision before realizing that he is being deceived by Satan. For 10 points, identify this author of The Last Temptation of Christ and Zorba the Greek.;;(Nikos)  Kazantzakis
European History;;Arsuf was the only traditional battle of this campaign, which, over the objections of Emperor Isaac II Angelus, was organized by Archbishop Josius and Pope Gregory VIII. An object purported to be the True Cross was paid as a ransom for the Muslim population of Acre during this conflict, which was led by such figures as Leopold of Austria and Philip Augustus of France. It ended with Richard the Lion Hearted imprisoned and Frederick Barbarossa drowned. For 10 points, name this crusade of the 1190s.;;(Third|3rd){1}? Crusade
Art;;After touring Europe in 1850, he wrote Walks and Talks of an American Farmer in England. His letters about the effects of slavery on Southern society were collected in The Cotton Kingdom, and he headed the U. S. Sanitary Commission during the Civil War. Just before the war, he collaborated with Calvert Vaux on a project which now contains Cleopatra's Needle and stretches from 59th to 110th street. For 10 points, name this architect who designed New York's Central Park.;;(Frederick) (Law) Olmsted
Chemistry;;They often form enolate tautomers in solution, a potential boon to stronger nucleophilic reactions with them, and usually come in at about 1700 inverse cm on the IR band. They react with phosphonium ylides in the Wittig reaction to produce alkenes via a four-center intermediate and are often formed via oxidation of secondary alcohols. They form geminal diols with water, and, unlike aldehydes, form no silver mirror in the Tollens test. For 10 points, name this class of compounds containing a carbonyl group linked to a disubstituted carbon.;;ketone(s)
United States History;;Keresan and Tanoan languages are common among this group, which was evangelized in 1539 by Marcos de Niza. A mysterious figure named Popé (poh PAY) led them in a successful revolt against Spanish rule, which regained their independence from 1680 to 1691. The namesake of an American submarine captured in 1968 by North Korea, they are descended from the Anasazi. For 10 points, such divisions as the Laguna, Acoma, Zuni, and Hopi comprise what group of Native Americans in the Southwestern U.S.?;;Pueblo
Art;;A treaty ceremony is found to the left of some version of this scene, which was painted to advocate the religious beliefs of the Inner Light movement. Chapter nine of Isaiah is the inspiration for the foreground, particularly such statements as "a little child shall lead them" and "the wolf shall dwell with the lamb". Painted over a hundred times, this scene expresses the Quaker belief that all humans and animals will become vegetarian after the Second Coming. For 10 points, give the common name of these Edward Hicks paintings.;;(The) Peaceable Kingdom
World Literature;;This author of "The Story of St. Christopher" and "The Life of a Fool" wrote of a Buddhist monk who has to live with an oversize nose. Experiences with mythical water creatures haunt the narrator of The Kappa, while another story discusses a woman stealing hair near a gate in Kyoto. A bandit, a samurai, and his wife have three different perspectives on a crime in another of his short stories. For 10 points, identify this author of "In a Grove" and "Rashomon".;;(Ryunosuke) Akutagawa
Religion;;Popular examples of this type of figure include the patron of the dead Ksitigarbha and the wise Mañjusri. They are said to value karuna equally with prajna and follow the stages of bhumi. All sects agree that only men can attain this status, though Japanese schools hold it open to laymen in opposition to the tradition that only monks may achieve it. One dedicated to mercy, Avalokitesvara, is said to be reincarnated as the Dalai Lama. For 10 points, name these figures who destined to become Buddhas but choose to be reborn.;;bodhisattva(s)
United States History;;This decision went against the 1946 precent of Colegrove v. Green, which disavowed ruling on "political questions". The dissent was Justice Frankfurter's final decision, and this case was applied shortly afterwards in Reynolds v. Sims, in which the Court held that both houses of bicameral state legislatures are subject to this ruling. For 10 points, name this Supreme Court ruling which led to an urbanward shift in state politics by forcing Tennessee to reapportion its legislature based on population.;;Baker (v) (Carr)
Religion;;Three its components are an attempt to avoid asrava by practicing sila. This doctrine is violated by beds that are too high off the ground, by those who eat late in the day, and by those who use perfume. The pancasila portion is binding on all, but only monks must obey the final steps of "right effort," "right mindfulness," and "right concentration". For 10 points, name this route that starts with acceptance of the Four Noble Truths and helps a Buddhist achieve nirvana.;;(the) Eightfold Path
Biology;;Teenagers with Deletion Syndrome have an abnormally high level of it in the prefrontal cortex, leading to psychosis. The mesolimbic, mesocortical, nigrostriatal, and tuberoinfundibular pathways all contain high levels of it in the human brain, and, like serotonin, low levels of it can lead to depression, which can be treated by reuptake inhibitors. For 10 points, name this neurotransmitter, whose levels are increased by stimulant drugs and whose deficiency causes Parkinson's disease.;;dopamine
Music;;Unperformed during its composer's lifetime, its seventh movement, "Gratias agimus tibi," is formally identical to its finale, "Dona nobis pacem". It is unusually divided so that the "Benedictus" and repeat of the "Osanna" are placed with the concluding "Agnus Dei". The "Kyrie" and "Gloria" are dedicated to the elector of Saxony in this work, the last sacred piece completed by its composer and the second, after the St. Matthew's Passion, to be revived by Mendelssohn. For 10 points, name this work by J.S. Bach.;;(High) Mass in B Minor
United States History;;In 2007, he propsed an eight dollar traffic entry fee in order to encourage public transportation usage. The school of public health at Johns Hopkins was renamed in honor of this man, who has twice defeated Fernando Ferrer in elections. Possibly running on an independent presidential ticket with Nebraska senator Chuck Hagel in 2008, his first run for office saw Election Day pushed back by two months due to the 9/11 attacks. For 10 points, name this Republican mayor of New York City.;;(Michael) Bloomberg
British Litearture;;The title character is shipwrecked near Leghorn and falls in love with Haidée, daughter of Lambro the pirate, after washing up in the Cyclades. In England, he hires Mrs. Pinchbeck as tutor to Leila, before spending time at the Amundevilles' country estate. Beginning with a "Dedication" that attacks Robert Southey, this poem's itinerant title figure is sold as a harem slave in Turkey before serving as Russian ambassador to England under Catherine the Great. For 10 points, name this Byron mock epic about a Spanish lothario.;;Don Juan
United States History;;In this conflict, William Eaton and the allies of Hamet Karmanli led a ground assault against Derne. During it, Edward Preble was replaced by Samuel Barron as commander of the U.S. Navy which was financed by a special Mediteranean Fund. For 10 points, Stephen Decatur gained fame for destroying the captured frigate Philadelphia during what 1801 to 1805 conflict, in which the United States attempted to gain freedom of the seas against North African pirate states?;;Tripolitan (War)
Chemistry;;This quantity is responsible for euxinia, because it causes the density changes that drive the thermohaline cycle. A good indicator of its value is the presence of foraminifera, and it is equal in different environments if the conductivity ratio is equivalent. This dimensionless quantity may lead to leaf burn and defoliation in soils, and is often plotted with temperature and density in oceanographic analysis. For 10 points, name this value which is non-zero in brackish water, a measure of the total concentration of salt.;;salinity
British Literature;;The heroine of this novel is stabbed at church for her bewitching influences, and the protagonist resolves to open a school. Thomasin's mother lies down and is bitten by an adder. In a contrived ending, the reddleman, who won back the money for Thomasin from an innkeeper, gets married, and the protagonist mourns the drowning of Eustacia Vye. For 10 points, the reckless Damon Wildeve and the devoted Diggory Venn are found in what novel about Clym Yeobright's homecoming by Thomas Hardy?;;Return of the Native
Mythology;;Upon learning of the death of his beloved, this god created the demons Bhadrakali and Virabhadra, from whose pores grew the monsters known as Raumyas. His most vengeful form is the Saddyojat, often associated with the Rudraksha tree. The father of Kartikeya, he takes the form of Nataraja, the cosmic dancer. Often depicted riding the white bull Nandi, he is the husband of Parvati. For 10 points, name this destroyer god, a member of the Hindu Trimurti along with Brahma and Vishnu.;;Shiva
United States History;;Its passage was advocated in a letter writing campaign by the General Federation of Women's Clubs and the Samuel Hopkins Adams exposé The Great American Fraud. The Supreme Court held that it did not apply to therapeutic claims in United States v. Johnson. Harvey Wiley clashed with Secretary of Agriculture James Wilson and President Theodore Roosevelt over the enforcement of this bill due to Roosevelt's love of saccharin. For 10 points, name this law partly inspired by Upton Sinclair's WThe Jungle.;;(Pure) F(ood) (and) D(rug) A(ct)
Music;;The conductor Robert Craft assisted in the creation of many of his late scores, including the Requiem Canticles. He collaborated with André Gide for the melodrama Perséphone, and wrote musical tributes to Dylan Thomas and John F. Kennedy. W. H. Auden lived with him while collaborating on The Rake's Progress, and he also composed The Soldier's Tale and such ballets as Petrouchka and The Firebird. For 10 points, name this Russian composer who started a Parisian riot at the premiere of his Rite of Spring.;;(Igor) (Fyodorovich) Stravinsky
Religion;;He commanded the Israelite army during the battle at Rephidim against the Amalekites, He claimed Timnath-serah for himself and divided the tribe of Manasseh in half when apportioning land. This son of a man called Nun set up a base of operations at Shittim from which he dispatched spies. For 10 points, who used that information to raze Hazor and bring down the walls of Jericho after he succeeded Moses as leader of the Israelites?;;Joshua
Geography;;The Ilisu Dam, part of the GAP Project, is set to put many historical sites along the banks of this river, including the city of Hasankeyf, under water. Known as the Dijlah in both of the countries through which it flows, it was once home to ancient cities such as Ctesiphon, the eastern Seleucia, and Nineveh. For 10 points, cities such as Mosul and Tikrit are now on the border of what Turkish and Iraqi river, which forms the Shatt al-Arab with the Euphrates?;;Tigris (River)
Physics;;This idea is founded on the principle of equivalence, which is similar to Mach's principle. This theory holds that inertial motion occurs on paths known as null geodesics. Observation of the phenomena of frame dragging and binary pulsar decay support this theory, which gained initial acceptance when it explained seeming irregularities in Mercury's orbit. For 10 points, name this theory that explains gravitation as the result of the curvature of space-time.;;(the) g(eneral) (theory) (of) r(elativity)
American Literature;;The title character romances the Episcopal minister Stephen Hazard in his novel Esther. He wrote about Madeline Lee in Democracy, An American Novel and compared two medieval landmarks in Mont-Saint-Michel and Chartres. A chapter contrasting traditional religion with modern technology, "The Dynamo and the Virgin," appears in another of his works. For 10 points, the autobiographical Education of… what descendant of two presidents is considered a landmark in nonfiction?;;H(enry) (Brooks) Adams;;Adams
Geology;;This region allows only K-wave propagation. An inconsistency in a major idea about this region is noted by Cowling's theorem, which states that motions here cannot create a dipole. Designated F by Bullen, this layer lies outside the Lehmann discontinuity. Dynamo theory states that the planetary magnetic field is created by convective motion in this 2000-kilometer-thick layer. For 10 points, name this region of liquid iron and nickel, the second deepest of the Earth's layers, that lies just below the mantle.;;outer core