American Literature;;The protagonist keeps a diary through which this story is told. That character falls in love with Miss Kinnian and fails in his attempts to correct a flaw in the procedure which drives the tale, but eventually the experiment fails, and the main character returns to life as a bakery worker with an IQ of 68. For 10 points—name this 1959 short story and eventual novel by Daniel Keyes.;;Flowers for Algernon
Music;;The earliest surviving form of this instrument was attributed to Andrea Amati. Its current range extends more than four octaves. Its strings are tuned to C, G, d, and a, a full octave below the viola, making it the lowest-register member of a string quartet. For 10 points—name this string instrument played by Pablo Casals.;;cello
United States History;;The Army of the Potomac crossed the Rapidan River early in May 1864, but was forced to camp while the supply train caught up. Southern forces were only three miles away when marching resumed. The battle itself occurred in chaos, with infantrymen fighting hand-to-hand and a forest fire killing men on both sides in this stalemate between Lee and Grant. FTP, identify this battle, named for the type of terrain on which it was fought.;;(Battle of the) Wilderness
Religion;;Thought to be identical to the fly agaric mushroom still used in indigenous Siberian rituals, its stalks were pressed between stones, then its juice was filtered through sheep's wool and mixed with water and milk. After being offered as a libation to the gods, the remainder was consumed by priests and the sacrificer. For 10 points—name this Vedic offering, valued for its exhilarating and hallucinogenic effect.;;soma
World History;;In 1949, the United Nations established a Line of Control, splitting this region into two districts with capitals at Muzaffarabad and Srinagar. The UN expected the Muslim population to determine its fate as a nation but has intervened twice after three wars over this territory. For 10 points—name this area on the border between India and Pakistan.;;(Jammu and) Kashmir
Chemistry;;Examples of this type of chemical species include the ions HSO41- [H-S-O-4, 1 minus], H2PO41-, and water itself; their behavior is governed both by the presence of other species, and the pH of the solution. In all cases, they must have at least one proton. For 10 points—what term describes a molecule or ion capable of either accepting or donating a proton?;;amphoteric
British Literature;;The first scene is a mad pursuit, the second a piper with his lover, and the third villagers leading a heifer to sacrifice. In the end the speaker declares that "Beauty is truth, truth beauty – that is all/Ye know on earth, and all ye need to know". For 10 points—name this poem by John Keats.;;Ode on a Grecian Urn
World History;;After losing the gains of the 1810 revolution, he returned and set up a base at Angostura from which he won victories at Carabobo and Boyar. A rival of Francisco Santander, he formed the Republic of Greater Columbia, of which he became the first president. He retired from politics after Peru seceded in protest of his autocratic rule. For 10 points—name this independence leader, known as "The Liberator".;;(Simon) Bolivar
Geology;;The modern standard is white unglazed porcelain of the same hardness as quartz. Traditionally a piece of polished black siliceous rock, treated with nitric acid, was used to identify minerals from the quality of the powder left behind by a stone. For 10 points—name this tool used by mineralogists to determine the quality of gold.;;touchstone
American Literature;;"Memories of a Girlhood Among Ghosts," it starts with a description of a drowned aunt. Later, there are stories of an emigrant doctor and the chapter "White Tigers," which discusses Fa Mu Lan. For 10 points—name this book by Maxine Hong Kingston.;;(The) Woman Warrior
European History;;The ninth, known as "the spider," married Margaret of Scotland and repelled the siege of Dieppe. The seventeenth died of tuberculosis at the age of ten. The eighteenth and last was succeeded by Charles X. The fifteenth oversaw the Seven Years War, and the sixteenth was beheaded. For 10 points—identify this name, whose fourteenth bearer ruled for seventy-two years as the "Sun King".;;Louis
British Literature;;The original version of its first stanza was featured as "Stanza of Anglo-Saxton Poetry" in an 1855 issue of the journal Mischmasch. Originally printed backwards, phrases such as "frabjous day! Callooh! Callay!" and "The vorpal blade went snicker-snack!" are interpreted by Humpty Dumpty. For 10 points—name this poem read by Alice in Through the Looking Glass.;;Jabberwocky
Physics;;In image compression, it is used to characterize the amount of bit uncertainty in the compressed image and has Tsallis and Shannon types. In thermodynamics, it is zero only for pure substances in their ground state at absolute zero. For 10 points—identify this physical quantity which measures the disorder of a system.;;entropy
Sociology;;Durkheim believed that it is a projection of the society that holds it to be valuable and therefore encapsulates the society itself. Freud held that it arises as a result of the Oedipus complex and the murder of the father on the part of the group in a work contrasting it with taboos. For 10 points—identify this term that describes an object used as a symbol of a given group.;;totem
Geography;;With a name meaning "place of the young spring," this state underwent a large increase in population when copper was discovered in 1854 at Ajo and in 1877 in Bisbee. Seats in its legislature are dominated by representatives from Maricopa and Pima counties. For 10 points—name this state whose major cities include Flagstaff, Tucson, and Phoenix.;;Arizona
American Literature;;e.e. cummings's The Enormous Room is structured after this novel. It begins with the author's recounting of a dream in which the protagonist cries and wonders how to save himself and his family from destruction. The protagonist is told to journey to Wicket-gate by Evangeline, and on his trip he meets Mr. Legality and Mr. Worldly-Wiseman. For 10 points—identify this tale of Christian's trip from the City of Destruction to the Celestial City, written by John Bunyan.;;(The) Pilgrim's Progress (from This World to That Which Is to Come)
United States History;;Six years after he made an anti-war speech in 1845, he was elected to the Senate. The chief sponsor of the Civil Rights Act of 1875, his speech, "The Barbarism of Slavery," occurred five years after he insulted Andrew P. Butler in the "Crime Against Kansas" speech. For 10 points—name this man who was then beaten on the Senate floor with a cane by Butler's nephew, Preston Brooks.;;(Charles) Sumner
American Literature;;His Realist-influenced works include "The Golden Horseshoe" and "The Main Death". "Nightmare Town" and "Two Sharp Knives" focus on urban corruption, as does much of Red Harvest. Most of his works deal with threats to a victim, such as "Night Shots" and "Death and Company". For 10 points—name this author of hard-boiled fiction who invented Nick and Nora Charles in The Thin Man and Miles Archer and Sam Spade in The Maltese Falcon.;;(Dashiell) Hammett
Biology;;The hornet moth, the wasp beetle, and the hoverfly are examples of the Mullerian form relative to the common wasp.  English Biologist Henry Bates studied similar examples in which palatable butterflies had a survival advantage when they appeared similar to unpalatable butterflies.  For 10 points—name this adaptation for which the resemblance of viceroy butterflies to poisonous monarch butterflies is an example.;;mimic(ry)
Physics;;It can be calculated by dividing the wavelength of light in a vacuum by the wavelength of light in a given medium. Always greater than 1, it can exceed 2 for certain materials, such as cubic zirconia and diamond. For 10 points--name this material-dependent constant, used in Snell's law, which gives the ratio of the speed of light in a vacuum over the speed of light in that medium.;;index of refraction
Religion;;Living in an uncertain range of dates around the turn of the first millennium, he headed an eponymous school of Talmudic Judaism and perfected the applied exegetical discipline that came to be known as his "Seven Rules". For 10 points—name this Jewish sage, whose name would later be used for Jewish organizations on college campuses.;;(Rabbi) Hillel (the Elder)
European History;;The original plebiscite in Denmark refused to ratify it, and it was modified but kept provisions which allowed Britain to ignore social and financial directives. Negotiated in a southeastern Dutch outpost, it formulated now-realized goals for international citizenship and a common currency. For 10 points—identify this 1992 treaty which created the European Union.;;Maastricht (Treaty)
Music;;This twentieth-century composer's ballets include Romeo and Juliet and Cinderella. He became prominent with the Scythian Suite for piano and his first symphony, nicknamed the "Classical". While The Fiery Angel may be his greatest opera, War and Peace is his most ambitious. For 10 points—name this Russian composer of Love for Three Oranges.;;(Sergey) (Sergeyevich) Prokofiev
European History;;The tightly massed, heavily armored losing army became trapped in the mud and suffered five thousand casualties as opposed to only two hundred for the longbowman-dominated winners of this battle. Taking place a month after Harfleur, it was the penultimate step, before victory at Orleans seven years later, in the English assumption of control north of the Loire. For 10 points—name this site of a 1415 battle at which the forces of Henry V defeated the knights of France during the Hundred Years War.;;(Battle of) Agincourt
Biology;;One region of it is composed of palisade parenchyma located beneath the upper epidermis; the parenchyma is made of columnar cells oriented perpendicular to the leaf surface. For 10 points—name this spongy layer of plant tissue, also known as the ground tissue system, in which photosynthesis takes place.;;mesophyll
United States History;;Public opposition to them intensified when Philadelphia Aurora editor Benjamin Franklin Bache was arrested under their provisions. One component was only in effect until March 3, 1801 and was allowed to expire; the other, composed of three separate laws, expanded the President's powers to deport non-citizens and extended the waiting period for naturalization from five years to fourteen. For 10 points—name these acts passed by Congress during the administration of John Adams.;;Alien and Sedition (Acts)
Geography;;Explored in the late 1730s by Sieur de la Verendrye, this state receives most of its irrigaton and power from the Garrison Dam on the Missouri River. Home to the International Peace Garden, Theodore Roosevelt National Park, and Fort Lincoln, it is currently considering changing its name to improve its image to tourists. For 10 points—name this state located between Montana and Minnesota.;;North Dakota
Psychology;;Actually published in 1899, later printings changed its date to 1900 to support the idea that this book was the harbinger of the twentieth century. Placing heavy emphasis on childhood and sexual desires in performing the title action, it introduces the concepts of the id, ego, and superego. For 10 points—name this major work of Sigmund Freud.;;(The) Interpretation of Dreams
European Literature;;Orphaned as a baby, she was taken to live with her aunt and uncle Reed.  Her uncle soon died, in the very room where she was kept as a punishment, and left her to the care of her aunt. At age ten, she was sent to Lowood Institution, where she remained for eight years. For 10 points—name this fictional woman who became the governess for, and eventual wife of, Edward Rochester in a novel by Charlotte Brontë.;;Jane Eyre
Chemistry;;Known to miners as "whitedamp," it is used in the purification of nickel and the manufacture of methanol. Chronic exposure is associated with a higher incidence of headaches, memory loss, visual deficits, and depression in its eponymous "syndrome".  For 10 points—name this molecule, a by-product of many combustion reactions, which has a greater affinity than oxygen in binding to hemoglobin.;;carbon monoxide
World History;;This highly hierarchical society was ruled by a high priest called the Sapa and the army commander. Their religion involved six major gods and viewed the earth-god Pachamama as the mother of all humans.  For 10 points—name this society led by Atahualpa which succumbed to the forces of Francisco Pizarro.;;Inca(n) (Empire)
World History;;The adjective used to refer to anything pertaining to this event is "Tridentine". The doctrine of the Eucharist and the sacrament of penance were rigorously defined here. For 10 points—name this meeting which lasted from 1545 to 1563, the nineteenth ecumenical council of the Catholic Church.;;(Council of) Trent
American Literature;;This Eatonton, Georgia native has written such works as Meridian and You Can't Keep A Good Woman Down. One half of the first legal interracial marriage in Mississippi, she rediscovered and popularized the work of Zora Neale Hurston. For 10 points—name this author who won the 1983 Pulitzer Prize for The Color Purple.;;(Alice) Walker
British Literature;;In this work, a woman poisons her sister due to her love for the bastard son of a duke, who lets himself be turned against his loving son. A loving daughter ends up hanged, and her father spends time in a fierce storm on a heath. For 10 points—name this play, in which Regan, Goneril, and Cordelia are the daughters of the title monarch.;;King Lear
European History;;After serving in the Foreign Legion, he joined Pierre Poujade's party of shopkeepers. He has suffered two major setbacks, a power struggle with Bruno Megret and a suspension from politics for punching an opponent in 1997, since founding his own party in 1972. For 10 points—name this National Front candidate who upset Lionel Jospin to advance to the second round of 2002 French presidential elections.;;(Jean-Marie) Le Pen
Math Theory;;It's the limit as n goes to infinity of 2 to the n+1 times the nested additive radical of two. MacLaurin expansion shows that you can express it one fourth of the sum of the reciproacals of the odd numbers. Archimedes used angles in polygons to determine that it is greater than three plus ten over 71. For 10 points—identify this ratio which, according to the same method, is less than 22 over 7.;;pi
Physics;;Simple ones can be represented by periodic circular functions; more complex ones are linear combinations of sines and cosines. Examples include seismic secondary waves and most electromagnetic emissions. For 10 points—identify this type of motion in which all points along a wave oscillate on paths normal to the direction in which the wave advances.;;transverse (wave(s))
Music;;A small mobile metal bar is characteristic of this instrument's Hawaiian variety, mastered by Fernano Sor. Its modern-day revival is often credited to Francisco Tarrega, and other masters include Julian Bream and Andres Segovia. For 10 points—name this instrument whose appearances in "serious" music also include being the original accompaniment to Franz Gruber's "Silent Night".;;guitar
Art;;His initial work as a painter in a porcelain factory helped him gain experience with light, fresh colors that distinguished his work as an Impressionist. His 1869 La Grenouillière is considered a classic early statement of the Impressionistic style, but by 1882, he felt he needed a greater sense of solidarity in his work, as seen in The Umbrellas. For 10 points—name this French painter of The Luncheon of the Boating Party.;;(Pierre) (Auguste) Renoir
United States History;;It was weakened by 1972, when Jesse Jackson left it to found Operation PUSH. At that time it had been led for four years by Ralph David Abernathy after the death of its founder. For 10 points—name this organization, founded in the wake of the Birmingham bus boycott by Martin Luther King, Jr.;;S(outhern) C(hristian) L(eadership) C(onference)
Geography;;It was located to the south of Helluland and Markland. Rich in timber and a new type of grain, it was first settled by Thorfinn Karlsefni, who abandoned it after native attacks. For 10 points—name this first point of European contact with the New World, discovered around 1000 AD by Leif Erikson.;;Vinland
American Literature;;It starts with "The Book of the Grotesque" before relating "Hands," "Paper Pills," "Godliness," "The Thinker," and "The Untold Lie". Characters include Louise Trunnion, Jesse Bentley, Wing Biddlebaum, and George Willard. For 10 points—name this collection which made "grotesques" of "all of the men and women the author had ever known," written by Sherwood Anderson.;;Winesburg, Ohio
Psychology;;People with this characteristic are unusually healthy psychologically, have the ability to free themselves from stereotypes, perceive everyday life realistically and accept it without defensiveness. One characteristic of it appears to be a "peak experience" of insight, joy, or intense awareness. For 10 points—name this characteristic which rests at the top of Maslow's hierarchy of needs.;;self(-)actualization
British Literature;;In this place, the title of "Snilpall" is conferred upon anyone who obeys the law for 73 moons. Threads are awarded to those who can pass over and under a raised and lowered stick for the longest period of time. It is located near the Empire of Blefescu and has its capital at Mildendo. For 10 points—name this island full of six-inch-high people, discovered in 1699 by Lemuel Gulliver.;;lilliput
Biology;;Depending on the type, up to one third of patients undergoing this procedure may develop a temporary fever, though that seldom occurs in the FFP or cryo-precipitate forms. More seriously, it can produce acute hemolysis, a potentially fatal immune reaction, if an error is made in cross-typing the patient or the donor. For 10 points—name this medical procedure, which resulted in thousands of AIDS infections among hemophiliacs.;;(blood) transfusion(s)
Mythology;;A son of Poseidon, he was a robber who dwelled somewhere in Attica in the neighborhood of Eleusis, and he was killed by Theseus. His name now denotes the forcing of something into an pattern. For 10 points—identify this figure who chopped off his victims' feet or stretched them on a rack in order to make them fit a bed.;;Procrustes
European Literature;;For eleven years, he works with the ferryman Vasudeva until his friend Kamala dies while crossing the river. After he spoils Kamala's son, who runs away, he learns the meaning of love and discovers the word of perfection, om. For 10 points—name this handsome Brahmin whose transformation in life is described in a namesake book by Herman Hesse.;;Siddhartha
Biology;;They do not have specific feather tracts but rather densely packed, scaly feathers. This name refers to eighteen species of birds, including the Gentoo, Humbolt, Chinstrap, and Macaroni. For 10 points—name the flightless, swimming bird whose natural habitat lies entirely within the Southern Hemisphere.;;penguin(s)
Physics;;The curvature of space-time in Einstein's theory of general relativity is proportional to this constant. Almost all measurements of it in the last two hundred years use a variation on the torsion balance method first used by Cavendish. For 10 points—identify this constant with a value of 6.67 times 10-11, represented by a capital G.;;gravitational (constant)
Art;;One wing of the enemy's helmet remains stiff and metallic, while the other reaches up to caress the leg of the hero. The hero wears nothing but a pair of boots and a hat crowned with laurel and has shoulder-length hair. Holding the sword of his vanquished foe, the title subject stands with one foot on the cheek of his enemy. For 10 points—name this bronze sculpture by Donatello in which a Biblical hero rests after killing Goliath.;;David
Mythology;;Her skill at her trade gave her such a reputation that she was compared to Athena. However, when she refused to show modesty to a disguised Athena, she was drawn into a contest, after which she attempted to hang herself when Athena railed at her perfect work. For 10 points—name this weaver who was saved by being turned into a spider.;;Arachne
American Literature;;This story follows Louisa, who finds, in the wake of grief over her husband's death, that her husband has oppressed her even as he loved her. With this comes the realization that she is finally free. For 10 points—name this story by Kate Chopin which ends with Brently Mallard coming home alive and Louisa Mallard dying of a heart attack.;;(The) Story of an Hour
Geography;;German schoolchildren know that Iller, Isar, Lech flow from the right and Altmuhl, Wornitz, Naab, and Regen flow from the left as seven of many tributaries arising from this river, whose delta is a designated World Heritage Site. For 10 points—name this European river which is nowhere near the "blue"color of a Johann Strauss waltz.;;Danube (River)
Music;;Its earliest printed version of the tune can be found in a 1775 volume of airs. Henri Vieuxtemps based his Caprice burlesque on it, Anton Rubenstein wrote variations on it, and Antonin Dvorak included it in the finale of the New World symphony. For 10 points—name this tune concerning an American who went to town riding on a pony.;;Yankee Doodle
United States History;;A protectionist, he sponsored a namesake high tariff in 1890 and later signed the Gold Standard Act. He was nominated for the Presidency as a contrast to William Jennings Bryan after fourteen years in Congress and two terms as governor of Ohio. For 10 points—name this President who served during the Spanish-American War and was succeeded by Theodore Roosevelt after he was assassinated in 1901.;;(William) McKinley
British Literature;;He met Sigfried Sassoon in an army hospital shortly before dying under machine gun fire, ironic in that he wrote "What passing-bells for these who die as cattle?/Only the monstrous anger of the guns". Sassoon then arranged for the publication of his Collected Poems, containing "Disabled" and "Strange Meeting". For 10 points—name this World War I poet of "Anthem for Doomed Youth" and "Dulce et Decorum Est".;;(Wilfred) Owen
Physics;;Today, they are located near Ellef Ringnes Island and the Adélie Coast. One was first discovered by James Ross in 1831, several kilometers from where Byrd and Bennett flew over it in 1926. For 10 points—name these two extremes which determine the position of compass needles.;;magnetic pole(s)
Astronomy;;The vertical axis is a logarithmic scale of luminosity with the sun having a base of one while the horizontal axis is a logarithmic scale of temperature.  At the lower left are white dwarves, while the right center has red giants and the top features supergiants. For 10 points—name this diagram for star classification.;;H(ertzsprung)(-)R(ussell) (diagram)
European History;;They ruled until Gian Gastone's death in 1737. Members Giovanni and Giulio were Popes Leo X and Clement VII respectively. Catherine and Marie were queens of France, while the bankers and politicians Lorenzo and Cosimo were great patrons of the arts. For 10 points—name this family, the longtime rulers of Florence.;;(de) Medici
American Literature;;The title character's guests include Medbourne, a poor former merchant; Gascoine, a former politician; the gouty Coloniel Kilgrew; and Widow Wycherly. The water of the fountain of youth is tested on the group, all of whom become younger until the water is spilled. For 10 points—name this short story from the Twice-Told Tales of Nathaniel Hawthorne.;;Dr. Heidegger's Experiment
Biology;;Among the smallest of cells, they contain an acrosome, a vesicle similar to the Golgi apparatus whch contains follice-loosening enzymes. Below the nucleus, the midpiece is packed with mitochondria which provide the necessary energy for the flagellum to propel this cell to its target. For 10 points—name this haploid male sex cell.;;sperm(atazoa)
United States History;;Originally a nine-hundred-ton ship named Le Duc du Duras, this ship was bought by Louis XIV at the request of the French minister of Marines. Holding forty-two guns, it led a small group of four ships into the English Channel to capture two trading ships.  For 10 points—identify this vessel that was renamed in honor of the distinguished American ambassador to France, Benjamin Franklin, and engaged the Serapis under the command of John Paul Jones.;;Bonhomme Richard
American Literature;;The title character is married simply because he didn't want to be alone in the winter. His wife, also his mother's nurse, became sick, but she stopped complaining because he stopped listening. When the wife's cousin comes to stay with the family, he falls in love with her, and they attempt to commit suicide via a sledding mishap so they will never have to be alone. For 10 points—name this novel set in Starkfield, featuring Mattie and Zeena, written by Edith Wharton.;;Ethan Frome
Mythology;;Allegedly the last direct descendant of Joseph of Arimathea, his coming is predicted in the Estoire del saint Graal. This knight of the round table is the son of Lancelot and Elaine of Corbenic. For 10 points—name this figure whom late versions of Arthurian legend say was the only successful pursuer of the Holy Grail.;;(Sir) Galahad
Art;;Originally developed by merchants to express frustrations at being socially inferior despite economic success. Its principal themes are conflicts between humanity and the feudal system, in such plays as The House of Suguwara. For 10 points—name this form of drama in which men called onnagata play the female parts.;;Kabuki
Astronomy;;General relativity is necessary to explain its observed orbital precession of forty-three arc-seconds per century. It has a thin sodium-potassium atmosphere and is both the only planet besides Earth with a magnetic field and the planet with the closest average density to that of Earth. For 10 points—identify the second-hottest planet in the solar system.;;Mercury
Geology;;Its waters are diverted to the Sunday and the Great Fish, with which it forms the world's longest irrigation tunnel. Its chief tributary is the Vaal, and it rises in the Maluti Mountains of northern Lesotho. It sometimes runs dry before reaching the Atlantic Ocean, because its lower portion runs through the Kalahari and Namib deserts. For 10 points—name this South African river with a colorful name.;;Orange (River)
World History;;His failed to capture the Hittite city of Kadesh, instead signing a peace treaty under which he married the Hittite princess Matnefrure. His building projects included a grandiose tomb in the Valley of the Queens for Nefertari and the completion of the temple of Abydos which his father Seti I had left unfinished. For 10 points—identify this Old Kingdom pharaoh who may have reigned as the Jews left Egypt.;;Ramses (II|the Second){1}?;;Ramses
European Literature;;At the beginning of this story, Blind Pew appears, and the Captain dies of a heart attack and gives the narrator a key to a chest. Aided by Bengun, the Squire, and Dr. Livesly, the group sets sail to seek a chest left by Captain Flint. For 10 points—name this novel featuring Jim Hawkins and Long John Silver, written by Robert Louis Stevenson.;;Treasure Island
United States History;;In 1829, construction began on this pentagonal edifice, built on a man-made island of seashells and granite. In December 1860, Major Anderson sought to strengthen his position here, but Pierre Beauregard ordered fire upon it. For 10 points—name this Charleston, South Carolina site which saw the start of the Civil War.;;(Battle of) (Fort) Sumter
Biology;;Patients with the inherited disease Dunnigan-type familial partial lipodystrophy have a higher incidence of heart disease and weight gain due to a resistance in the cells' response to this hormone, which consists of a 21-amino-acid alpha helix linked to a 30-amino-acid beta sheet. For 10 points—name this protein, discovered by Banting and Best, whose insufficient production is a hallmark for diabetes.;;insulin
Geography;;Of the 250 ethnic groups living in this country, the Hausa and Fulani comprise thirty percent of the roughly 127 million residents. Half of the population is Muslim while forty percent is Christian. In 1999, voters elected Olusegun Obasanjo under a new constitution adopted to end sixteen years of military rule. For 10 points—name this most populous African nation whose capital was transferred in 1991 from Lagos to Abuja.;;(Federal Republic of) Nigeria
European History;;Members usually came from one of about thirty houses, such as the Claudii and the Icorii. They were identified by shoes of red leather, an iron ring, and a broad purple stripe worn down the right side of their tunics. For 10 points—name this aristocratic class of Romans who, unlike the plebians, sat as representatives in the Roman Senate.;;patrician(s)
Physics;;It is, by definition, never conserved. Its formal study is known as tribology. Bagnold's law describes it for granular surfaces. Coefficients generally denoted with mu indicate its magnitude; the two most important varieties are static and dynamic. For 10 points—identify this source of energy loss in moving systems.;;friction
Linguistics;;This language has thirteen consonant letters, after nine of which an "h" can be inserted for lenition. It also has five vowels, each of which has both a short sound and a long sound. Only the definite article "the" is translated; the base form, "an," changes in form according to the number, gender, case, and initial letter of the noun qualified. For 10 points—name this language, a member of the "Q" group of Celtic languages, spoken in different varieties on the Isle of Man, in Scotland, and in Ireland.;;Gaelic
Music;;In this cycle's twelfth song, "Olim lacus colueram," the tenor and the bassoon perform at an abnormally high register to recreate the wailing of the unfortunate roasted swan. The beginning and ending pieces are identical, with the choruses singing at a slightly different rhythm from the orchestra in imitation of a turning wheel. For 10 points—name this work based on thirteenth-century poems including "O Fortuna," written by Carl Orff.;;Carmina Burana
Math Theory;;The continuum hypothesis states that raised this to itself gives the number of ordinal numbers. Georg Cantor introduced the Aleph notation for its levels. A member of the extended reals but not the reals, it is defined as the number of whole numbers. For 10 points—identify this quantity, informally defined as the reciprocal of zero.;;infinity
Philosophy;;He fled to Paris after the closing of the newspaper which he edited in Cologne. He wrote against Proudhon in The Poverty of Philosophy and collaborated on the anti-Hegelian The Holy Family. In 1864, he was the speaker of the First International. For 10 points—name this man who worked with Friedrich Engels on Capital and "The Communist Manifesto".;;(Karl) (Heinrich) Marx
European Literature;;It includes such stories as "Titus and Grippus," "The Pot of Basil," "Isabella," and "Griselda". The stories are told by seven women and three men in the hills of Fiesole after escaping the Black Death in Florence. For 10 points—name this collection of of one hundred tales by Bocaccio.;;(The) Decameron
American Literature;;In this poem from The Town down the River, the title character finally "coughed, and called it fate,/and kept on drinking". Unaware of his shortcomings, he laments that he is "Born too late," "loved the days of old," and "sighed for what is not". As a "child of scorn," "he wept that he was ever born". For 10 points—name this poem about a resident of Tilbury Town, by Edward Arlington Robinson.;;Miniver Cheevy
United States History;;To overriding it, a law must not discriminate against another state, must not require  national or uniform regulation, and must serve interests of a state which outweigh those of the federal government. For 10 points—give the common name for this passage of the U.S. Constitution, which empowers Congress to regulate a certain activity "with foreign Nations, and among the several States".;;Commerce (Clause)
United States History;;This unsuccessful candidate for the 1974 Republican gubernatorial nomination in South Carolina sued CBS in 1984 for alleging that he concealed high estimates of enemy strength nearly twenty years earlier. At that time, forbade any operation by a unit smaller than 750 men as part of a conservative "war of attrition" policy, but, in 1968, he was succeeded by Creighton Abrams in his highest post. For 10 points—name this man who, for four years, was the top U.S. general in Vietnam.;;(William) (Childs) Westmoreland
European Literature;;He studied in Ireland before settling in Paris in 1937. During World War II, he was a farmworker and part of the resistance. Afterwards, he wrote the trilogy Molloy, Malone Dies, and The Unnamable. He then went on to such plays as Happy Days, Krapp's Last Tape, and Endgame. For 10 points—name this author who described Pozzo, Lucky, Estragon, and Vladimir in Waiting for Godot.;;(Samuel) Beckett
Biology;;The essential step involves combining CO2 with RuBP. The series yields an unstable intermediate, which breaks down into two molecules of phosphoglycerate, or PGA. Six revolutions of the cycle means that six CO2 molecules react with six RuBP molecules to produce 12 molecules of PGA.  For 10 points—identify this second stage of photosynthesis, which is actually dependent on temperature rather than light.;;dark reaction(s)|Calvin Cycle
World History;;It governed based on the model of Toyotomi Hideyoshi. The ruling family controlled a quarter of the country while daimyo were given vassalage over provinces. A class system without social mobility and almost total isolation led to 265 years of tense peace. For 10 points—name this final Japanese shogunate.;;Tokugawa (Shogunate)
American Literature;;Four years after The Crisis published his poem "The Negro Speaks of Rivers," he left three poems on Vachel Lindsay's plate at a restaurant, leading to the publication of The Weary Blues.  For 10 points—name this Harlem Renaissance poet of Not Without Laughter and "A Dream Deferred".;;(James) (Mercer) (Langston) Hughes
Music;;He wrote Songs and Proverbs of William Blake for the baritone Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau. His parents dashed plans to work with Alban Berg while he was in his teens; instead, he studied with Frank Bridge. Many of his later operas and chamber works are performed at the Aldeburgh [ULD bruh] Festival, which he founded. For 10 points—name this British composer of the operas Billy Budd and Peter Grimes, as well as the choral War Requiem.;;(Benjamin) (Edward) Britten
Physics;;As an acoustic property, it is the ratio of the sound pressure to the sound flux at a boundary surface. When the result is complex, the real part is called the resistance while the imaginary part is called the reactance. That is an exact analogy to the case of an electric circuit, where pressure and flux are replaced by voltage and current. For 10 points—name this electromagnetic property, the reciprocal of admittance, which measures general opposition to an electric current.;;impedance
Art;;He often painted a series of the same scene in order to capture the effects of changing light. While living in England, he painted such landmarks as the Thames and the houses of Parliament, but he did his signature work in Argenteuil. For 10 points—name this French painter of Impression: Sunrise and many, many water lilies.;;(Claude) (Oscar) Monet
Astronomy;;Its name is corrupt Arabic for "hand of the mysterious woman". Lying about 580 light-years away, it is the only star aside from our sun whose disk is visible from earth, a consequence of its enormous size. For 10 points—name this red supergiant which forms the left shoulder of Orion.;;Betelgeuse
United States History;;He was denied re-appointment to the Senate after supporting Jefferson's economic program and becoming the only New England Federalist to vote in favor of the Louisiana Purchase. Between appointments as diplomatic representative to Russia and Britain, he led the American side at Ghent. As Secretary of State, he negotiated the cession of Florida with Luis de Onis and formulated the Monroe Doctrine. For 10 points—name this sixth U.S. President, elected as a result of the 1824 "Corrupt Bargain".;;(J)(.)(ohn) Q(.)(uincy) Adams;;Adams
American Litearture;;The graceful bullfighter Romero has an affair with the lead female character of this work, which follows a group of expatriate Americans who travel from Paris to Spain. Mike Campbell, Bill Gordon, and Robert Cohn and the aforementioned Brett Ashley are among those described by impotent narrator Jake Barnes. For 10 points—name this novel about the "lost generation" by Ernest Hemingway.;;(The) Sun Also Rises
Philosophy;;After serving as a minister of crime, he sought to deliver humanity from vice by returning to ancient principles. His believed in the "five relationships," including that of the citizen to the ruler, which became the basis of later political philosophies. He did not write anything himself, entrusting the documentation of his beliefs to Xunxi and Mencius. For 10 points—identify this founder of an eponymous Chinese ethical and religious doctrine.;;Confucius
World History;;A civil war after its 1960 independence saw bids for power by multiple politicians. Antoine Gizenga proclaimed a communist government in Stanleyville. Moise Tshombe led the secessionist Katanga province. The first prime minister, Patrice Lumumba, was fired and then killed. For 10 points—name this country in which Mobutu Sese Seko overthrew the government of Joseph Kasavubu in 1965 and ruled until 1997, when power was seized by Laurent Kabila.;;(The) D(emocratic) R(epublic) (of) (the) C(ongo)
European History;;A year before Winston Churchill's Fulton speech, this man coined the term "iron curtain". The founder of the All German Chess League, he eventually poisoned his five children and had his servant shoot himself and his wife after hearing of Hitler's death. For 10 points—name this "minister of cultural enlightenment" responsible for Nazi propaganda.;;(Paul) (Joseph) Goebbels
Biology;;Discovered by Charles Bonnet in the eighteenth century, it was observed in frogs by Jacques Loeb and rabbits by Gregory Pincus. For 10 points—name this form of reproduction in which an ovum develops into a normal organism without fertilization.;;parthenogenesis
American Literature;;Once inhabited by the Chickasaw tribe, it was settled around 1800. It lies south of the Tallehatchie River and west of Crossman. With its seat at Jackson, its residents include the DeSpain, Benbow, Bundren, and Coldfield families. For 10 points—name this fictional county, the setting for many stories by William Faulkner.;;Yoknapatawpha (County)
Geography;;Covering almost five hundred thousand square miles but no more than three hundred feet deep, its arms include Laizhou Bay, the Bo Gulf, the Liaodong Gulf, and Korea Bay, while it is connected to the Sea of Japan by the Korea Strait. Its name comes from deposits received from the Han and Huang He. For 10 points—name this Pacific sea.;;Yellow (Sea)
Music;;Christopher Seed commissioned a left-handed one in 1997. First created in 1709, it was called a "gravecembalo" [grah veh shem bah law]. Its later versions were based on Bartolomeo Cristofori's design of 1726. In modern times, its tension has been increased from sixteen to thirty tons. For 10 points—name this instrument whose English name is derived from Italian words meaning "soft" and "loud".;;piano(forte)
American Literature;;His real name is Oscar Zoroaster Phadrig Isaac Norman Henkle Emmanuel Ambroise Diggs, and he was once a pedestrian magician from Omaha whose hot air balloon was caught in a storm. He stumbled into a throne which he later abdicated, after which he was invited to study under Glinda in order to live up to his title. For 10 points—name this man who built the Emerald City and provided help to the Scarecrow and Dorothy.;;Wizard of Oz
Economics;;It assumes that information flows completely and instantly, firms always seek maximum profit, total freedom to enter and leave the market exists, and no business is large enough to have undue influence. For 10 points—identify this market structure in which resources are allocated perfectly but there is no long-term profit.;;perfect competition
Physics;;The Van Vleck form is exhibited by compounds with unpaired electrons, while the Pauli form is observed in metals. For 10 points—name this form of magnetization in the presence of an external magnetic field, which is larger than diamagnetism and sometimes has ferromagnetism superimposed.;;paramagnetism
European Literature;;Toward the end of the twentieth century, he wrote a treatise, What is Art?, in which he claimed that art is an extension of morality. Earlier, he wrote the trilogy Childhood, Boyhood, and Youth and short stories such as "Happiness" and "The Death of Ivan Ilych". For 10 points—identify this author of Anna Karenina and War and Peace.;;(Leo) (Nikolayevich) Tolstoy
United States History;;"Rumania, Serbia, and Montenegro should be evacuated; occupied territories restored; Serbia accorded free access to the sea". "A readjustment of the frontiers of Italy...along...lines of nationality". All French territory should be freed" and Alcase-Lorraine restored". For 10 points—name the proposal including those demands, freedom of sea navigation, and arms reduction, announced in 1918 by Woodrow Wilson.;;(Fourteen|14){1}? Points
Astronomy;;Discovered in 1846 just a few weeks after the planet it orbits, it moves in a retrograde orbit, which may means that it was captured by its planet after forming. Additionally, tidal interactions with its planet result in its orbit losing energy, so it is spiraling inwards. For 10 points—in approximately 100 million years, what satellite will either create a ring around, or crash into, Neptune?;;Triton
Geography;;As it is filled almost entirely by snowfall, it is one of the clearest lakes in the world, recording clarity depths of up to 142 feet. The seventh deepest lake in the world, it has no outlet, and Wizard Island rises 764 feet above the surface on its west side. It was formed by the collapse of Mount Mazama. For 10 points—name this body of water, the central feature of a national park in Oregon.;;Crater Lake
Art;;In his The Happy Hand, an enormous wedding ring encircles a piano. In The Legend of the Centuries, a wooden chair sits on top of an enormous stone chair. In Golconde men in suits rain from the sky, while in Son of Man an apple obscures a man's face. For 10 points—name this artist who also painted The Treachery of Images, which features a pipe painted above the phrase "Ceci n'est pas une pipe".;;(Rene) Magritte
American Literature;;His later works included Thomas Cole's funeral oration, the manual Lectures on Poetry and a forty-nine year term as editor-in-chief of the New York Evening Post. His major poems can be considered his early works as all were published before he turned 21. For 10 points—name this poet of "The Yellow Violet," "To A Waterfowl," and "Thanatopsis".;;(William) (Cullen) Bryant
Sociology;;It outlines a complete philosophy from first causes, beginning with the first chapter, "Of Sense". Divided into four sections, "Of Man," "Of Commonwealth," "Of a Christian Commonwealth," and "Of the Kingdom of Darkness," it proposes that the unrestrained state of nature causes a life which is "solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short". For 10 points—name this 1651 treatise by Thomas Hobbes.;;Leviathan
Biology;;The 260 species of this group of animal can be separated into six classes. Didelphids and caenolestids generally live on the American continents while phalangers, dasyurids, and permelids are found in New Guinea and Australia. For 10 points—name this group of animals whose species include the cuscus, the koala, and the kangaroo.;;marsupial(s)
United States History;;In May 2002, Ronald Kessler fingered W. Mark Felt as this individual just a month before the June 17 release of an e-book on the subject. The only person explicitly ruled out by those who know for sure is Alexander Haig. Historians maintain that the only possibilities are former FBI director L. Patrick Gray and e-book author John Dean himself. For 10 points—identify this two-word phrase denoting the inside source which confirmed Woodward and Bernstein's information during the Watergate investigation.;;Deep Throat
American Literature;;His recent works have focused on the waning days of the great American middle-aged male, while his earlier works discussed the American Jewish experience. Some of his characters share his name and many reflect events of his life as filtered through his altar-ego, narrator Nathan Zuckerman.  For 10 points—identify this author of such works as The Great American Novel, Goodbye Columbus, and Portnoy's Complaint.;;(Phillip) (Milton) Roth
Economics;;In this type of market, a firm's demand curve is not perfectly elastic and a firm must lower price to raise marginal revenue. Thus, they are sometimes created by the government even though the firm can set the price to the maximum profit level without regard to competition. For 10 points—name this market structure with only one seller.;;monopoly
European History;;The first woman to appear on a U.S. postage stamp, she revived the medieval hermandades police forces in order to control rebellious Castilian nobles. The mother of Henry VIII's first wife, Catherine of Aragon, she oversaw the expulsion of Muslims and Jews from her country. For 10 points—name this Spanish queen who sponsored Columbus along with her husband Ferdinand.;;Isabella I
European Literature;;The son of Lord Auchinleck, this hypochondriac declined a law career in order to write An Account of Corsica and Journal of a Tour of the Hebrides. The trip which inspired the latter work was taken with a certain companion, whom he met in a bookshop in 1763. For 10 points—name this renowned biographer, author of the Life of Samuel Johnson.;;(James) Boswell
Astronomy;;It says that the radius vector, a straight line from the center of a planet to the center of the sun, covers the same area in any two equally long durations of time regardless of the relative locations of the planet in an orbit during those durations. From that fact, one can conclude that planets move faster when they are closer to the sun than when they are further away. For 10 points—name this member of a set of three laws of planetary motion.;;Kepler's Second (Law)
Geography;;It consists of three groups, the Line Islands, the Phoenix Islands, and the Gilbert Islands; the latter was the name of this country when it was a British protectorate. A 1995 law moving the International Date Line to its east enabled it to become the first country to welcome the new millennium. For 10 points—name this Pacific island state whose capital, located on Tarawa atoll, is Bairiki.;;(Republic of) Kiribati
Math Theory;;It appears in Euclid's algorithm for finding the least common denominator of two numbers. Its square is one greater than it, and it's the ratio of the circumradius of a decagon to the length of the side. It is also found in the chambers of the nautilus and the proportions of the Parthenon. For 10 points—identify this proportion, equal to approximately 1.618.;;golden ratio
European History;;While in prison, he met the writer Rustichello, to whom he dictated his memoirs. The resultant book, Divisament dou monde, is sometimes called Il milione due to its great number of falsehoods. He spent three years as the governor of Yangzhou and became the first European to cross the Gobi Desert. For 10 points—name this Venetian nobleman who journeyed to the court of Kublai Khan.;;(Marco) Polo
Biology;;Herbal medicines containing horse chestnut are advertised to people suffering from this condition as an alternative to injections of hypertonic salt solution known as sclerotherapy. For 10 points—name this disease in which veins become twisted and enlarged because of an inability to return blood to the heart effectively.;;varicose (vein(s))
United States History;;Its power was initially quite limited, as the governor could veto any of its legislation and it had no override power. Two members were elected from each county, and it eventually challenged the governor's power, helping to spur the Revolution. For 10 points—name this first legislature in the colonies, established in 1619 in Virginia.;;House of Burgesses
Philosophy;;Oswald Spengler, in The Decline of the West, sought to prove that this philosophy was a conspicuous feature of collapsing civilizations. It was popular in Russia during the mid-nineteenth century, in a form which held that society could not be redeemed and must be rebuilt after total destruction. For 10 points—name this school of philosophy whose chief proponent was Friedrich Nietzsche, named after the Latin for "nothing".;;nihilism
Physics;;Representing the change in energy of a system at constant temperature and constant pressure, thermodynamic systems will exhibit a spontaneous change only if this quantity decreases during the process. It can be calculated from the internal energy by adding the product of pressure and volume and subtracting the product of temperature and entropy. For 10 points—identify this type of energy, named after an American physicist.;;Gibbs (free) energy
European Literature;;The wife of Simon de'Bardi, she met her greatest admirer only twice and died at the age of twenty-four. Her death was lamented in La Vita Nuova, whose author later wrote of an encounter with her in paradise, where she serves as a guide. For 10 points—name this love of Dante Aligheri.;;Beatrice
Biology;;In this process, malate and isocitrate are stored and used to fuel photosynthesis during the day. It prevents water loss from the opening of stomata by succulent plants in arid regions. For 10 points—name this process which allows carbon dioxide uptake to take place at night.;;C(rassulacean) A(cid) M(etabolism)
Mythology;;Also called Aeaea after the name of her island, she concocted a poisonous drug whose only antitode is moly, brought by Hermes. She purified Jason and Medea of Absyrtus's murder before asking them to leave her island. For 10 points—name this enchantress who turned Odysseus's shipmates into swine.;;Circe
American Literature;;This author of Mexico City Blues often used the alter ego Dulouz to represent his own excesses. After attending Columbia University on a football scholarship, he wrote such works as The Subterraneans, Desolation Angels, Big Sur, and Visions of Cody, which describes conversations with Neal Cassady. For 10 points—name this author of The Dharma Bums and the Beat mainstay On the Road.;;(Jack) Kerouac
Astronomy;;Organic molecules on this satellite suggest that life might be possible despite the surface temperature of 94 degrees Kelvin. In 2004, the Huygens probe will land on this moon, providing the first photos of its surface. For 10 points—name this only satellite in the solar system with a significant atmosphere, the largest moon of Saturn.;;Titan
World History;;It started because soldiers were issued the Enfield rifle, which required soldiers to bite the ends off of lubricated cartridges in order to load the weapon. Some soldiers using these rifles believed that the grease used to lubricate them consisted of either pig or cow lard. Thus, loading the rifles would have meant religious transgression for Hindus and Muslims. For 10 points—thus began what 1857 mutiny against British rule in India?;;Sepoy (Mutiny|Rebellion)
Music;;It premiered in 1877, but Marius Petipa's revision, staged two years after the composer's death, was more well-received and is the version usually performed today. In some performances, Rothbert vies with the Prince in battle for the heart of the princess. For 10 points—name this Tchaikovsky ballet, in which Siegfreid's engagement to Odile causes Odette's death.;;Swan Lake
Religion;;He was expected to continue his father's prosperous business, but in 1206, a dream prompted him to renounce his worldly position and devote himself to repairing the church. One of his first religious actions was to care for a leper, and his order still values a simple life, poverty, and humility before God. For 10 points—name this canonized Italian monk, often pictured with birds and other small animals.;;(Saint) (St(.)) Francis of Assisi;;(Saint|St(.)) Francis
Biology;;Their walls, which can be characterized as tight, continuous, discontinuous, or fenestrated depending on porosity, facilitate the exchange of cells, chemicals, and nutrients. For 10 points—name these eight-to-ten-micron-diameter conduits lined by a single layer of endothelium which carry blood from the arterioles to the tissues.;;capillar(ies|y){1}?
American Literature;;Nick, a newly hired professor at New Carthage University, and his petite wife Honey are invited to the house of older history professor George and wife Martha, the daughter of the university president. Soon George and Martha's marital arguments spread to attacking Nick and Honey. For 10 points—name this 1962 play whose title refers to a 1920s feminist author.;;Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf
United States History;;Assembled by Quakers in the 1780s, it operated until George DeBaptiste announced its success in 1870. Components included Boston's Hayden House and the homes of Seymour Finney, Lucretia Mott and Levi Coffin. 1849 saw the first of nineteen trips along it by Harriet Tubman. For 10 points—name this network which facilitated the escape of Southern slaves.;;(the) Underground Railroad
United States History;;Written by Alice Paul, it was initially presented to Congress in 1923. Discussion has been renewed in each session since then, most recently in 2001 by Representative Carolyn Maloney in conjunction with a call for tax-funded abortions. Passing both houses in 1972, it failed to be ratified by the required 38 states. For 10 points—name this proposed amendment to the Constitution, championed by NOW.;;E(qual) R(ights) A(mendment)
European Literature;;His poetry collections include The Wild Swans at Coole, The Tower and The Winding Stair. With Lady Gregory, he wrote the nationalist play "Cathleen ni Houlihan" and founded the Abbey Theatre. For 10 points—name this Irish author of "Leda and the Swan," "Sailing to Byzantium," and "The Second Coming".;;(William) (Butler) Yeats
Physics;;A refinement of it introduced two empirical quantities, a and b, to account for non-zero volume of particles and the presence of intermolecular forces. That revision is named for Johannes van der Waals. This law synthesizes the prior laws of Avogadro, Gay-Lussac, Charles, and Boyle. For 10 points—name this statement  written as PV = nRT.;;ideal gas (law)
Geography;;Constructed under the supervision of Ferdinand de Lesseps, it was closed from 1967 to 1975. After the treaty allowing the British military to protect it was abrogated in 1954, the Dulles Plan attempted to establish an international presence. It was then nationalized, triggering a crisis whose resolution won a Nobel Peace Prize for Lester Pearson. For 10 points—name this hundred-mile long waterway through part of Egypt.;;Suez (Canal)
Religion;;Developed by Abraham of Posquieres, Moses ben Nahman, Isaac the Blind, and Issac Luria of Safed, it is a cosmology based upon the Hebrew alphabet, whose numerical values link creation with the sephirot. Described in the Sefer ha-zohar, or the Book of Splendor, its name translates as "tradition". For 10 points—name this mystical school associated with Hasidic Jews.;;Kabbala
Math Theory;;David Hilbert asked if an integer x raised to the square root of y power, where y is an integer but not a perfect square, belongs to this subset of the real numbers; in that example, x does, but the square root of y doesn't. They also include e and p. For 10 points—name this subset of real numbers which cannot be the solution of any polynomial equation with integer coefficients.;;transcendental (numbers)
American Literature;;The main character of this story denies that he is a madman but, for eight nights in a row, checks on his elderly companion and is terrified by his "evil eye". Finally, the protagonist kills the old man and hides the body under the floorboards but becomes unnerved when the police arive. For 10 points—name this 1843 Edgar Allan Poe short story in which the murderer confesses after hearing the titular organ.;;(The) Tell(-)Tale Heart
United States History;;A graduate of the University of Michigan law school, he defended "Big Bill" Haywood against a charge of murdering the governor of Idaho and two brothers against charges of blowing up the headquarters of the Los Angeles Times. Although primarily a labor lawyer, he may be best known for defending Leopold and Loeb and facing off against William Jennings Bryan in Dayon, Tennessee. For 10 points—name this defender of John Scopes.;;(Clarence) (Seward) Darrow
Biology;;An eyespot is present in them in the anterior of the cell independent of the chloroplast. Contractile vacuoles are present in both its marine and freshwater forms. One flagellum is always present, though sometimes it may be too small to detect with a light microscope. For 10 points—name these unicellular organisms, protists that can both produce their own food and consume via phagocytosis.;;euglena
World History;;They appeared in Anatolia at the beginning of the second millennium BCE, and by 1340 BCE they became a dominant power from their capital at Hattusa. Their prominent kings included Labarna, Suppiluliuma, and Hattusilis. For 10 points—identify this ancient people who developed siege and made the first effective use of iron.;;Hittite(s)
Music;;The Elizabeth Sprague foundation commissioned him to write a half-hour ballet for six dancers; the result was 1927's Apollo. In collaboration with George Balanchine, he created Agon, while his late works include Requiem Cantadides and the opera The Rake's Progress. For 10 points—name this composer of Petrushka and The Firebird.;;(Igor) (Fyodorovich) Stravinsky
European Literature;;For the BBC, he wrote the radio plays Albert's Bridge and Where Are They Now? and the serial A Student's Diary: An Arab in London. For the stage, he's written The Invention of Love, The Real Thing, and Arcadia. For 10 points—name this author of a modern take on minor Hamlet characters called Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are Dead.;;(Tom) Stoppard
Geography;;Just sixteen miles long but four thousand feet at its widest, it flows by Roosevelt Island and Hell Gate. It separates Manhattan from Long Island in addition to linking New York Bay and Long Island Sound. For 10 points—identify this body of water spanned by eight bridges including the Brooklyn Bridge.;;East (River)
United States History;;Article Sixteen allowed both parties to fortify whatever points necessary for security. Article Twelve called for a fifteen million dollar payment from the victor to the loser. This document ceded five hundred thousand square miles of territory and extended the national boundary south of the Nueces River. For 10 points—name this 1848 treaty which ended the Mexican-American War.;;(Treaty of) Guadalupe(-)Hidalgo
United States History;;The Senate proposal for this bill emphasized rates for farm products, while the House version focused on manufactured goods. A joint session disastrously combined the two and, despite wide protest, it replaced the Fordney-McCumber bill upon its signing by President Hoover. For 10 points—name this Depression-intensifying tariff act.;;Smoot(-)Hawley (Tariff)
American Literature;;Sugar-Boy O'Sheean is a driver and bodyguard. Byram B. White accepts graft money, which causes a scandal leading to an impeachment attempt. Adam Stanton does more than impeach the governor after learning of his wife's affair. For 10 points—Jack Burden narrates the rise and fall of Willie Stark in what Robert Penn Warren novel?;;All the King's Men
Geography;;Inhabitants of this mountain range call themselves the Shleuh. Its landmarks include Dades Gorge and Mount Chelia. It iss is divided into five subranges, and the highest peak in the system, Mount Toubkal, is fifty miles south of Marrakech. For 10 points—name this mountain range which covers much of northwest Africa.;;Atlas (Mountains)
World Literature;;It has no central conflict; rather, it is a series of overlapping mini-sagas revolving around the son of a low-ranking courtesan. That man takes numerous lovers, including Utsuemi and Yugao. For 10 points—name this work of Murasaki Shikibu, often considered the world's first novel.;;(The) Tale of Genji
Physics;;In 1986 the space shuttle Columbia attempted to study this phenomenon by dragging a 21-kilometer-long conducting tether through the Earth's magnetic field. Since Faraday's law states that it is proportional to the cosine of the angle between a circuit and the magnetic field, it will not occur if the circuit is parallel to a magnetic field. For 10 points--name this process in which a magnetic field can establish an electric current and vice versa.;;(electromagnetic) induction
European History;;He established an amicable relationship with Tahmasp I, the Safavid ruler of Iran. His 1566 to 1574 rule included the suppression of a revolt in Yemen, the capture of Cyprus from the Venetians, and the recapture of Tunisia from the Spanish. For 10 points—identify this Ottoman sultan, also known as "The Sot" or "The Blond," the son and succesor of Suleyman the Magnificient.;;Selim (II)
Biology;;With an estimated 2000 species in the world, this group of invertebrates range in size from one inch to around 200 feet in length.  Drifting in the ocean for over 650 million years, they attack their prey using stinging cells that inject poison into the organism.  For 10 points—name this animal species which includes the Lion's Mane and Portuguese Man-of-War that looks like an umbrella when submerged in the water.;;jellyfish
Psychology;;Born near Greenville, South Carolina, he attended Furman and Chicago before becoming director of the psychological laboratory at Johns Hopkins. Before he was forced to resign due to an affair with a research assistant, he conducted the "Little Albert" experiment in which he trained a small child to be afraid of fuzzy white things. For 10 points—name this founder of behaviorism.;;(John) (Broadus) Watson
Physics;;The earliest photographic evidence of their existence currently dates to 1890 rather than 1895 as sometimes believed. With wavelengths ranging from 10 nanometers down to 1 picometer, they overlap with the short end of the ultraviolet portion of the electromagnetic spectrum. For 10 points—name this form of radiation discovered by Roentgen (RENT-gin).;;x(-)rays
World Literature;;Some attribute its coinage to Alejo Carpentier, while others say the term was introduced by Felix Roh or Arturo Uslar Pietri. Miguel Angel Asturias used the term to describe his novels when he won the 1967 Nobel Prize. It can be defined as placing the ordinary elements into the unreal and strange and ignoring the restriction of time. For 10 points—name this narrative style of such writers as Carlos Fuentes and Gabriel García Márquez.;;magic(al) realism
Miscellaneous;;In The Lathe of Heaven, she wrote of a man whose dreams literally become reality. She use "An Ambiguous Utopia" as the subtitled for The Dispossessed, while she also wrote of a world in which the concepts of "male" and "female" are arbitrary and can be switched at will. For 10 points—name this author of The Telling, The Left Hand of Darkness, and a cycle beginning with A Wizard of Earthsea.;;(Ursula) (Kroeber) Le Guin
European History;;One branch of this family inherited mental disorders from Queen Juana the Mad of Castile, while their incestuous marriage practices led to Charles II of Spain being unable to chew solid food. Their main branch built an empire which was challenged by nationalistic Croats, Czechs, Poles, and most ominously, Serbs. For 10 points—name this family which ruled the Holy Roman Empire from 1438 until the empire's downfall and was the only ruling line in the history of Austria-Hungary.;;Hapsburg
Computer Science;;Although they could always be allocated dynamically in C, run-time allocation of them was impossible in FORTAN before the advent of Fortran 90. Multidimensional ones are stored columnwise in FORTRAN but rowwise in C, making conversion of scientific programs extremely difficult. For 10 points—name these objects which consist of multiple entries of a single data type.;;array(s)
Art;;This group was named by Alfred Barr and Holger Cahill. Formed by writers for the Philadelphia Press, it later moved to New York, where it continued to use somber palettes and realistic representation of urban settings inspired by the newspaper sketches of the pre-photograph era. For 10 points, identify this art movement, a rebellion against the influence of French impressionism centering on Robert Henri.;;Ashcan (School)
American History;;At 785 feet in length and over thirty thousand gross tons, it was the largest liner of its time. The sister ship of the Mauretania, it was launched in 1906 and left New York for the last time in May 1915, carrying 128 Americans among its passengers. For 10 points—name this ship whose sinking by a German U-boat spurred American entry into World War I.;;(RMS) Lusitania
Geography;;Fed by the Weber, Bear, and Jordan Rivers, islands in it include Antelope and Fremont. A remnant of prehistoric Lake Bonneville, it supports no life except brine shrimp and colonial algae. Promontory Point extends from the north into it. For 10 points-name this shallow but expansive body of water in Utah.;;Great Salt (Lake)
Religion;;This religion believes that truth is revealed by "bridge-finders" or tirthankaras. Followers are divided into the Digambaras and the Svetambaras; the former wears simple white clothes, while the latter follows the orthodox doctrine of nudity. Many carry their belief in ahimsa to such an extent that they wear masks and filter their water to avoid killing insects. For 10 points—name this religion, founded in India by Mahavira.;;Jain(ism)
United States History;;Soon after its issue, the government suspended loan payments to states. Issued by Treasury Secretary Levi Woodbury, it was in force until repealed by Congress in 1838. Because of land scarcity, it did not accomplish its goal of reducing speculation. For 10 points—name this 1836 Jacksonian directive which stated that gold, silver, or Virginia scrip were the only payments accepted for federal land.;;Specie Circular
Geology;;First, B-22. Then, C-19, and now D-17, which was once part of the Lazarev Shelf in the Liddell Sea. All have detached over the past year, but the trend may cease due to recently reported thickening. For 10 points—name these large masses of frozen water and snow.;;iceberg(s)
Physics;;Derived from a the Latin for "unskillful," this term was introduced by Kepler. In electromagnetism, it refers to the resistance of an electric or magnetic field to sudden changes of current or field strength. As a passive physical property, it plays no role except allowing a body to oppose forces and torques. For 10 points—identify this physical property which explains why moving particles keep moving.;;inertia
European Literature;;He cracks his knuckles when speaking, has a shrill voice, and accentuates odd words in a sentence. A powerful government official, he is impotent to prevent his wife from falling in love with Count Vronsky. For 10 points—name this father of Serezha and husband of Anna Karenina.;;(Alexey) (Alexandrovich) Karenin
Math Theory;;When integrating over them, one should remember to multiply the function by the variable that appears in transformation. Used to express the Mandelbrot set, they come about because the unit of incremental area increases with distance from its origin. Transforming from Cartesian coordinates uses the relationships tangent of theta equals y over x, r squared equals x squared plus y squared. For 10 points—identify this coordinate system, which expresses points in terms of angle and distance from the origin.;;polar (coordinate(s))
European History;;Although he was victorious in minor engagements against Labienus, his forces were defeated soundly at Alesia. Named king of the Averni in 52 BCE, he used guerilla tactics in order to frustrate Caesar's army. For 10 points—name this leader of the Gallic rebellion.;;Vercingetorix
Linguistics;;This language has fifteen cases which can express place, time, ownership, manner, and other relationships which are prepositional in English. A phonetic language with only one pronunciation for each letter, it is called "suomi" by its speakers. For 10 points—identify the native language of Jean Sibelius and Paavo Nurmi.;;Finnish
World Literature;;This series begins during World War I and concerns a family patriarch, his wife, Amina, and their five children. Conflicts arise in the novel due to Yasin's appetite for women and the differences between the plain Khadija and the beautiful Aisha. For 10 points—identify this trilogy featuring Al-Sayid Ahmand Abdal-al Jawad, consisting of Palace Walk, Palace of Desire, and Sugar Street and written by Naguib Mahfouz.;;Cairo (Trilogy)
United States History;;It was introduced in 1904 during a troubled European political climate, as Ottoman discrimination against Armenians and a new Russian pogrom against Jews came to light. It also touched on events closer to home such as the bankruptcy of the Dominican Republic. Using Europe's disgraces to head off controversy, it asserted the right of the United States to intervene in the Western Hemisphere. For 10 points—name this revision of the Monroe Doctrine.;;Roosevelt Corollary
Chemistry;;His early work in stereochemistry explained optical activity in terms of the tetrahedral bonding of carbon.  He later introduced modern concepts of chemical affinity and advanced the understanding of electrolytes. He related the equilibrium constant to temperature and created equations relating osmotic pressure to mole fraction of solute. For 10 points—name this man, the first winner of the Nobel Prize in Chemistry.;;(Jacobus) van(')t Hoff
Physics;;It makes possible the direct measurement of a gamma-ray line width, which corresponds to the width of the decaying nuclear level. In solid-state physics, using single crystals, the amplitude of the motion can be measured in specific crystallographic directions, providing a test of lattice dynamical models. For 10 points—identify this effect, also known as recoil-free gamma-ray resonance absorption, discovered in 1957 by a German-born physicist.;;Mossbauer (Effect)
World History;;He traveled around the world as a ship's cook. During a 1920 stopover in France, he helped form the French Communist Party. After a World War II spying conviction, he adopted a name meaning "most enlightened one" and formed the Viet Minh. For 10 points—name this man who led the defeat of the French at Diem Bien Phu and later became president of North Vietnam.;;Ho Chi Minh
American Literature;;A gifted young woman receives summer internship as a junior editor at a magazine in New York City in the early 1950s. Eventually Esther Greenwood, who was not totally stable to begin with, goes completely insane. For 10 points—name this novel by Sylvia Plath.;;(The) Bell Jar
Geography;;Its outlet is spanned by the immense General Rafael Urdaneta Bridge. Its chief tributary is the Catatumbo River, and it was discovered in 1499 by Alonso de Ojeda, whose namesake city is on its shores along with Cabimas. It is found between two mountain ranges, the Cordillera Oriental and the Cordillera de Mérida. For 10 points—name this Venezuelan lake, the largest in South America.;;(Lake) Maracaibo
Geography;;In this country's north, the Tenne back the All People's Congress, while the southern Mende support the People's Party of president Ahmad Tejan Kabbah. The former Revolutionary United Front is attempting to become a legitimate political party as founder Foday Sankoh faces potential war crimes charges. For 10 points—name this West African nation whose decade-long civil war was fueled by its diamond wealth.;;(Republic of) Sierra Leone
European Literature;;First issued in 1835 as a collection of 32 runos and later expanded to 50 runos in 1849, it is centered around three heroes: the sage-and-singer Vainamoinen, the smith Ilmarinen, and the adventurer Lemminkainen. For 10 points—name this poem compiled by Elias Lonnrot, the national epic of Finland.;;(The) Kalevala
World History;;After losing two fingers in the Battle of Tshushima Straits, he journeyed to the United States, where he attended Harvard and served as a naval attaché for three years. He was killed in the Solomon Islands by a 347th wing bombing raid in 1943, three years after bluntly telling the cabinet that his forces could hold off the Allies for no more than one year. For 10 points—name this Japanese admiral who planned the Pearl Harbor attack.;;Yamamoto (Isoroku)
Biology;;It was the first selective serotonin uptake inhibitor marketed by Eli Lilly. As Serafem, it is prescribed to help women suffering from a serious form of premenstrual syndrome.  First used in Belgium in 1986, the patent for its most prescribed brand name is now expired. For 10 points—give the trade name for fluoxetine, a popular anti-depression drug.;;Prozac
Physics;;Taking units of joules per square meter, it results from discontinuity: while most molecules in a liquid are entirely surrounded by others, at interfaces they aren't, resulting in energy imbalances. It can be directly measured with a capillary tube, and explains why bubbles take spherical shapes: minimizing area minimizes energy. For 10 points—identify this property of fluids, because of which certain insects can "walk" on water.;;surface tension
American Literature;;Each of its chapters begins with excerpts from the title character's calendar. Inspired by news accounts of the Tocci brothers, it takes place in Dawson's Landing, Missouri, home of the slave Roxanna and Percy Driscoll, who become the parents of Tom and Chambers, respectively. For 10 points—name this novel of fingerprints and mistaken identity by Mark Twain.;;(The) (Tragedy of) Pudd(‘)nhead Wilson
Music;;Six of his piano concertos are based on works of Antonio Vivaldi and Marcello Benedetto. His Christmas Oratorio is composed of six parts, each to be performed on the day of the calendar which it commemorates. He wrote five settings of the "Sanctus," which does not appear in four of his masses but does appear in the Mass in B minor. For 10 points—identify this German baroque composer of The Art of the Fugue, The Well-Tempered Clavier, and the Brandenburg Concertos.;;J(.)(ohann) S(.)(ebastian) Bach;;Bach
World History;;The current version of it differs from the original in the addition of the Filioque clause, which acknowledges belief in the Holy Spirit. Written to counter Arianism, it put forth the "consubstantalist" view that God and Jesus were of the same substance. For 10 points—name this profession of faith, adopted at a conference in 325.;;Nicene Creed
Biology;;Basal bodies are a specialized form of these structures, which anchor cilla and flagella to the cell membrane. Ordinary versions consist of nine triplet microtubules, lie at right angles to each other within the cell and serve as a spindle to direct chromosomes during cell division. For 10 points—name these components of the cytoskeleton.;;centriole
British Literature;;This author's first published collection, 1941's A Curtain of Green, contained a story called "Why I Live at the P.O". about the tumultuous events surrounding a Mississippi family on the Fourth of July. The story inspired Steve Dorner to name an e-mail client in tribute to her. For 10 points—name this author of The Optimist's Daughter and Delta Wedding.;;(Eudora) Welty
World History;;Generals China and Dedak Kimathi were captured and charged with leading it. Instigated by members of the Kikuyu tribe, it first targeted native loyalists, then English settlers themselves. For 10 points—name this 1956 rebellion in Kenya.;;Mau Mau (Rebellion)
United States History;;It was described at the Democratic national convention in Atlantic City as "a place where men are more concerned with the quality of their goals than the quantity of their goods". For 10 points—name this broad program which included the National School Lunch Act and Head Start, the name given to the social platform of Lyndon Johnson.;;(The) Great Society
Chemistry;;At room temperature, 999 out of 1000 molecules of it exist in the so-called "chair configuration," while the "boat" configuration is observed only at higher temperatures. Substituents on its ring structure, such as methyl or tert-butyl groups, are more stable on the equatorial plane rather than on one of the axial positions. For 10 points—identify this class of compounds containing non-aromatic six-membered rings.;;cyclohexane(s)
Georaphy;;It contains the cities of Bar and Cetinje and the western part of Lake Scutari. Its largest city and capital, located at the confluence of the Ribnica and Moraca rivers, is Podgorica. Independent as a kingdom under Nicholas I from 1910 to 1918, its residents voted against resuming independence in a 1992 plebiscite. For 10 points—name this only member, besides Serbia, of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.;;Montenegro
Physics;;His namesake frequency is given by dividing a particle's energy by Planck's constant, while his namesake wavelength is calculated by dividing the particle's momentum into Planck's constant. These latter numbers, however, tend to be so small for ordinary matter--on the order of 10 to the -30 meters or less--that they are unobservable in macroscopic real-world situations. For 10 points—name this physicist best known for postulating the wave-particle duality of nature.;;(Louis) (de) Broglie
Mythology;;The daughter of Mutto, her Tyrian name was Elissa. When her brother Pygmalion assassinated her uncle Sicharbas, she fled to Cyprus and then Africa. She found a horse's head in the ground and decided to build a city on that spot but was continually pursued for marriage by neighboring king Iarbas. For 10 points—name this sister of Anna who immolated herself after the departure of Aeneas from Carthage.;;Dido
British Literature;;He once worked for a rich and handsome man who used his looks to sway the jury in a court case. He was sentenced to twice the jail time of his good-looking employer before escaping from prison and making a great deal of money in Australia. With his money, he helped Philip Pirrip go to London and become a gentleman. For 10 points—name this convict from Great Expectations.;;(Abel) Magwitch
United States History;;"You have taken off silk and put on khaki.  You have a debt to democracy and a date with destiny," said Oveta Culp Hobby, the first leader of this group, in 1942. A year later, as a result of bills introduced by Congresswoman Edith Rogers, it became part of the army and Hobby was given the rank of Colonel. For 10 points—name this organization which oversaw female soldiers until the 1978 gender integration of the Army.;;W(omen's) A(rmy) C(orps)
European History;;He was recruited by a Major Tankosic and was only able to perform his deed because the victim's car took a wrong turn. Because of disputes over his age, he was given a sentence of twenty years rather than the death penalty, and he died of tuberculosis in the same year that the war he helped to start ended. For 10 points—name this man who assassinated Franz Ferdinand.;;(Gavrilo) Princip
Sociology;;Its three types are broad, narrow, and pop. "Broad" study general behavioral tendencies present in animals and humans. "Narrow" is based on evolutionary theory and focuses on genetic aspects of behavior, rejecting cultural influences. The "pop" type uses the arguments of the narrow type and relates the evolutionary theory to human nature. For 10 points—name this approach which treats genetics as the sole factor responsible for behavior in humans and animals, first explained in a namesake work by E.O. Wilson.;;sociobiology
Art;;He claimed that his paintings were inspired by military service in Mexico, but he actually had an unremarkable military career and drew inspiration from zoos around Paris. His series of jungle paintings includes The Dream and Surprised! Tropical Storm With a Tiger, while his nickname refers to his post-military employment in a customs office. For 10 points—name these "naïve painter" of The Football Players and The Sleeping Gypsy.;;(Henri) Rousseau
World Literature;;One of the title characters, a doctor, is saved from death in a massacre because he is stained with an antiseptic that looks like blood. He also has the most sensitive nose in history, and, after hitting his head twice, finds that he can read the minds of the one thousand others like him. For 10 points—Saleem Sinai is the protagonist of what novel, named for those born during the first hour of India's independence, by Salman Rushdie?;;Midnight's Children
Sociology;;He collaborated with his wife Mary Ritter on The Rise of American Civilization, which called the Civil War a "second American Revolution" by industrialists against farmers. A founder of the New School for Social Research, his other works include The Making of American Civilization and The Supreme Court and the Constitution. For 10 points--name this historian who alleged that the Constitution was designed to further the financial interests of the framers in An Economic Interpretation of the Constitution.;;(Charles) (Austin) Beard
World Literature;;His "voice" is found in the title of a Kahlil Gibran work, and this word also precedes "Olof" in a Strindberg play. He is "of Go" in a Kawabata Yasunari novel and "of Ballantrae" in a Robert Louis Stevenson novel. For 10 points—identify this word which also precedes "and Margarita" in a novel by Bulgakov and "builder" in a play by Ibsen.;;(the) master
Geography;;This landmark is named after a barnstorming bush pilot from Missouri who sighted it in 1933. It flows over the tabletop mountain Auyan-tepui, past a replica of its namesake's Falamingo monoplane. For 10 points—name this Venezeulan waterfall, the world's highest.;;Angel (Falls)
Physics;;It wasn't until the Karlsruhe Conference, and at the urging of Stanislao Cannizzarro, that his ideas were widely accepted. Those ideas were that some elements could exist as diatomic molecules in the free state, and that weights of molecules were directly proportional to gas density; this latter statement is implied by, for 10 points— whose hypothesis that equal volumes of gas at equal temperatures and pressures contain equal numbers of particles?;;(Amedeo) Avogadro
Math Theory;;Summing the so-called "shallow" diagonals yields the Fibonacci series. For a swiss-pair tournament with 2^n teams, the results are the n+1th row; a binomial expansion of (a+b)^n yields its nth row as coefficients. Although Yanghui and Omar Khayyam both studied it, it takes its name from the mathematician who developed the formula for each subsequent row. For 10 points—identify this mathematical curiosity, in which each number is the sum of the numbers above it, which begins: 1, 1 1, 1 2 1, 1 3 3 1...;;Pascal's Triangle
Biology;;According to Cornell professor Thomas Eisner, members of this phylum "are not going to own the Earth. They own it now". Two out of every three living species belongs to this phylum, all of whose members have a hard outer exoskeleton. For 10 points—name this phylum which includes insects and spiders.;;arthropod(a|s)
Music;;His dramatic works include the ballet The Victory of Love and Ulysses's Return to his Homeland. His choral music includes nine books of madrigals and the Vespers of the Blessed Virgin. His studies under Jacopo Peri inspired his work, some of the earliest of the baroque period, including The Coronation of Poppea. For 10 points—name this Italian who, in 1607, composed Orfeo, the earliest significant opera.;;(Claudio) Monteverdi
Geography;;Leopoldo Galtieri scheduled Operación Rosario for here on May 25th, independence day, but pushed the invasion up to April 2 to divert attention from internal strife. American Secretary of State Alexander Haig attempted to mediate the conflict without success. The conflict came to a military resolution after Port Stanley fell. For 10 points—name the island group contested by Britain and Argentina.;;Falkland (Islands)
Religion;;Although originally synonymous with "caliph," divergence in its use occurred after the death of Ali. The Shi'ites believe that it applies only to the divinely appointed descendants of Ali, while the Qur'an uses it to refer to leaders as well as Abraham. For 10 points—give this Arabic term used to denote the spiritual leader of a local congregation.;;imam
American Literature;;Marcus Schouler graciously accepts the fact his sweetheart Trina Sieppe has chosen to marry the title character until Trina wins five thousand dollars in a lottery. Marcus then exposes the titular San Francisco dentist as unlicensed and dimwitted, plunging the couple into destitution. For 10 points—thus begins what novel by Frank Norris?;;McTeague
Astronomy;;It originated from an attempt to help wannabe astronomers make a name for themselves.  When it was invented, discovering a comet was the way to become a famous astronomer, but there were many objects that were easily confused with comets.  Our version includes seven objects that were not in the original catalog.  For 10 points—name this Frenchman's list of 110 stellar objects, designated by "M" numbers.;;Messier (catalog)
European History;;Louis VII wanted to do penance for a massacre, while Pope Eugenius III had declared a bull after urging by Bernard of Clairvaux for this action. The only success for the Christian forces was the recapture of Lisbon, and the goal of capturing Edessa was not met. For 10 points—identify this 1146 crusade.;;Second (Crusade)
Economics;;In this field, probability is used to determine ideal outcomes, which maximize utility in the system, with the knowledge that people are generally self-interested. Its classic problems include the prisoner's dilemma, while its fundamental theorem deals with optimal mixed strategies and is known as the minimax theorem. For 10 points—name this field of math and economics, pioneered by Oscar Morgenstern and John von Neumann.;;game theory
British Literature;;Richard Wallace's 1996 book Jack the Ripper, Light Hearted Friend proposes that Jack was this man, who once removed a chapter from one of his works and published the chapter as The Wasp in a Wig because illustrator John Tenniel found the story too implausible. For 10 points—name this man whose stories to Henry Lidell's daughter became Through the Looking-Glass and Alice's Adventures in Wonderland.;;(Lewis) Carroll
Biology;;His second law explains the stochastic frequency of various dihybrid ratios provided the two characteristics followed are unlinked and determined by random recombination. A trait is segregated according to his first law so that the two alleles received from the parents are separated with equal probability in the progeny. For 10 points—name this man who postulated laws of inheritance during his experiments at an Austrian monastery.;;(Gregory) Mendel(‘s) (Laws)
Economics;;The government should not attempt to influence aggregate demand at all, because fiscal policy is ineffective. Instead, the money supply should increase at a steady rate equal to the long-term growth rate of production. The long-term aggregate supply curve is vertical. For 10 points—identify the economic school of thought which promulgates such ideas, championed by Milton Friedman.;;monetarism
European History;;Born in Torgau in 1463, he built a castle and a university which transformed Wittenberg into a center of arts and learning. Before dying at his hunting lodge, he gained fame by protecting an accused heretic and later allowing him to be kidnapped for the protection of both men. For 10 points—name this Saxon elector who defended Martin Luther's right to a hearing before the Diet of Worms.;;(Elector) Friedrich
American Literature;;A Unitarian pastor from Boston, he was the Senate Chaplain from 1903 until his death in 1909. His writings include Franklin in France, the autobiographical New England Boyhood, and Memories of a Hundred Years. His most lasting work, published in 1863, tells the tale of Philip Nolan. For 10 points—name this author of "The Man Without a Country".;;(Edward) (Everett) Hale
Geography;;It has three main islands, Njazidja, Nzwani, and Mwali, because Mayotte voted against independence. Heavily dependent on its former colonizer France for trade and foreign aid, this Islamic state is an archipelago in the Indian Ocean between Madagascar and Mozambique. For 10 points—name this island country with capital at Moroni.;;Comoros
European Literature;;He once replied to a letter from his editor, consisting of a single question mark, with an exclamation point. A member of the National Assembly of the Third Republic, his poetry may be found in The Art of Being a Grandfather and Autumn Leaves, while his dramas include The King Amuses Himself, which forms the basis of Verdi's Rigoletto. For 10 points—name this author of The Hunchback of Notre Dame and Les Misirables.;;(Victor) (Marie) Hugo
Music;;It was inspired by the rhythmic noises on a train ride from New York to Boston. First written as a two-piano score orchestrated by Ferde Grofe, its first performance included an opening glissando for the clarinet and several improvised piano solos played by the composer. For 10 points—name this fusion of jazz, classical, and pop elements which appeared in 1924 from the pen of George Gershwin.;;Rhapsody in Blue
British Literature;;In his first power grab, he claims a medal without doing any fighting. He then claims credit for the idea of building a windmill and secretly sells one of his "comrades" to a butcher. He also adds phrases such as "without sheets" and "to excess" to a series of seven rules and puts out a bounty on Snowball. For 10 points—name this pig who becomes the dictator of George Orwell's Animal Farm.;;Napoleon
Geography;;Despite a peace deal signed in February 2002, this country's authorities arrested Laskar Jihad leader Jafar Umar Thalib for inciting a massacre of villagers in the regional capital of Ambon City in the Moluccan Islands. For 10 points—name this large country in which Christian-Muslim violence has previously occurred in Aceh and Timor.;;(Republic of) Indonesia
Psychology;;It was first introduced in 1950 using a man and a woman instead of the present setup. Weizenbaum's ELIZA program and Colby's PARRY program were cited as examples of how the system was flawed, because such programs generate correct behaviors for incorrect reasons. For 10 points—name this process in which an interrogator has conversations with a man and a machine, based on the idea that artificial intelligence exists when the interrogator can no longer tell the two apart.;;Turing (Test)
Sociology;;Born in 1509, he grew up in a middle-class family and studied humanities and the law.  Dedicated to building a society on Biblical principles, his work in Geneva was ill-received by the people of the city, and he was exiled. For 10 points—name this Protestant reformer, who preached predestination.;;(John) Calvin
United States History;;Former Illinois governor John Stelle wrote this bill, and William Randolph Hearst's lobbying led to its passage in June 1944. Although it has dispersed over seventy billion dollars, it has returned government investment up to twelvefold in income taxes due to higher-paying jobs for beneficiaries. The drastic change in student body composition which it caused led to the introduction of programs in applied fields. For 10 points—name this act which subsidized the college tuition of veterans.;;GI Bill (of Rights)
Sociology;;It discusses of pecuniary emulation, and the "predatory society," in which the status gained from displaying the possession of a good is more important than the good itself. For 10 points—name this speculative work of sociology which coined the term "conspicuous consumption," written by Thorstein Veblen.;;(The) Theory of the Leisure Class
European History;;He and Athenagoras I, the patriarch of Constantinople, agreed to nullify the mutual excommunications that caused the schism of 1054. He became the first Pope to leave Italy in over 150 years when he traveled to the Middle East. His orders included encyclicals affirming the bans on female investiture and priestly marriage, an expanded ban on birth control, and allowance of vernacular in the Mass. For 10 points—name this Pope, succeeded by John Paul I, who led the end of the Second Vatican Council.;;(Pope) Paul VI
British Literature;;Accompanied by the title character and Immortality, this work's narrator passes a school "where Children strove at Recess," "Fields of Grazing Grain," and the "Setting Sun," or  rather the "Sun passed the Carriage". For 10 points—give the first line which titles this Emily Dickinson poem about a leisurely and serene eternal voyage.;;Because I could not stop for death
World History;;Born in 1892 in Ejarsa Gora, he changed his name to a phrase meaning "might of the trinity" when he took the throne. In 1936, while in exile, he spoke to the League of Nations against Italy's occupation of his country. For 10 points—name this man who ruled from 1931 to 1974 as emperor of Ethiopia.;;(Haile) Selassie|(Ras) Tafari
American Literature;;He ran for governor in 1934 on the End Poverty in California platform, and after his narrow defeat he produced novels based on the trial of Sacco and Vanzetti and the Teapot Dome scandal, respectively entitled Boston and Oil!. A decade earlier, he wrote a work which caused Theodore Roosevelt to invite him to the White House and endorse the Pure Food and Drug Act. For 10 points—name this man who wrote about slaughterhouse worker Jurgis Rudkus in The Jungle.;;(Upton) Sinclair
American Literature;;In 1742, he wrote a novel in imitation of the style of Don Quixote and in mocking of the sentiments of Samuel Richardson, whose characters include Parson Abraham Adams and Fanny the milkmaid. In another of his works, Blifil and the ward of Squire Allworthy vie for Sophia Western. For 10 points—name this author of Amelia, Joseph Andrews, Tom Thumb, and Tom Jones.;;(Henry) Fielding
United States History;;Its leader, David Bradford, fled to the area which became Louisiana. One of the first tests of the new government's power, it ended after the militias of Pennsylvania and surrounding states were mobilized. For 10 points—name this 1794 campaign against an excise tax.;;Whiskey (Rebellion)
Chemistry;;The first stable one discovered was triphenylmethyl in 1900. Destroyed on exposure to air, they are generally formed by the cleavage of an electron-pair bond. Generally electrically neutral, they are highly reactive due to the presence of an unpaired electron. For 10 points—name these chemical structures responsible for chain reactions.;;(free) radical(s)
United States History;;Its social initiatives, such as free breakfasts, came to be called Survival Programs. Its more controversial efforts including an armed march into the California state legislature to protest a gun control bill. For 10 points—name this party which promulgated the Ten Point Program under the leadership of Huey Newton and Bobby Seale.;;black panthers
European Literature;;His comedies and tragedies include The Pedant Tricked and The Death of Agrippina, while his fantasies include two "Comical Histories of States and Empires", one of the moon and one of the sun. For 10 points—name this duelist and author whose long nose inspired a namesake play by Edmund Rostand.;;(Cyrano) (de) Bergerac
American Literature;;"Doctor Long Ghost A Wag - One of His Capers", "A Surprise - More About Bembo", "The Tatooers of La Dominica", and "Further Account of the Julia" are just some of the chapters found in this novel. Its title literally means "one who wanders from island to island". For 10 points—identify this Herman Melville novel, the sequel to Typee.;;Omoo
Astronomy;;Organic molecules on this satellite suggest that life might be possible despite the surface temperature of 94 degrees Kelvin. In 2004, the Huygens probe will land on this moon, providing the first photos of its surface. For 10 points—name this only satellite in the solar system with a significant atmosphere, the largest moon of Saturn.;;Titan
United States History;;He began his career as a computer systems analyst with the US Veterans' Administration in 1961. After serving as deputy director of the Office of Management and Budget, he went into business and held such jobs as president of International Paper and CEO of Alcoa. For 10 points—name this man who succeeded Lawrence Summers as US Secretary of the Treasury.;;(Paul) O'Neill
Philosophy;;Subtitled "A Book for All and for None," it is written in the style of a Biblical narrative. Its eighty sections include "The Three Metamorphoses," "The Ugliest Man," and "The Drunken Song". Its title character commands "ye higher men, learn to laugh!", and eventually departs from his cave. For 10 points—identify this Friedrich Nietzsche work which uses the founder of an Asian religion as the mouthpiece.;;Thus Sp(o)(a)ke Zarathustra
Biology;;Kupffer cells, which line the blood sinuses of the liver, are a type of these cells, although most are motile. Containing lysosomes and an oxidative microbicidal system, they respond to interferons and attach to complement-coated or antibody-coated materials. For 10 points—name these mononuclear immune cells which engulf infected cells.;;macrophage(s)
Music;;The sustained high B at the conclusion of its concert hall version is heard only when it is reprised in its operatic form, and then is to be sung from offstage, growing ever farther away as the aria continues. In the reprise, it signifies that the Duke, who sings it, is still alive and that Sparafucile has instead killed Gilda. For 10 points—name this callous tenor aria which declares that "all women are crazy," found in Rigoletto.;;(La) donna e mobile
Biology;;Unlike most insects, the pupal form of this insect, known as a tumbler, is active and can swim freely. Two genuses, Aedes [EE-deez] and Culex [KYOO-leks] carry encephalitis.  For 10 points—name this family of blood-sucking insects, whose genus Anopheles [uh-NAH-fuh-leez] is best known for spreading malaria.;;mosquito(es)
United States History;;He became the first Presidential candidate to make an extensive campaign tour on his own behalf, two years after winning re-election to the Senate despite the debating skills of his challenger. The Senate sponsor of the Kansas-Nebraska Act, he was nicknamed "The Little Giant". For 10 points—name this man who, the northern Democrat candidate for President in 1860.;;(Stephen) (Arnold) Douglas
Math Theory;;Its integral cannot be explicitly found, and is called the erf or error function. Although it can be overapplied, the Central Limit Theorem states that any distributed population will behave somewhat like it. The Price is Right game "Plinko" yields it, as do many populations studies for properties such as height and weight (though not age). For 10 points— identify this most common statistical distribution.;;normal (distribution)
British Literature;;The poet asks if the title figure knows who gave him life, who bid him "feed/By the stream and o'er the mead;" who gave him "clothing of delight,/softest clothing, woolly, bright". The key question is "Who made thee"? For 10 points—name this poem by William Blake.;;(The) Lamb
Geography;;The Goyder Channel joins the northern and southern parts of this lake, and its southeastern coast consists of sand cliffs. The Tirari and Simpson Deserts border it to the north and east, and the main islands found within it are Brooks and Dulhunty. For 10 points—name this often dry lake, which, at fifteen feet below sea level, is the lowest point in Australia.;;(Lake) Eyre
Physics;;The collector electrode is generally made of tungsten and charged to about 1200 volts.  A glass cylinder is used, the inside of which is coated with a conductive material.  For 10 points—when a radioactive particle enters, it converts a helium atom to a positive ion, in this device named after a German physicist.;;Geiger Counter
American Literature;;The protagonist's earlier attempt to solve the central theological quandry involved assigning ratings to the goodness of plague victims and was unsuccessful. However, when Pepita, Esteban, Uncle Pio, Jaime Perichole, and the Marquesa de Montemayor die in the collapse of the title structure, the project to understand why God allows some to live and others to die is renewed by Brother Juniper. For 10 points—name this 1927 Thornton Wilder novel, set in eighteenth-century Peru.;;(The) Bridge of San(-)Luis Rey
European History;;He married his cousin Faustina and was in office during Galen's service as court doctor. He ruled from 161 to 180 as the successor of his adoptive father Antonius Pius. A student of Fronto and of the Stoic Epictetus, he wrote of his own philosophy in the Meditations.  For 10 points—name this last of the so-called "five good emperors," succeeded by the megalomaniacal Commodus.;;Marcus Aurelius
Psychology;;Invented by Lofti Zadeh, it is currently used in automatic toasters and coffee makers, as well as other "learning" devices. Under it, the paradox "this statement is false" is solvable, with a truth value of one-half. For 10 points—name this system in which fractional truth values between 0 and 1 are allowed, as opposed to the binary approach of classical formal logic.;;fuzzy logic
World Literature;;He grew up in a house with a large library and garden where his father demonstrated Zeno's paradox on a chessboard. All of that influenced his works, including The Gold of Tigers and The Book of Imaginary Beings. For 10 points—name this blind Argentinian author who told of the Aleph in one story from his Ficciones.;;(Jorge) (Luis) Borges
Mythology;;He tied up Death to avoid going to Hades, and forbade his wife Merope from performing funeral rites so that he could return to Earth and live a second time. For 10 points—name this king this king of Corinth who was punished for his misdeeds by being forced to roll a stone up a hill eternally.;;Sisyphus
Biology;;In animal cells, it is achieved through the constriction of the cell by a ring of contractile microfilaments, which consist of actin and possibly myosin. In plant cells, a new cell wall or cell plate forms. For 10 points—name this process which occurs after mitosis, consisting of the division of the cytoplasm.;;cytokinesis
Geology;;The A-type, also called "delamination," may only proceed for a few hundred kilometers, as it involves only continental material.  This is contrasted with the B-type, where oceanic crust may be recycled for a thousand kilometers.  Generally causing deep earthquakes, their namesake "zones" form island arcs and trenches.  For 10 points – name this process of a tectonic plate sliding under another.;;subduction
Geology;;Although nowhere near Los Angeles, it has a very lengthy full name beginning with "The city of angels," although its name goes on to proclaim it "the great city, the residence of the Emerald Buddha, the impregnable city of God Indra, the grand capital of the world…given by Indra and built by Vishnukarn". For 10 points—name this city across from Thon Buri on the Chao Phraya River in the Malay peninsula, the capital of Thailand.;;Bangkok
Philosophy;;Erasmus argues that it was compatible with Christianity in In Praise of Folly. St. Thomas More maintained that it promoted more behavior. The "ethical" form of this belief is found in Epicurus, while its "physical" form advocates sensual pleasures over moral restraint. For 10 points­—name this philosophy, which emphasizes the seeking of pleasure.;;hedonism
American Literature;;He was born in 1925 at the U.S. Military Academy, the son of the first aviation instructor there. At the age of ten, he became the youngest pilot to date, as recorded in his Screening History. He wrote his first novel, Williwaw, while on duty in World War II. For 10 points—name this author of "The American Chronicle," Julian, The Best Man, and Myra Breckinridge.;;(Gore) Vidal
World History;;Extremely literate, he amassed a collection of cuneiform tablets in his grand library at Nineveh. He filled his palace with art depicting events of his reign, such as the defeat of the Babylonians in a 648 BCE uprising and defeat of his traitorous brother Shamashumukin. For 10 points—name this grandson of Sennacherib who brought Assyria to its greatest height.;;Ashurbanipal
Astronomy;;Its rotational period is the same as its orbital period, approximately 1.77 days.  Its orbit is unusually circular and equatorial, and its sulfur / sulfur dioxide surface has no major impact craters, testament to its extreme geologic activity, including the very large volcano Pele, which is caused by tidal forces from Jupiter and its other moons.  For 10 points – name this innermost of the Galilean satellites.;;Io
World History;;On May 31, 2002, all members of the European Union ratified this treaty. Russia is expected to join later this year, but Canada has expressed reservations about wording and Australia has already rejected it. Calling for a general return to 1990 levels, it has been opposed as biased and economically harmful by the Bush administration. For 10 points—name this 1997 agreement on greenhouse emissions.;;Kyoto (Protocol) (Treaty)
World Literature;;His only novel is 1980's Tsotsi. He maintained a theatre group in Port Elizabeth which performed anti-government plays such as No-Good Friday, and Nongogo. For 10 points—identify this anti-apartheid playwright of The Blood Knot and Master Harold…And the Boys.;;(Athol) Fugard
United States History;;James Barron, who was court-martialed while this man was a navy judge, killed him in an 1820 duel. In the War of 1812 he commanded the ships United States and President, and, in 1815, he forced the dey of Algeria to sign a treaty ending United States tribute to that country. For 10 points—name this man whose daring 1804 raid destroyed the captured American frigate Philadelphia in the harbor of Tripoli.;;(Stephen) Decatur
Mythology;;It is expected to survive Ragnarok, though some sources claim it cracks and crumbles at the world's end. Holding the three main parts of the universe together, it sprang from the body of Ymir. For 10 points—name this giant ash tree whose roots reached Niflheim, Jotunnheim, and Asgard in Norse myth.;;Yggdrasil
World History;;It included moving the capital to Edo, the establishment of a national bank, introduction of a Diet on the German model, and the use of Western engineering. It began in 1868 with the accession of Mutsuhito. For 10 points—name this period which ended the Tokugawa shogunate and modernized Japan.;;Meiji (Restoration)
Chemistry;;Invented by Peter Desaga of the University of Heidelberg, its developer worked with Kirchoff on his eponymous project, publishing in 1860. The invention was designed to enhance the clarity of spectral lines. Its developer used it to discover cesium; the device bears his name because he originated the idea of pre-mixing the gas with air to get a hot, non-luminous flame. For 10 points— identify this device, the most common source of high temperatures in the modern chemistry lab.;;Bunsen burner
United States History;;His father was the hero of Missionary Ridge and later defeated the Aguinaldo rebellion. This man was an aide to Theodore Roosevelt before becoming the most decorated American soldier of World War I. While serving as chief of staff in 1932, he led the dispersal of the Bonus Army, and he served until fired by Truman in 1951 for his overzealous conduct of the Korean War. For 10 points—name this general who kept his vow to return to the Philippines as supreme commander of Southwest Pacific forces.;;(Douglas) MacArthur
Biology;;In May 2002, the prescription drug Zoloft became the first drug approved to treat the more severe form of this condition, which is known as a "dysphoric disorder". Bloating, irritability, and depression are all symptoms of--for 10 points—what hormonal disorder in females?;;PMS
American Literature;;The narrator hired him calm the current staff, which included Ginger Nut, the irritable Nippers, and the drunken Turkey. When asked to give information about himself, he would always respond in the same manner. He lived in the office and gradually refused duties until he did nothing at all. For 10 points—name this title character of a Herman Melville short story.;;Bartleby (the Scrivener)
Sociology;;Its author offers a feminist reworking of important themes in social criticism, including the notion of a faltering masculine identity. In "The Problem That Has No Name," the author describes the malaise of "housewife culture," in which motherhood becomes a status symbol. For 10 points—name this 1963 book by Betty Friedan.;;(The) Feminine Mystique
European Literature;;Hovstad and Aslaksen of The People's Messenger convey the title characters findings about o Morten Kiil's tannery. However, on grounds of attracting tourism, the public opposes relaying the pipes to the public baths, even though Doctor Thomas Stockmann has found that the water is contaminated. For 10 points—name this play by Henrik Ibsen.;;(An) Enemy of the People
Geology;;Unlike its three-dimensional counterpart, it requires gluing both pairs of a rectangle's opposite edges together after half-twisting one. Properly, it can only exist in four-dimensional space. For 10 points—name this topological surface without an inside or outside.;;Klein bottle
World History;;In April 2002, United Nations Special Envoy Razali Ismail traveled to this opposition leader's University Avenue residence, where the military junta has confined her since September 2000. The leader of the National League for Democracy, she received 1991 Nobel Peace Prize, but was not permitted to travel to accept the award. For 10 points—name this daughter of an independence leader, still under house arrest in Myanmar.;;(Aung) (San) Suu Kyi
United States History;;Although criticized for opposing World War I, he won his home state and five million votes on a platform advocating government seizure of railroads, banks, factories, and natural resources. For 10 points—name this 1924 third-place Presidential candidate, a Wisconsin Progressive.;;(Robert) (Marion) La Folette (Sr.)
World Literature;;In 1990, he ran as the presidential candidate of the Fredemo party and finished second. He returned to writing, creating A Fish in Water and The Feast of the Goat in the 1990s. Earlier, he wrote The Green House and the historically inspired The War of the End of the World. For 10 points--name this Peruvian author of The Time of the Hero and Aunt Julia and the Scriptwriter.;;(Mario) Vargas Llosa
Anthropology;;Based on a miscommunication, the New York Times reported in December 1929 the discovery by Davidson Black of ten skeletons of this subspecies, a member of species Homo erectus. For 10 points—name this fossil destroyed during World War II before it could be smuggled out of China.;;Peking man
World History;;After the twelfth year of her husband's reign, she died or retired and was replaced as primary queen by Kita or by her own daughter Meritaten. She was a leading figure in establishing an ethics-based monotheistic religion in Egypt, along with her husband. For 10 points—name this queen depicted in a bust found in 1912, a wife of Akhenaton.;;Nefertiti
European History;;In between two stints as secretary of the admiralty, he served a prison term under suspicion of being a French spy. His major project began in 1660 and included the first description of ice skating and accounts of the London plague and Great Fire. For 10 points—name this keeper of a detailed shorthand diary.;;(Samuel) Pepys
Music;;His obsession with numbers can be seen in his Lyrical Suite, in which the metronome markings and measure totals for each movement are multiples of either 23 or 10, numbers he assigned respectively to himself and to the woman to whom he secretly dedicated the work. For 10 points—name this student of Arnold Schoenberg who composed the operas Wozzeck and Lulu.;;(Alban) Berg
American Literature;;Cora is married to Nick, the Greek, and when Frank Chambers enters the restaurant Nick owns, he immediately decides to stay in the adjoining boarding house. Cora and Frank plot to kill Nick and succeed, but fate gets its revenge, taking Cora and her baby and putting Frank in jail for murder. For 10 points—name this first novel of James Cain.;;(The) Postman Always Rings Twice
United States History;;Frenchmen, Methodists and Quakers were the only whites exempted from his plan, which may have succeeded if not for a violent rainstorm which made bridges and roads inaccessible. Governor James Monroe was able to assemble the state militia before his army was fully assembled. For 10 points—identify this leader of an 1800 slave revolt in Richmond.;;(Gabriel Prosser)
Biology;;In a physical exam, usually five sets of these bean-shaped organs located submandibular, prescapular, axillary, inguinal, and popliteal are palpated.  Extending from the enclosing fibrous capsule are trabeculae or septa that separate the organ into various sinuses or chambers.  For 10 points—name this anatomical structure important in the creation of new immune cells during an infection and notably swells when infected.;;Lymph node(s)
Geography;;Created in 1938 by the construction of Parker Dam, it has 450 miles of shoreline. It lies 150 miles south of Las Vegas and 200 miles northwest of Phoenix and supplies water to nearly twenty million people. For 10 points—name this body of water which is the current home of London Bridge.;;(Lake) Havasu
World History;;While working as a lawyer in South Africa, he advocated racial equality and won a medal for founding an ambulance corps during the Boer War. He drew his philosophy from various traditional religion texts as well as Leo Tolstoy's The Kingdom of God is Within You. For 10 points—name this proponent of satyagraha who led the Indian home rule movement.;;(Mohandas) Gandhi
European History;;Alfred the Great translated this man's book Pastoral Care into Anglo-Saxon, almost three hundred years after he sent Augustine of Canterbury to convert southern Britain. The last of the four original Doctors of the Church, he set the Advent calendar and established direct Papal control over the Roman government. For 10 points—name this canonized Pope who developed a namesake style of chant.;;(Pope) Gregory (I|the First){1}?|(Pope) Gregory
British Literature;;Supposedly inspired by contemporary gossip about David Passi, this play revolves around a character whose estate is confiscated and made into a nunnery. A series of vengeful acts, including the poisoning of Abigail, culminates with Barabas plunging into a cauldron. For 10 points—name this tragedy by Christopher Marlowe.;;(The) Jew of Malta
Chemistry;;Implicit in this idea's formulation is wave-particle duality.  Because the product of the namesake quantities must be on the order of Planck's constant, it only becomes important at the particle level.  Though it can be applied to energy and time, it is generally reserved for momentum and displacement.  First stating that observation has an affect on a system – for 10 points – name this idea first promulgated in the 1920s by Werner Heisenberg.;;uncertainty principle
American Litearture;;She was once a high school English teacher in Laurel, Mississippi, but her life changed when her husband shot himself. Her relationship with Mitch fails due to her past, and she ends up in a mental institution after her brother-in-law assaults her in New Orleans. For 10 points—name this sister of Stella from Tennessee Williams' A Streetcar Named Desire.;;Blanche (DuBois)
World History;;Along with Tito, Nasser, and Nkrumah, he led the Non-Aligned movement and maintained distance from both the US and USSR until China invaded his country, at which point he accepted western aid. In 1942, he became leader of the National Congress Party, advocating a more active stance than his friend Ghandi's. For 10 points—name this man who maintained his leadership post as first Prime Minister of India.;;(Jawaharlal) Nehru
Philosophy;;This student of Antithenes renounced every object of ambition, supposedly living for a time in a tub. His habit of standing in the street barking at passersby led to the naming of his school after the Greek word for "dog" as the Cynics. For 10 points—name this Greek philosopher who supposedly walked throughout Athens at night with his lantern in search of an honest man.;;Diogenes (of Sinope)
Biology;;Experimental treatments involving injections of Sotradecol or a radiofrequency electrode placed at the soft palate are being used as alternatives to standard, but more painful techniques like laser ablation or surgery.  Possible known causes among the 40 million people affected include enlarged tonsils or chronic nasal congestion, and it could be associated with an increased vulnerability to strokes and heart disease.  For ten points, name this principal symptom of apnea that usually keeps others awake, which sounds somewhat like a saw cutting logs.;;snoring
American Literature;;Those performing the titular action are described as "Crowds of men and women attired in the usual costumes!" The author concludes by observing that "You furnish your parts toward eternity;/Great or small, you furnish your parts toward the soul". Opening by saying "Flood-tide below me! I watch you face to face," it describes "the walk in the street, and the passage over the river". For 10 points—name this Walt Whitman poem set in New York.;;Crossing Brooklyn Ferry
World History;;The Peers Commission found that it was ordered by Captain Ernest Medina, who was acquitted of involuntary manslaughter. Other men involved included helicopter pilot Hugh Thompson and Lieutenant William Calley, the only soldier convicted in the wake of numerous rapes and murders. For 10 points—identify the Southeast Asian hamlet which lends its name to this Vietnam War "massacre".;;My Lai (Massacre)
Physics;;One was modified to add a term for displacement current. Another forbids the existence of the so-called magnetic monopole. For the steady state, the divergence, curl, electric field, and magnetic field each appear in two. They combine the efforts of Gauss, Ampere, and Faraday. For 10 points—name this group of four laws which governs electromagnetism.;;Maxwell(‘s) (Equations)
Music;;It begins with an escaped political prisoner, Angelotti, hiding in the family chapel. Mario gives Angelotti food and hurries off to meet the title character. That character then makes a deal with the chief of the secret police, to set up a mock execution of Mario. For 10 points—name this Puccini opera in which the plan backfires, leading to the death of Scarpia and the title character leaping to her death.;;Tosca
British Literature;;His lines include "What, drawn, and talk of peace! I hate the word/the hate I bear thee can afford," and "..no better term than this,/ thou art a villain". He thwarts Benvolio's attempts to stop a street brawl at the start of the play, then almost attacks an intruder at a feast. He challenges his new relative to a duel, but the challenge is taken by Mercutio, whom he kills. For 10 points—name this militant nephew of Lady Capulet who is then slain by Romeo.;;Tybalt
Geography;;Cinder cones and volcanic surfaces still dot parts of it, and the US government founded a geothermal plant there in the late 1970s. Within it are the low-level nuclear waste site of Ward Valley as well as Edwards Air Force Base. The Sonoran desert borders it to the southeast, and the Sierra Nevadas are to the north and west. For 10 points—name this desert, home to Joshua Tree National Park and Death Valley.;;Mojave (Desert)
Chemistry;;Measured on the Pauling scale, which gives a practical range from .7 to 4.0, it follows regular trends: it increases linearly within each period and decreases as period increases, with the only true anomaly being hydrogen, which has no shielding., for 10 points— this is what property of an unbonded atom, which is least for cesium and greatest for oxygen and fluorine?;;electronegativity
Economics;;It varies with the demand for liquidity and is equal to the quantity of output times the price level divided by the money supply. It is also equal to the nominal GDP divided by the money supply. For 10 points—identify this quantity, defined as the rate at which money changes hands.;;velocity of money
United States History;;The Supreme Court will hear cases in the fall from Connecticut and Alaska to determine whether the required publication of information on the Internet as a result of these laws violates the right to due process. All fifty states have enacted them in response to the 1994 murder of a New Jersey girl by a man whose extensive criminal history was unknown to his neighbors. For 10 points—identify the common name for these laws, taken from that girl.;;Meghan's Laws
European History;;It was a reaction to the assassination of Charles IX's advisor Admiral Coligny by the Duke of Guise. Taking place during a gathering of its victims for the marriage of princess Marguerite to Henry of Navarre, it began on August 24, 1572 and spread throughout France. For 10 points—name this event in which mobs killer over three thousand Huguenots.;;Saint Bartholomew's Day Massacre
Art;;In the background, two men and a woman walk up a dark stairway to avoid seeing what is about to transpire. In the midground, a man rests his arms and head on the wall. In the foreground, a shirtless man raises a hand to the skies, while a distraught man in red stares at the ground as he passes a potent goblet to the contemplative central figure. For 10 points—name this 1787 depiction of a forced suicide by Jacques-Louis David.;;(The) Death of Socrates
Philosophy;;It opposes catastrophism, the idea that the earth has been shaped by a series of events such as Biblical floods.  First used by William Whewell, its concepts were shaped by James Hutton, and reached wide acceptance with the works of Sir Charles Lyell.  Lyell showed that the processes currently at work on the earth explained its structures, and no catastrophic processes had necessarily happened.  For 10 points, name this idea, which essentially states that "the present is the key to the past".;;Uniformitarianism
European Literature;;In 1951, he wrote The Future Is in Eggs, a sequel to Jaques, or the Submission, as well as a short play which ends in the murder of a student by a professor after the two exchange much bizarre dialogue. That play, The Lesson, was written in the same year as a play which conjoins clichés out of a foreign-language phrase book. For 10 points—name this Romanian-French absurdist, the author of The Bald Soprano.;;(Eugene) Ionesco
United States History;;As a rewarded for his loyalty to the crown during the English civil wars, he was appointed governor of New York and New Jersey in 1674, and six more governorships over the next two decades. However, his suppression of freedoms of worship and assembly and cancellation of local control of taxes led to his 1681 recall and later imprisonment. For 10 points—name this governor who met public opposition after  convincing James II to unify New England as a single colony.;;(Sir) (Edmund) Andros
Astronomy;;There is some debate as to whether or not it includes Maffei I and Maffei II. Among its approximately thirty components are Fornax, Sculptor, Wolf-Lundmark, and the Triangulum Spiral. Among its largest members are Nebecula Major and Minor, also known as the Clouds of Magellan. For 10 points—name this galactic cluster which also includes Andromeda and the Milky Way.;;Local Group
American Literature;;He wrote a campaign biography of Lincoln in 1860 and received an appointment as a consul in Venice in 1861, which inspired his works Venetian Life and Italian Journey. He moved from comedies of manners to naturalistic novels of social conflict such as Through the Eye of the Needle, A Modern Instance, and A Hazard of New Fortunes. For 10 points—name this author, a longtime editor of the Atlantic Monthly who wrote The Rise of Silas Lapham.;;(William) (Dean) Howells
Economics;;In his Cours d'économie politique, he described a law stating that income and wealth are distributed in a regular logarithmic pattern. Later, in his Mind and Action, he discussed his theories of an elite class, which may have influenced Italian fascism. For 10 points—name this man whose name also denotes the solution to a distribution problem which has the least negative impact on any particular group, his "optimality".;;(Vilfredo) Pareto
European History;;After his 1100 death he was buried in the Church of the Holy Sepulcher, of which he was previously entitled the "defender". While his position as the Duke of Lorraine remains in question, he did sell a town in Lorraine to its inhabitants in an effort to finance his ventures. His brother Baldwin I succeeded him to the title of King of Jerusalem. For 10 points—name this leader of the First Crusade.;;Godfrey (of) (Bouillion)
Biology;;Derived from tyrosine, this complex compound comes in two classes: one form is yellow-to-reddish brown, soluble in alkali solutions sometimes called trichromes.  The other is a black or dark brown compound that is insoluble.  For ten points, name this chemical found primarily in the retina and in hair, responsible for protecting the skin from harmful ultraviolet rays.;;melanin
Mythology;;Tate is their patron in Lakota myth, while Feng Po-Po oversees them in Chinese myth. Futin is responsible for them in Japanese myth and Njord in Norse myth. For 10 points--name these things which in Greek and Roman myth are associated with the sons of Aurora and Astraeus, namely Eurus, Notus, Zephyrus, and Boreas.;;wind(s)
World Literature;;His works include The Sound of Waves, a Japanese version of the legend of Daphnis and Chloe, the tetralogy about reincarnation called The Sea of Fertility, and the true story of a monk who burns down a Buddhist landmark, The Temple of the Golden Pavilion. For 10 points—name this author who, in support of an imperial revival, led the takeover of a military base by his Shield Society and committed hara-kiri on television in 1970.;;(Yukio) Mishima
Music;;Its formal structure consists of an alternation of exposition and episode. Its basic principle is imitative counterpoint of several voices, as the subject is first presented in one voice alone and then successively in all voices. For 10 points—name this musical form whose "art" was explored in a series of piece by J.S. Bach, named from the Latin for "flight".;;fugue