World History;;It was sparked by the protests of William Sancroft against the Declaration of Indulgence. Events immediately preceding it included a landing at Brixham and the meeting of a Convention Parliament. John Churchill -- the Duke of Marlborough -- , Prince George, and Princess Anne defected, and the Immortal Seven sent a message to the Netherlands calling for a replacement for James II and the Stuart dynasty. For 10 points, identify this nonviolent coup that saw William and Mary placed on the English throne.;;(The) Glorious Revolution;;Bloodless Revolution
Mythology;;Pausanias and Athenaeus name one called Poene, sent to Argos by Apollo as punishment for the death of Psamathe. The mother of the immortal horses Balius and Xanthus was another of these called Podarge, and while most mythologists include Caelano in their number, Hesiod only names Aello and Ocypete as those driven off by Calais and Zetes. They snatch away the food and defile the table of the blind king Phineus until given aid by the Argonauts.  For 10 points name these creatures possessors of the heads of women and the wings and bodies of birds.;;harpies
Biology;;In Acetobacter xylinum its biosynthesis is controlled by the operon acsA/bcsA [eh-see-ess-eh slash bee-see-ess-eh]. Differentiable from amylose due to the orientation of its connections, this compound is highly soluble in such solvents as NMNO and cadoxen, and it has been theorized that water molecules align its chains through hydrogen bond bridging. Each of its residues is oriented 180 degrees relative to the next, and its beta-1-4-glycosidic linkages can only be broken by a select few microorganisms. The most abundant organic compound on Earth, for 10 points, name this strong structural polymer that comprises the majority of the plant cell walls.;;Cellulose
World History;;The rise of local military leaders known as "jiedushi" led to its eventual fall as the warlord Zhu Wen deposed its last emperor, Aizong. Earlier political threats included the rise of the Empress Wu Zeitan and the An Lushan rebellion. Often remembered for its introduction of civil service exams, this dynasty lasted between the Sui and Song. For 10 points, name this Chinese dynasty that reigned from 618 to 907 CE and featured the poetry of Li Po and Tu Fu.;;Tang (Dynasty)
Psychology;;This term was coined by James Braid, who put it on scientific footing by disproving the idea of a magic fluid being its cause. Theories explaining it include the special process theory and the nonstate theory: one states that it is socially influenced while the other postulates a distinct cognitive state associated with this process. It produces hypermnesia, in which so-called "repressed memories" may be recalled. For 10 points, name this induced state of consciousness in which an individual responds to suggestions, popularized by Friedrich Mesmer.;;Hypnosis
British Literature;;He collaborated with his brother-in-law Woolcott Balestier to write a poorly received romance, Naulakha, and he wrote The Irish Guards in the Great War in tribute to his son John, who died in World War I. His Barrack-Room Ballads and Other Verses included poems such as "Danny Deever," and "Screw Guns," though he may be better known for such lines as "you'll be a Man, my son" and "the savage wars of peace". For 10 points, name this British author of the poems "Gunga Din," "If," and "White Man's Burden," as well as the prose works Kim, Just-So Stories and The Jungle Book.;;(Rudyard) Kipling
Miscellaneous;;Headquartered in Overland Park, Kansas, it is directed by Michael Foley and Anders Edlund. Originally allowing for data exchanges up to 1 megabits per second, the newest version of this wireless technology uses the 2.4 gigahertz spectrum to exchange information between two devices at a distance of less than 30 feet. Its name refers to a Danish king who unified Denmark with Norway in the tenth century. For 10 points, name this wireless open-access technology used to communicate between stationary and portable devices.;;Bluetooth
Geology;;Cold descending squalls known as elvegusts are prevalent around them, as are sikussaks, which are chunks of old sea ice that become trapped in them. The deepest one on record is found in Skelton Inlet in Antarctica and the longest in the world is Greenland's Scoresby Sund, though the only "true" one on the United States' Atlantic coast is Somes Sound in Maine. They are generally formed in areas where rock is fairly resistant to erosion and where strong glaciation once took place, such as in New Zealand and Chiles. For 10 points, name these glaciated valleys that are filled in by seawater and are found in abundance in Norway.;;Fjord(s)
Music;;Vowing at the age of twelve never to marry, she had illegitimate children with stage designer Gordon Craig and the heir to the Singer sewing machine fortune. She caused controversy by using Beethoven's music, setting one of her most noted works to the Ninth Symphony. A vision of the death of her children inspired another of her works, and several days after the premiere of that, the children drowned in the Seine. She likewise met a tragic end in France when, in Nice, her veil caught in the wheel of her automobile. For 10 points, name this proponent of Greek revival and modern expressionist dance.;;(Angelical) (Isadora) Duncan
American Literature;;Early short stories such as "Bookies Beware" and "Nothing to be Done" displayed this author's penchant for gambling. His Jewish protagonists include Bruce Gold and King David in God Knows. A man returns from fighting in World War II to find that he only wants to drink beer naked in "I Don't Love You Anymore," displaying similar irreverence to this author's character who feigns liver problems to escape flying missions over Pianosa. For 10 points, name this author of Good as Gold and Something Happened.;;(Joseph) Heller
Chemistry;;Halogenation of an alkane involves one of these because of the way in which ultraviolet light breaks the bond of the diatomic halogen molecule. The so-called peroxide effect refers to the fact that peroxides encourage reactions that involve these to initiate. They often form self-propagating chain reactions, such as when the homolytic cleavage of a carbon-chlorine bond in a CFC causes them to be released, where they break up the ozone layer. For 10 points, antioxidants are important in stopping the propagation of what unstable type of atom with an unpaired electron?;;(free) radical(s)
European History;;The promises made in it began to erode after the invasion of La Rochelle by the forces of Cardinal Richelieu, and it was formally repealed in 1685. An attempt to expand upon concessions made by Catherine di Medici in the 1562 Edict of January, it promised "full liberty of conscience and private worship" and was issued in 1598 by Henry IV. For 10 points, name this statement that recognized the rights of French Protestants.;;Edict of Nantes
Music;;Its melody includes the sequence of two whole steps followed by a half step.  Its frequent leaps of a sixth are based on the Lutheran hymn "Wachet auf, ruft uns die Stimme". A pair of timpani in D and A is first introduced in the larger work when they join this section, and the trumpets rejoin the chorus for the dramatic sequence at the words of Revelation 19:16. Music historians dispute whether Joseph Haydn at Westminster Abbey, George II at Covent Garden, or no one at all originated the tradition of standing during it. For 10 points, identify this final movement in Part Two of Händel's Messiah.;;Hallelujah (chorus)
Astronomy;;The Pound-Rebka-Snider experiment confirmed the Einstein or gravitational version of this effect, which also occurs when two beamed energy sources interact, an interaction known as the Wolf Effect. The Relativistic Doppler effect provides an exact equation for calculating this, an approximate form of which is z = v divided by c, where v is the velocity of the source of light that is moving away from the viewer. For 10 points, name this effect used as evidence the universe is expanding and to calculate the distance of distant galaxies, an apparent lengthening of the wavelength of light from its source to its observation.;;Redshift
European History;;He struggled against Juan Manuel de Rosas as head of the Uruguayan navy and he fought for the independence of Rio Grande do Sul, a breakaway Brazilian republic. Although he continued to wear his gaucho costume throughout his life, many of his exploits are associated with another type of clothing, worn by his followers during their victory on the Volturno River. By defeating the armies of Francis II, his "Expedition of a thousand" thus delivered Sicily to Victor Emmanuel II. For 10 points, name this leader of the Red Shirts, a major contributor to the Risorgimento that unified Italy.;;Garibaldi
American Literature;;He fictionalized his time spent in Spain in the work Rosinante to the Road Again. His play The Moon is a Gong introduces the newsman Jimmy Herf, whom this author later re-used in the novel Manhattan Transfer. Known for such devices as the "Camera Eye" and the "Newsreel," he demonstrated distaste for bureaucracy and authority in Three Soldiers. For 10 points, name this American author whose The Big Money and 1919 are part of his U.S.A. trilogy.;;(John) Dos Passos
Philosophy;;In 1823, he spent a night in prison for distributing birth control literature. His 1873 Autobiography chronicled his extraordinary education at the hands of his father James and of Jeremy Bentham, and he argued for equal rights in his 1869 essay On the Subjection of Women. His 1848 Principles of Political Economy expanded on the work of Ricardo, and he explored the balance of majority rule and minority rights in 1859's On Liberty. For 10 points, name this philosopher and author of 1861's Utilitarianism.;;(John) (Stuart) Mill
Art;;In the center of this painting, a redheaded woman in a brownish-black dress sits in a wooden chair with her back turned, most likely engaged in conversation with the four others at her table. Another redheaded woman wearing pale greenish makeup stares directly at the viewer on the right side. Walking in background past a woman in black adjusting her hair is the artist himself, a small bearded man in a top hat, scoping out the evening crowd at the title location. For 10 points, name this painting set in a Paris nightclub, a work of Henri Toulouse-Lautrec.;;At the Moulin Rouge
Physics;;Kosterlitz and Thouless explained its transition via the unbinding of vortices, and a Rollin film consists entirely of one. It is impossible to set up a temperature gradient in an object with this property, as those exhibiting it have infinite thermal conductivity and zero entropy. Used in dilution refrigerators, the temperature threshold for its occurrence can be found on a graph of specific heat capacity versus temperature, and is known as the lambda point. John Allen and Peter Kapitza discovered, for 10 points, what property of helium-4 and other compounds in which resistance to flow enitirely dissapears?;;Superfluid(ity)
European Literature;;Arguments with Francois Mauriac and Andre Breton his anti-communist State of Siege and The Just Assassins. "The Growing Stone" and "The Adulterous Woman" can be found in his final creative output, The Exile and the Kingdom, though he left The Happy Death unfinished. He said that the novels' heroes, such as Bernard Rieux and Jean-Baptiste Clamence, are absurdist. For 10 points, name this author of The Myth of Sisyphus who wrote abut Mersault's murder of an Arab and is responsible for such works as The Fall, The Rebel, The Plague and the aforementioned The Stranger.;;(Albert) Camus
Math Theory;;In Brocard's problem, one must find values for which this plus one is equal to a square number. The Pochhammer symbol is used to denote its "rising" variety, which is equal to the gamma function of x + n divided by the gamma function of x. The gamma function of n + 1, in turn, is equal to this for integers greater than or equal to zero, and Stirling's approximation is used to calculate it for very large numbers. For 10 points, name this mathematical construct used in calculating combinations and permutations, the product of all positive integers less than or equal to a given number, which is symbolized by an exclamation point.;;Factorial
Art;;He displaced Nefertum from the Memphis triad, and his temple at the island of Philae was often full of the sleeping ill, who believed that cures were revealed there in dreams. In addition to his work as a physician, this son of Ptah is credited with the Edfu temple, the unfinished tomb of Sekhemkhet, and one complete structure in a Memphis necropolis. For 10 points, identify this deified historical figure that built Djoser's (Zozer's) step pyramid at Saqqara.;;Imhotep
British Literature;;His philosophical writings can be found in Aids to Reflection, and he dabbled in drama, collaborating with Robert Southey to write The Fall of Robespierre and focusing on the titular emotion in Remorse. He speaks to his "pensive Sara" in a poem written during his honeymoon, "The Aeolian Harp," and wrote about a romantic adventure in "Christabel". Also known for speaking about "a grief without a pang, void, dark, and drear" in "Dejection: An Ode," is, for 10 points, what English poet who spoke of a "stately pleasure dome" in Kubla Khan and of a murdered albatross in The Rime of the Ancient Mariner?;;Coleridge
United States History;;A clerk to Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, he attended the Yalta Conference as an advisor to Franklin Roosevelt and served as temporary Secretary-General of the United Nations at the San Francisco Conference. The 1996 release of U.S. intelligence's Venona Telegrams contradicted Russian General Dmitri Volkogonov's announcement that there was no evidence this man was a Soviet agent. For 10 points, name this State Department official investigated by Richard Nixon and witnessed against by Whittaker Chambers.;;(Alger) Hiss
Geography;;Located at the confluence of the Chuviscar and Sacramento Rivers, its namesake capital city's plaza commemorates the execution of Miguel Hidalgo. This state contains the Conchos River, Copper Canyon, and the cities of Hidalgo del Parral and Juárez. It borders Sinaloa and Sonora on the east, Durango on the south, and Coahuila on the east. For 10 points, identify this state, the largest by area in Mexico.;;Chihuahua
United States History;;Members included Peter Porter, Langdon Cheeves, and Felix Grundy. They dominated the Twelfth Congress and were named by John Randolph of Virginia, who opposed their "land hunger". For 10 points, Henry Clay and John C. Calhoun led what bellicose group that advocated an invasion of Canada and thus sparked the War of 1812?;;War Hawks
Biology;;Paul Lauterbur won a share of the 2003 Nobel in Medicine for developing this technology. In many cases, it can show the arterial system without a contrast injection. The radio waves, while harmless, collide with hydrogen nuclei in water and lipids, producing electrical energy from a magnetic coil and allowing a computer to produce a map of tissue. For 10 points, give the name for this process of using alignment of magnetic moments to produce pictures.;;M(agnetic) R(esonance) I(maging)
Music;;While other woodwinds move to the upper register at the second harmonic above the fundamentals, this one shifts at the third register via an "overblowing" process. A quirk seen in German players of this instrument is to retain the string for constructing the mouthpiece, while the rest of the world now uses a metallic ligature. The basset horn and the bass and contralto variants are common, but more standard is the soprano kind, pitched in A or more often B flat with seventeen keys and six tone holes. For 10 points, name this single-reeded cylindrical-pipe instrument.;;Clarinet
United States History;;Her writings include The Spirit of Youth and City Streets and the 1922 work, Peace and Bread in Time of War. She brought the idea that she is most known for back to the United States after visiting Samuel Barnett in London. Along with Nicholas Murray Butler, she won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1931 for her efforts to help immigrants in Chicago. For 10 points, name this social worker that brought settlement houses to the United States by founding Hull House.;;(Jane) Addams
United States History;;He found that Francis Smith and John Ericcson beat him to the patent, by a few months, for a design for a screw propeller for steamboats. While attending Ohio Medical College, he adapted his cotton-sowing machine for food grains and invented a hemp-breaking machine and a steam plow. His namesake invention was intended to reduce war casualties by cutting the need for soldiers and used a hand crank and multiple rotating barrels. For 10 points, name this Civil War-era inventor of the first practical machine gun.;;(Richard) (John) Gatling
European Literature;;Neither the Boy nor the Child speak, hence contributing to the Mother's torture throughout the work as she tries in vain to approach them. The Son has grown up in the country and is humiliated by the others, so he refuses to participate. The Stepdaughter seeks revenge on the Father, and in the end, the Manager tries to put it all together. For 10 points, such is the action of what absurdist award-winning play by Luigi Pirandello?;;(6|Six) Characters In Search of An Author
Physics;;The Wien bridge measures it in terms of resistance and frequency, and the Schering bridge measures dissipation factor and this property. For an isolated conducting disk of radius R, it is given in CGS units by 2 times R divided by pi. The reciprocal of elastance, an example commonly seen in textbooks consists of parallel metal plates, for which it is proportional to the area and inversely proportional to the distance between them. For 10 points, what is this property of a circuit element which used to be called a condenser, which is the amount of charge said element can store divided by a potential difference?;;Capacitance
European Literature;;His first major work was a treatise on rhetoric called the Dialogus. He also produced a detailed study of Germanic peoples and received much correspondence from his contemporary, Pliny the Younger. Heavily critical of Domitian in his biography of his own father-in-law, Agricola, he focused on the rule of the Julio-Claudians like Tiberius and Nero in another historical volume. For 10 points, name this Roman historian and author of the Annals.;;Tacitus
British Literature;;At the request of John Reynolds at the Hampton Court Conference, forty-seven scholars worked in six groups to produce it. Its first edition was divided into the "he" and "she" editions due to a printer's error, and it later had "Vinegar" and "Wicked" variants, the latter of which accidentally printed a commandment as "Thou shalt commit adultery". For 10 points, identify this translation of the Bible, named for the British monarch who commissioned it.;;King James (Bible) (Translation)
British Literature;;Early works of this author often relied on the supernatural to avoid embarrassing topics, as a hero's cheating is excused in "The Bridal" because he was lured by magic. William Crimsworth is the title character in The Professor, though this author is better known for writing about young women in works such as Shirley and Villette. She also wrote a novel in which the title character is sent to a school directed by Reverend Brocklehurst but eventually becomes governess to Adele Varens. For 10 points, name this sister of Branwell, Anne, and Emily and author of Jane Eyre.;;C(harlotte) Bronte;;Bronte
Economics;;The Boskin Commission's recommendations for eliminating "substitution bias" from this value led to the introduction of a "geometric mean estimator" in 1998. The "constant-utility" correction to it accounts for changing preferences, but other problems in sampling include its targeting of middle-class families of four in urban areas and its thirty-percent reliance on the mutable food and energy sectors. In the past, such flaws have led the Bureau of Labor Statistics to as much as a 1.1 percent overstatement of the rate of inflation. For 10 points, what is this value that measures the cost of a fixed "basket of goods" in order to estimate price changes in the economy as a whole?;;C(onsumer) P(rice) I(ndex)
Math Theory;;While visiting Baruch Spinoza in 1676, this thinker composed the short work "Pacidus Philalethi," in which he analyzed Zeno's paradox of motion. His resolution involved the development of a system that he didn't describe in print until 1684. In the meantime he conceived of a fundamental, metaphysical unit of existence he called the "monad". For 10 points, name this German philosopher who, independently of Newton, derived a differential calculus.;;(Gottfried) (Wilhelm) Leibniz
World History;;The origin of this empire lay in the battle of Kirina, in which Sumanguru Kante of the Soso Kingdom was defeated by its legendary first ruler, Sundiata Kieta. Home to the prolific trading city of Djanne, it cemented its status as a force in the Islamic world after a 1324 pilgrimage to Mecca by Mansa Musa. Replaced by the Songhai Empire after its fall was, for 10 points, what West African empire that also contained the city of Timbuktu?;;Mali
Math Theory;;The attractor of the Hénon map provides one example, and the trajectory of a particle undergoing Brownian motion provides another. In general it refers to objects with Hausdorff dimension exceeding the topological dimension. Dividing an equilateral triangle into four smaller ones, removing the middle one, and repeating the process on the remaining ones, one obtains another example of them, the Sierpinski gasket. The Koch snowflake is another example of, for 10 points, what word coined by Benoit Mandelbrot for shapes exhibiting self-similarity?;;Fractal
Art;;The artist of this painting also created a preceding work showing a mob attacking Mamaluke soldiers on horseback. The action takes place at the hill of Principe Pio, where a man in yellow pants and a white shirt stands amidst a crowd of scared civilians and raises his arms in a Christ-like pose. The bodies and the pool of blood below hint at his fate as a row of soldiers on the right lines up their guns and prepares to fire into the crowd in, for 10 points, what Francisco Goya work depicting the executions of the titular day?;;(The) Third of May, 1808
Mythology;;In its later chapters, the poet tells of learning the story from Narada while raising the hero's twin sons. Its hero slays Kumbha-Karna, Ravana, and countless other Rakshasas, with help from his brother Lakshman and the monkey warrior Hanuman. For 10 points, the hero described by Valmiki eventually reigns alongside Sita for ten thousand years in what Indian epic?;;(the) Ramayana
Astronomy;;One mystery involving these objects with extremely long life spans is the presence of metals, an observation that suggests these entities were not part of the first generation of stars, since low mass stars cannot form without metals. During their long lives, they are not massive enough to initiate helium fusion so they slowly burn hydrogen and contract for billions of years. For 10 points, name these low luminosity, main sequence stars with K or M spectral type, examples of which include Proxima Centauri and Bernard's Star, that are larger than their white counterparts.;;Red Dwarf
United States History;;He entered politics as a district attorney from Dane County and, although he ran afoul of conservative Republicans like Philetus Sawyer, he was elected as governor in 1900. Many of his reforms were suggested by economist John R. Commons, such as "equalizing" the tax burden and establishing a direct primary system. Although he aspired to the presidency, his opposition to World War I sealed his political doom. For 10 points identify this Progressive politician who wished to expand the "laboratory of democracy" seen in his "Wisconsin Idea".;;(Robert) (Marion) La Follette
American Literature;;He wrote the libretto for an opera about Jean-Jacques Dessalines, The Troubled Island. A young man named Roger attempts to snatch the purse of a middle-aged widow and is rewarded with nothing but kindness in this man's short story "Thank You, Ma'am", while his other short fiction includes a series of works about a man named Simple and "Laughing to Keep from Crying". Poems such as "The Panther and the Lash" appear in his collection The Weary Blues. For 10 points, name this Harlem Renaissance poet of "Montage of a Dream Deferred" and "The Negro Speaks of Rivers".;;(Langston) Hughes
United States History;;His last major victory was at Drury's Bluff.  After the war, he criticized Jefferson Davis in a series of military books, including one analyzing the first battle of Manassas, where he commanded. He assumed command after the death of Albert Sidney Johnston at Shiloh. For 10 points, name this Louisiana-born Creole who presided over the bombing of Fort Sumter.;;(Pierre) (Gustave) (Toutant) (de) Beauregard
Biology;;Diabetes mellitus and goiter are common in patients with this condition, which is often treated with the drug Restandol. While symptoms of marked mental retardation and fusion of certain bones vary, in most cases, it results in delayed motor function, speech, and maturation. Those with this disorder also have low urinary 17-ketosteroids, reduced testicular development and in some cases, gynecomastia. Occurring in about 1 in 500 live male births, for 10 points, name this genetic disorder arising from the presence of an extra X-chromosome.;;Klinefelter('s) (Syndrome)
Astronomy;;The Inuit believed it was a reflection of dead souls feasting and playing with the skull of a walrus. Other tribal groups believed that the crackling sound often associated with it was caused by the footsteps of the dead running to the afterlife. The Laps believed that one man lived to be over 2000 by capturing three rays from it. For 10 points, the armor of the Valkyries was also believed to create what light display visible to such residents of the extreme north?;;Aurora Borealis;;Northern Lights|Aurora
European History;;It took place two weeks after the king's opponent had landed at Pembrokeshire, and it began with the king having staked out a position atop Ambion Hill after departing from Leicester. When Lord Northumberland betrayed the king, Lord Stanley and William Stanley brought their army into the battle. For 10 points, Henry Tudor emerged victorious from what decisive War of the Roses battle that saw the death of Richard III?;;(Battle) (of) Bosworth Field
Art;;Minor details which can help identify this style include the use of a plinth on which the supports sit and the presence of dentils above the frieze, which is typically carved in relief. Its columns are sharply fluted and measure about ten base diameters in height. According to legend, it was invented by the architect Callimachus who was inspired by a covered basket through which an acanthus plant had grown. The leaves of the acanthus are still found at the top of this kind of column, the Classical order most favored by the Romans. For 10 points, name this style of architecture that evolved from the Doric and the Ionic.;;Corinthian (Order)
Biology;;He expanded on Mitscherlich's work with enantiomers and racemic mixtures in his own experiments with tartaric acid. While working with yeast and writing his Studies on Wine, he showed that the cell attempts to maintain a constant ATP concentration, which is now known as his namesake effect. He also helped to debunk the theory of abiogenesis with some swan-necked flasks. for 10 points, name this French microbiologist, the creator of the anthrax vaccine and the namesake of a method for killing harmful germs in milk.;;(Louis) Pasteur
American Literature;;In April 2005, the premiere of Radio Golf completed his ten-play cycle that includes Gem of the Ocean and King Hedley II. While one of his title characters is a slave that never appears on stage in Joe Turner's Come and Gone, he may be better known for writing about Alberta's affair with Pittsburgh garbageman Troy Maxson. For 10 points, name this playwright of Ma Rainey's Black Bottom, The Piano Lesson and Fences.;;(August) Wilson
United States History;;His appointment is mandated by Article I, Section 3, Clause 5 of the Constitution. Because no term of office is described, Henry Anthony was re-elected to this post fifteen times over four years. In 1912, Augustus Bacon, Jacob Gallinger, Henry Cabot Lodge, and Frank Brandegee all served. Currently Alaska's Ted Stevens, the major responsibility of this position is to conduct daily business in the absence of the Vice President. For 10 points, name this office of the Senate, usually held by the senior member of the majority party, which is third in line for the Presidency.;;President Pro Temp(ore) (of) (the) (Senate)
Math Theory;;His namesake equation expresses the amount of energy removed from a gas stream by a turbine. His namesake criterion is related to his "totient" function, phi of n, which is the number of natural numbers less than n and relatively prime to n. His invariant for a surface is given by the number of vertices minus the number of edges plus the number of faces, and is equal to two for a sphere. A constant named for him and Mascheroni is approximately equal to 0.577. The first to relate the exponential of an imaginary number to the cosine and sine functions, for 10 points, who is this Swiss mathematician, whose better-known eponymous constant is approximately 2.71828?;;(Leonhard) Euler
Mythology;;The Australian aboriginal figure Bamapana, who committed incest, is considered one. San Martin Txiki [cheeky], whom the ancient Basque credited with inventing the saw, is another. Sun Wukung, the monkey king of the Chinese epic Journey to the West, also fits the criteria, having eaten the peaches of immortality and survived numerous execution attempts. For 10 points, identify this type of deity also seen as Mabb, Prometheus, Coyote, and Loki.;;Trickster
European History;;He was accused of fleeing the Battle of Chaeronea and of greed in advocating the construction of warships. Aeschines accused him of undeservedly claiming a golden civic crown, and he was eventually exiled and killed after an accusation of embezzling from the Theoric fund. He sued his uncles for his father's estate after overcoming his speech impediment, and he again used his rhetorical skills to warn against the Macedonian threat. For 10 points, name this speechmaker of the Olynthiacs and the Phillipics.;;Demosthenes
British Literature;;Nautical themes can be found in his shorter poems such as "Shakespeare" and "To Marguerite," though melancholy pervades the monody for his friend Arthur Hugh Clough entitled "Thyrsis". Most famous for a poem in which he states "The Sea of Faith was once, too, at the full," he wrote of a vagabond at Oxford in "The Scholar Gypsy". For 10 points, name this English poet who wrote about "where ignorant armies clash by night" in his most famous poem, "Dover Beach".;;(Matthew) Arnold
Sociology;;Marvin Harris argues that many of them serve ecological functions, while the second volume of Frazer's Golden Bough addresses them in conjunction with "The Perils of the Soul". Freud suggested that they are the product of social ambivalence towards actions that are unconsciously desired, in a work pairing them with totems. Known as kapus in Hawaii, this term was introduced to English by James Cook, who encountered it in Tonga. For 10 points, incest is a widespread example of what kind of strong prohibition on an act in Polynesian culture?;;Taboo
Biology;;High levels of its namesake hydroxylase enzyme are partially responsible for the biosynthesis of melanonin, which is synthesized via the methylation and acetylation of this molecule. Its presence in snake venom causes vasoconstriction at the site of injury, and its release is stimulated by cocaine. Synthesized by enterochromaffin cells in both the bronchi and stomach, it is also known as 5-hydroxytryptamine, and it is degraded by monoamine oxidase type A, an enzyme which is inhibited by certain medications. Synthesized from l-tryptophan, for 10 points, name this neurotransmitter that got its name from its discovery in serum and whose re-uptake is inhibited by antidepressants like Zoloft and Prozac.;;Serotonin
European History;;He sometimes traveled in disguise under the pseudonym Captain Gars. He immediately signed away Älvsborg in the Peace of Knäred, after coming to power with the consent of the Riksdag at the age of sixteen. Ruling alongside Maria Eleonora for two decades, he pioneered the use of mobile artillery and was known as the "Lion of the North," before dying in battle at Lützen. For 10 points, identify this Protestant figure in the Thirty Years War and king of Sweden.;;Gustavus (II) (Adolphus)
Art;;Works from his early period include a depiction of a man extracting a rock from another's head, The Cure of Folly, and a painting of a magic show called The Conjurer. In his later years he expanded on his interest in depicting the human proclivity towards sin with grandiose and chaotic pieces like Ship of Fools, as well as The Temptation of Saint Anthony, which, like his signature work, was a triptych. For 10 points, name this Flemish painter who painted "The Creation of the World" and "Hell" as sections of The Garden of Earthly Delights.;;(Hieronymus) Bosch
American Literature;;One of the recurring symbols in this novel is a dog barking, which menaces the protagonist throughout the book, along with the phrase "so it goes," which appears on almost every page. Traveling through time and space, the main character is exhibited naked in a zoo with Montana Wildhack on the planet Tralfamadore and witnesses the bombing of Dresden. For 10 points, name this novel, subtitled The Children's Crusade: A Duty Dance with Death, and written by Kurt Vonnegut.;;Slaughterhouse Five
World History;;Its political doctrines originated in the writings of Michel Aflaq, who sought to encourage ethnic unity and a non-Marxist brand of socialism. Officially formed in 1947, it split in 1963 into a progressive faction under Nurredin Atassi and a nationalist one under Hafez al-Assad, the latter of which forcibly won control over its home nation of Syria. For 10 points, name this party whose other branch was controlled by Saddam Hussein.;;Ba'ath (Party)
Geology;;The cloudburst test uses steel balls dropped from a predetermined height to determine it, and its micro-variety can be measured by the Knoop test. The Rockwell test measures it based on resistance to a static or dynamic load, while the Vickers test uses a diamond-pyramid penetrator is used, and the Brinell test uses a tungsten carbide ball's indentation. It is often measured by scratch tests, such as one named after Bierbaum, and another more famous scale. For 10 points, name this property of a material that is most often measured on the Mohs scale.;;Hardness
American Literature;;His collection Hydrogen Jukebox was set to music by Philip Glass, and other collections include Iron Horse, Open Head, and The Moments Return. An acid trip inspired his "Wales Visitation," and he sees other authors standing near the watermelons in "A Supermarket in California". After being kicked out of Columbia for drawing pornography on his dorm window, he went to San Francisco where he hung out with Lawrence Ferlinghetti, who published many of his works. For 10 points, name this beat poet who wrote a long elegy for his mother, Kaddish, and "saw the best minds of [his] generation destroyed by madness" in his most famous work, Howl.;;(Allen) Ginsberg
Art;;One collection by this name is housed in the Pallazzo Venier dei Leoni in Venice. Its newest branch opened in Las Vegas's Venetian resort in 2001, while the original was contracted by Hilla Rebay as the Museum of Non-Objective Painting. The inverted ziggurat and the winding spiral connecting the galleries were designed by Frank Lloyd Wright. For 10 points, name these museums, whose flagship branch houses the world's largest Kandinsky collection, in Manhattan.;;Guggenheim (Museum)(s)
Chemistry;;The heaviest one is extremely rare and is produced by bombardment of bismuth with helium. The lightest one forms a diatomic acid useful in etching glass. The least reactive is the second-heaviest one, a purple solid first isolated from seaweed. A silver salt of the third heaviest is used in photography, and the second lightest is abundant in seawater. For 10 points, give the collective for these five elements of group 17, which includes the most electronegative element and others such as astatine, bromine and chlorine.;;Halogen(s)
Religion;;The prefix "pari" is appended to describe the death of one occupying it. This term derives from a verb meaning "to extinguish," and in context it is often considered equivalent to a flame being blown out. It is the end of dukkha and the deferrment of it is called karuna and practiced by bodhisattvas. It is described as the region of "no earth, water, fire or air . . . not the region of infinite space nor of infinite consciousness". Therevadas use the term "arhat" to refer to, for 10 points, a person who has achieved what release from samsara, the ultimate goal of a Buddhist?;;Nirvana
United States History;;Samuel Chase was impeached for his vigorous prosecution of these laws. William Duane, Matthew Lyon, and James Callender were among those convicted under these laws, which guard against possible hostilities erupting from the XYZ affair. Opposed by the Virginia and Kentucky Resolutions, they banned publishing "false, scandalous, and malicious" writings. For 10 points, the Naturalization Act and the Enemies Act were part of what set of laws passed by the John Adams administration?;;Alien (and) Sedition Acts
European History;;Twenty-four consecutive princes of Reuss bore this name, also carried by the "Cardinal-King" of Portugal. A duke of Bavaria was known as "the Quarrelsome" and begat a son of the same name who became the last Saxon-Dynasty Holy Roman Emperor.  Other Germans include "the Jasomirgott," "the Lion" and "the Fowler". For 10 points, all shared what name with men from Guise and Navarre as well as eight English kings, the last of whom established the Church of England and had a habit of killing his wives?;;Henry
American Literature;;The poet claims that "the moon never beams/without bringing" him dreams of his love, and that "the stars never rise/but I feel" her bright eyes. She is plagued by a wind blowing out of a cloud, which leads her to be born away by her highborn kinsmen. Despite this, the poet asserts that "neither the angels in heaven above/nor the demons down under the sea" can separate their souls, and he lies next to her in her sepulcher for all eternity. For 10 points, name this poem set in a Kingdom by the Sea, a work of Edgar Allan Poe.;;Annabel Lee
Astronomy;;Russell Hulse and Joseph Taylor shared the 1993 Nobel Physics prize for the discovery of an example of them named 1913+16. Examples include one in the Kes 75 supernova remnant, Geminga, the first one discovered solely through x-ray and gamma-ray emission, and one located in the constellation Vela, which has a period of eighty milliseconds. For 10 points, Jocelyn Bell and Antony Hewish first described what kind of neutron stars that emit sharp, periodic bursts of radiation?;;Pulsars;;Neutron Stars
Music;;This cycle was the basis of Michel Corrette's Laudate Dominum de coelis and a flute solo composed by Jean-Jacques Rousseau. Collected alongside Pleasure and Storm at Sea in The Trial of Harmony and Invention, its score contains references such as "the barking dog" and "the drunkard," drawn from the composer's sonnets on which they are based. For 10 points, identify these concerti for violin and string orchestra that move from a pastoral dance to a description of "Shivering, frozen mid the frosty snow in biting, stinging winds," composed as an early incident of program music by Antonio Vivaldi.;;(The) Four Seasons
Geography;;Like Sumatra, it was once known as Taprobane thanks to Alexander the Great's general Onesicritus, and classical geographers long debated whether it stretched nearly to the coast of Africa. Fronted on the west by the Gulf of Mannar, this island was formerly connected to the Asian mainland by a series of limestone shoals known as Adam's Bridge. For 10 points, name this teardrop-shaped island on whose eastern side lies the Bay of Bengal and which is separated from India by the Palk Strait, formerly known as Ceylon.;;Sri Lanka
Religion;;He healed the Syrian captain Naaman of leprosy, and after this man's death, the touch of his bones revived a man buried in his sepulcher. On his deathbed, he prophesized King Joash's victory over the Syrians. He led the holy war against the house of Omri, which resulted in the slaughter of King Ahab and his family and the anointment of his disciple Jehu as king. He also once called upon God to send bears to kill youths who made fun of his baldness. For 10 points, identify this successor of Elijah.;;Elisha
European Literature;;He used the pseudonym Horace de Saint-Aubin for novels such as The Vicar of Ardennes and Annette and the Criminal, though he first used the pseudonym Lord R'Hoone for The Wild Ass's Skin. The title character falls in love with the effeminate Charles in his Eugénie Grandet, For 10 points, name this prolific French author of Pere Goriot, Cousin Bette, parts of his Human Comedy.;;(Honore) (de) Balzac
United States History;;Fought at Cavite's Sangley Point, it turned on the discovery that the opposing forces were not in Subic Bay, when the American commander reported to chief-of-staff Lamberton, "Now, we have them!" The late arrival of Camara's Flying Relief Column left the flagship Reina Cristina commanded by Patricio Montojo y Pasaron in charge of fending off the American Asiatic Squadron led by the Olympia. For 10 points, Charles Gridley was ordered to "fire when ready" in May of 1898 by George Dewey in what major battle of the Spanish-American War?;;(Battle) (of) Manila Bay
Biology;;In January 2005, a study authored by Dr. David Kass suggested that it could reverse cardiac hypotrophy in mice that were already in heart failure, and in June its manufacturer received permission to rebrand it as Revatio, a treatment for pulmonary arterial hypertension. Less encouraging news came from Howard Pomeranz, who published a May 2005 study suggesting that it can cause non-arteritic anterior ischemic optic neuropathy, a form of blindness. For 10 points, name this sildenafil citrate tablet marketed by Pfizer for treatment of erectile dysfunction.;;Viagra
Chemistry;;The Wittig rearrangement of them uses a methylating agent to produce secondary and tertiary alcohols, and their polyvinyl variety is used in adhesives. They are often made by reacting sodium alkoxide with an alkyl halide. Epoxides are cyclical versions of these compounds, and the crown variety can bind alkali metal atoms. The Williamson synthesis produces, for 10 points, what class of compounds characterized by an oxygen atom linking two hydrocarbon groups, whose diethyl variety was once used as an anesthetic?;;Ether(s)
British Literature;;During the three days on which this man goes hunting, he catches a fox, a boar and a deer and gives them all to his guest, who is to give him any gifts he receives on those days in return. Despite the advances of this man's wife, his guest reports all gifts with the exception of a girdle, which he is told will save his life. This man, also known as Sir Bertilak, spares his adversary the first two blows and only nicks him on the third. For 10 points, name this character, who conspires with Morgan le Fay to corrupt Sir Gawain in a poem that may have been written by the Pearl Poet.;;(The) Green Knight
Art;;Hypotheses on the origin of its trademark pattern include the tughra seal of Turkey, the boteh cypress tree that represents death in Zoroastrianism, half of a T'ai Chi symbol, a mango tree, or the leaf of the bodhi tree. When Kashmir fleece was imported from Britain to the Scottish town of this name, weavers spread its eponymous pattern across the world in woolen shawls. For 10 points, name this comma-shaped design adapted from Mughal artwork and still found on ties and other clothing.;;Paisley (design)
Economics;;The situation of "government failure" can arise when attempts to eliminate these aggravate the problem. A revolutionary theorem about them suggests that they will be countered in a Pareto-efficient manner, regardless of ownership, in any system with clear property rights and negligible transaction costs. Traditional approaches believed that the positive kind, caused by "merit goods," is always outweighed by the negative, a common example of which is air and water pollution. For 10 points, identify these phenomena, defined as the unintentional effects of one entity's economic activity upon other entities.;;Externalities
World History;;Built in the shape of a sacred puma with the megalithic fortress of Sacsayhuaman at the head, its richest temple was Koricancha. The so-called "navel of the world", it was said to be founded when Mama Ocllo and her brother-husband Manco arrived at the hill Huanacaure and saw a scepter submerge. Soon after it served as the center of the booming empire of Tahuantinsuyu, the general Quisquis was forced to defend the city, and it was disastrously ruined. For 10 points, name this long-time capital of the Inca Empire.;;Cuzco
Computer Science;;One algorithm to perform it is RC4, which is based on a "one-time pad" and the XOR [ecks-oar] function. SEAL can do it in a streaming fashion, unlike older algorithms such as DES [dez], IDEA, and Blowfish, which must break the input up into fixed-length blocks. One easy-to-break method of it is based on performing modular arithmetic on the Roman alphabet, and is named after Julius Caesar, while another, based on the infeasibility of factoring really big numbers quickly, is called RSA. For 10 points, name this process, for which public- and symmetric-key algorithms exist, in which plaintext data is converted into ciphertext, thus making an original message difficult for an eavesdropper to read.;;Encryption
Religion;;It states that it is a literal record or "well-preserved tablet" in the section called "The Constellations". It contains just over one million dots and is sometimes divided into seven manazil. Its longest sections, such as The Cow and The Table, are near the beginning, while the 106th section, entitled Winter, has just four verses or ayats. For 10 points, the bismillah opens all but one of the 114 sections of what book, often supplemented by the Hadith, the holiest scripture of Islam?;;(the) (Qur(')an|Koran){1}?
Music;;This student of Costa owned the "Cannone Guarnerius," which he bequeathed to the city of Genoa upon his death. The proprietor of a failed casino in Paris, he suffered from Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, which enabled him to perform certain roulades and double-stops. He commissioned Hector Berlioz's Harold in Italy and himself wrote frequent left-handed pizzicati, harmonics, and other tricky sequences in such works as his twenty-four caprices. For 10 points, jaw cancer, not a pact with the devil for his amazing skills, caused the strange appearance of what lauded violinist?;;(Niccolo) Paganini
American Literature;;Lines written by him can be found as epigraphs in Cooper's The Last of the Mohicans. Often inspired by nature in poems such as "The White-Footed Deer," "The Yellow Violet," and "To a Fringed Gentian," one of his better-known poems asks of a titular bird, "dost thou pursue thy solitary way"? He exhorts those who fear to face death with courage in an 1817 poem whose title literally means "meditation on death". For 10 points, name this American poet of "To a Waterfowl" and "Thanatopsis".;;(William) (Cullen) Bryant
Physics;;Philipp Lenard's explanation for it was rejected in favor of one that utilized quantum theory, and Joel Stebbins attempted to use it in a device to measure light curves of eclipsing binary stars. Some diodes and solar cells use it to create electric current, and it was first observed by Heinrich Hertz in 1887. Robert Millikan's experiments showed its nearly inverse dependence on wavelength, and the equation describing it contains a work function, which is the threshold necessary for it to occur. For 10 points, name this phenomenon where light of a certain frequency ejects electrons from the surface of a metal, whose explanation won Albert Einstein the 1921 Nobel Prize in Physics.;;Photoelectric effect
United States History;;His father of the same name captured Jamaica in 1655. This man was imprisoned late in life after his own steward swindled him out of money, and he wrote such dissident tracts as The Sandy Foundation Shaken and No Cross, No Crown. A onetime trustee for Edward Byllynge, one of two proprietors of East Jersey, he later drew up the Charter of Privileges and championed the liberal "Frame of Government" for the state he founded. For 10 points identify this creator of a "holy experiment" in line with his Quaker principles, that became the colony on the immediate north side of the Mason-Dixon line.;;(William) Penn
European Literature;;One chapter in it contains a lengthy discourse on artificial lemonade powder, and frequent references are made to a lawyer named Klepp. The second chapter, "Wide Skirt," details the relationship between the protagonist's maternal grandparents, while in the third chapter the protagonist recalls a moth hitting a light bulb during his birth. The protagonist rejects the possibility of working for his father Alfred, a member of the Nazi party, by refusing to grow after the age of three. For 10 points, name this novel that features the dwarfish protagonist Oskar Matzerath's beating on the titular object, written by Gunter Grass.;;(The) Tin Drum
European History;;It listed its governing principles as "Work, Family, and Fatherland," and came into power after the resignation of Paul Reynaud. A group called the Legion of Order, later renamed the Milice, served as its secret police, and the force's commander, Joseph Darnand, was made an officer in the Waffen SS. Its other leading figures included Pierre Laval and Marshall Henri Petain. For 10 points, identify this Nazi-supported puppet government that headed France during World War II.;;Vichy (France)
Chemistry;;Many of the synthetic ones available today were introduced by N.E. Good in 1966, and tromethamine is known as the "tris" variety. Polyols and phosphates act as them by forming complexes with divalent and polyvalent cations. One of these solutions in human blood is a blend of bicarbonate ion and carbonic acid, and they are essential to the proper function of many enzymes. Described by the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation, they consist of a weak acid and its conjugate base, or a weak base and its conjugate acid. For 10 points, name this type of solution that resists a change in pH.;;Buffer(s)
Mythology;;One of his allies is Asherah, the lady of the deep whose son Ashtar attempts to fill in when this god goes missing, and who also helps him secure permission to build a house on Mt. Zaphon with the help of the smith and armorer Kothar-u-Khasis. He employs the envoys Gapn and Ugar to refuse tribute to the lord of deserts, but both revive and in the final battle this god defeats Mot. For 10 points, name this son of El, a Canaanite fertility god whose name is familiar to readers of the Bible as a name often given to idols and a Semitic root for "lord".;;Baal
Astronomy;;The Wolf-Wolfer number and the Zurich number quantify their activity, and the Evershed effect is a displacement of their spectral lines. The Wilson effect is a narrowing of their penumbras, and faculae are often known to appear near these objects. They almost never appear below 5 degrees or above 40 degrees north or south of the equator, and their progressive movement to lower latitudes is described by Spörer's Law. Modern discoveries have revised Samuel Heinrich Schwabe's observations to note cycles of 22 years. For 10 points, name these relatively colder areas on the solar surface that can be detected by the naked eye.;;Sunspot(s)
United States History;;The Senate investigation of it was led by Montana Democrat Thomas Walsh of the Committee on Public Lands and Surveys. The Mammoth Corporation was connected to it, and a six-month prison sentence was issued to that company's executive, Harry Sinclair. This incident also led to the first prison sentence for a cabinet officer, then-Secretary of the Interior Albert Fall. For 10 points, name this scandal that involved oil fields at a Wyoming naval reserve and marked the low point of Warren Harding's presidency.;;Teapot Dome
Art;;His religious works include Pharoah and His Host Lost in the Red Sea and Christ Healing the Sick. This painter of Agrippina Landing at Brundisium used distinctive large, almond-shaped eyes in his portraits. Though American-born, he helped found the Royal Academy before painting Death on the Pale Horse and Penn's Treaty with the Indians. For 10 points, name this painter who sparked a controversy by using contemporary figures in classical poses for his depiction of the taking of Quebec in The Death of General Wolfe.;;(Benjamin) West
Astronomy;;It contains several coronas such as Idem-Kuva and Artemis Chasma, and the Schröter effect is the occurrence of its dichotomy earlier than theoretically expected when it is waning. The Sif-Gula region, Beta Regio, and Alta Regio are associated with shield-volcano complexes, while Ishtar Terra is comparable to the size of the continental United States and contains a mountain massif known as Maxwell Mons. For 10 points, name this planet whose average temperature is around 900 Fahrenheit thanks to a high concentration of carbon dioxide and is second-closest planet to the Sun.;;Venus
Art;;This term can be used for work as diverse as that of Otto Wagner and Joseph Olbrich, who opposed Wagner's classicism and formed the Vienna Secession. It is exemplified by Victor Horta's Hotel Tassel, inspired by the works of Charles Rennie Macintosh. Architect Hector Guimard used it for the Paris Metro signs, and it also popped up as Spain's "modernisme" and Germany's Jugendstil (YOO gind shteel). For 10 points, name this movement also practiced by Antonio Gaudi and shown at the Universal Exposition of 1900, exemplified by the painting of Gustav Klimt and the glassmaking of Louis Tiffany.;;Art Nouveau
British Literature;;Jerry and Kevin, the protagonist's two sons, are seen as Shem the Penman and Shaun the Postman respectively. At one point the protagonist dreams of himself as Tristram and his daughter Isobel as Iseult the fair, and he constantly fears that the police will come after him for an incident that occurred in Phoenix Park. The protagonist's wife, Anna, is representative of the river Liffey in the poetic Anna Livia Plurabelle section. For 10 points, name this novel with Humphrey Chimpden Earwicker as its protagonist, the final novel of James Joyce, whose title alludes to an Irish legend about a man being revived at his own funeral.;;Finnegans Wake
World History;;This present-day country was the seat of an empire under Queen Tamar, but its eastern part was annexed in the Treaty of Gulistan, subsuming the culture that produced the epic "The Knight in a Panther's Skin". It was overrun in 1921 by the USSR despite having its own socialist government, sparking the condemnation of Lenin, and it then produced such important Soviet figures as Lavrenti Beria. For 10 points, the Rose Revolution lately changed the government of Eduard Shevardnadze in what Caucasian republic, the homeland of Joseph Stalin?;;Georgia
United States History;;Its Weeks Island site was decommissioned in 1999 after contamination from a sinkhole. It is now housed in several caverns created by artificial salt erosion, at Big Hill, West Hackberry, Bayou Choctaw, and its largest location, Bryan Mound near Freeport, Texas. Established by the 1975 Energy Policy and Conservation Act, it is currently believed to have the capacity to lower unit prices by up to twenty cents. For 10 points, name this storage network that contains a volume of seven hundred million barrels, intended to insulate the U.S. from sudden supply shocks in a certain fossil fuel.;;Strategic Petroleum Reserve;;strategic reserves
Mythology;;One named Pholus opened a jar of wine for Heracles, leading to Heracles killing Isoples, Hippotion, and others. Rhoecus and Hylaeus were killed by Atalanta after trying to attack her. Eurytion got drunk at the wedding of Pirithous, and Eurytus started the fight that led to their battle with the Lapiths. For 10 points, what creatures, that also include Heracles's murderer Nessus and the wise Chiron, were half man and half horse?;;Centaur(s)
Psychology;;A study by the University of Chicago showed that chromosomes 14 and 15 affect it in humans, and Dr. Howard Hoffman's book on this process indicates that it is neither rapid nor irreversible, as it generally disappears within thirty hours of the initial conditioning. Usually accomplished within the first three hours of life, it was famously studied in goslings and ducklings. For 10 points, name this phenomenon first investigated by Konrad Lorenz, a form of learning where a young animal's first contact with any object results in an often-parental association with that object.;;Imprinting
United States History;;Its founding members included Bob Ross, now a professor at Clark University, and the now-married Sharon Jeffrey Lehrer. Al Haber was elected the first president of this organization, which later spawned such offshoots as the Revolutionary Union and the terrorist Weathermen. For 10 points, Tom Hayden's Port Huron statement enunciated the principles of what 1960s organization of radical collegians?;;S(tudents) (for) (a) D(emocratic) S(ociety)
British Literature;;The author of this poem sings "The sweetness, mercy, majesty and glories" of his King like committed linnets, and claims that "Enlarged winds," "The birds that wanton in the air" and "Fishes that tipple in the deep" all "Know no such liberty" as the author of this poem when he lies tangled in his lover's hair and "fetter'd to her eye". He declares that "minds innocent and quiet take" the titular locale for a hermitage. For 10 points, "Stone walls do not" make the title entity, "nor iron bars a cage" according to what poem by Richard Lovelace?;;To Althea(,) From Prison
Geography;;This region's coat of arms contains a bearded vulture and seven towers, the latter of which is reflected in its German name, Siebenburgen. Its major rivers include the Olt, Somes [SOH-mesh] and Mures [MOO-resh], which drain into the Danube. Mostly consisting of a plateau about 1000 feet above sea level, its western side slopes down to the Pannonian Plain and Bihor Mountains. For 10 points, name this region that borders the Carpathian Mountains of Romania, whose name literally means "beyond the forest".;;Transylvania
World Literature;;Its anonymous narrator revels in his toothaches and liver problems, claiming that his failure to seek treatment from a doctor is a way of rebelling against modernity. He dreams about sitting in silence with the family of Anton, and then calls on Simonov only to find out that he is planning a party for his enemy, Zverkov. In its second section, "Apropos of the Wet Snow", the narrator urges a prostitute named Liza to abandon her ways only to insult her when she later visits his apartment. Set in St. Petersburg during the 1860s, for 10 points, identify this subterranean work of Fyodor Dostoevsky.;;Notes from (the) Underground
Art;;His classically inspired sculptures include The Rape of Proserpina and Apollo and Daphne, which were executed for Cardinal Borghese. More extravagant works include a baldacchino over the high altar in St. Peter's Basilica and the Fountain of the Four Rivers. His masterpiece sits under a hidden window in the Cornaro Chapel, and shows an angel driving an arrow into the heart of a female mystic. For 10 points, name this Italian Baroque sculptor of The Ecstasy of St. Teresa.;;(Gianlorenzo) Bernini
Physics;;Quantum-mechanical waves can be seen with the naked eye due to the constancy of their phases. One theory, named after London, treats certain isotopes as ideal ones, and one of them was made from sodium-23 by Wolfgang Ketterle. However, the first was created by Cornell and Wieman at JILA in Colorado, who supercooled two thousand rubidium atoms and caused them to act as a single "superatom". For 10 points, name these collections of particles cooled below a critical temperature, a so-called fifth state of matter, predicted by an Indian and a German physicist for whom they are named.;;Bose-Einstein (condensate(s))
Religion;;Its fourth day is the start of Kartikka and coincides with the lunar new year. Jains believe that Mahavira passed into nirvana during this time, while Sikhs remember the return of Guru Hargobind from captivity over this holiday. Northern celebrants believe that, during this time, major figures from the Ramayana return to Ayodha. Its third day involves lighting of lanterns to encourage reflection, and it opens with the lighting of candles as a greeting to Lakshmi. For 10 points, name this five-day "festival of lights" celebrated in India every autumn.;;Di(v|w){1}?ali
European History;;It was signed by 577 people following discussions led by Jean-Sylvan Bailly and Jean-Joseph Mounier. Followed a week later by Louis XVI's order to call a meeting of the Estates General, it consisted of a promise to remain together until the drafting of a constitution. The response to the locking of the doors at the Menus Plaisirs, the regular meeting place of the Third Estate, was, for 10 points, what pledge issued at a namesake recreational center?;;Tennis Court Oath
United States History;;He wrote the opinions holding that federal courts cannot order state extraditions in Kentucky v. Dennison and ending Dorr's Rebellion in Luther v. Borden. In the Charles River Bridge case, his court held that there are no implied rights in contracts. The brother-in-law of Francis Scott Key, he wrote the Ableman v. Booth opinion that enjoined Wisconsin from interfering with federal enforcement of the Fugitive Slave Act. For 10 points, who was this Chief Justice appointed by Andrew Jackson, the author of the Dred Scott decision?;;(Roger) (Brooke) Taney
American Literature;;In "The Hippopotamus," he claims that the titular beast is the "True Church," a line that he later explained in a work of criticism, After Strange Gods. The lines "in my beginning is my end" and "in my end is my beginning" can be found on his memorial plaque, as they are taken from "East Coker". That is the second in a collection that also includes "Burnt Norton" and "Little Gidding" and is known as his Four Quartets. For 10 points, name this author of the play Murder in the Cathedral and poems such as "The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock," "The Hollow Men," and "The Wasteland".;;T(.)(homas) S(.)(tearns) Eliot;;Eliot
Music;;Igor Stravinsky and Paul Hindemith contributed commissions for the fiftieth anniversary of this organization founded by Henry Lee Higginson, while Sergei Rachmaninov refused its conductorship on several different occasions. It is the orchestra-in-residence at the Tanglewood Music Festival each summer, and it has been conducted by Arthur Nikisch, Charles Munch (moonk), and Serge Koussevitsky. In 2004, James Levine replaced Seiji Ozawa as principal conductor of, for 10 points, what orchestra whose regular home is Symphony Hall in the Back Bay Fens?;;Boston Symphony Orchestra
United States History;;The product of this meeting was a proposed amendment requiring each president to be from a different state than his predecessor, a challenge to Virginia's hegemony over the office. George Cabot presided over it, and, like twelve of the twenty-six delegates there, represented Massachusetts. Roger Sherman and Theodore Dwight also attended this conference that challenged President Madison's authority and discussed secession, but instead sealed the demise of the Federalist Party. For 10 points, name this convention called in response to the War of 1812 and hosted in a Connecticut city.;;Hartford (Convention)
Biology;;The P1, M13 and Mu varieties are widely used cloning vectors, though Seymour Benzer used the T4 variety to analyze the gene. The Hershey-Chase experiment utilized the T2 type to prove that nucleic acids contain genetic code. Independently discovered by Frederick Twort and Felix d'Hérelle, the lambda variety can engage in lysogenic reproduction by integrating with host plasmids and chromosomes, but most engage in the lytic (LIT-ikk) cycle of attachment, penetration, multiplication, maturation, and a bursting release. For 10 points, identify these types of viruses named for their single-celled hosts.;;Bacteriophage(s)
World History;;An official declaration of war noted that this was precipitated by the seizure of the Taku forts. Its casualties included the German minister, Baron von Kettler, and it began in earnest with an attack on the Feng'tai railway station. Originally organized in the Chihili and Shantung provinces, the movement was tacitly endorsed by the dowager empress. Much of the violence targeted Christian missionaries and converts in, for 10 points, what 1899 revolt against Western influence named for and led by a society that called itself the I Ho Chuan or the "Righteous Harmonious Fists"?;;Boxer (Uprising|Rebellion)
Mythology;;In Jewish folklore, it achieved its ability because it did not annoy Noah during the voyage of the ark. China has an equivalent known as the Feng-huang. It was said to live in Arabia near a cool well of water. Every morning it appeared at dawn, singing a song so wonderful that even Apollo stopped to listen. It was known to embalm its predecessor into an egg and lay that egg on the altar of the sun god in Heliopolis. For 10 points, name this mythical bird that perpetually immolated itself and then rose again.;;Phoenix
Biology;;Antibiotics like puromycin resemble the 3-prime ends of this molecule and thus inhibit its activity. The 3-prime end of every molecule of it has the sequence CCA, and its D and T-psi-C arms cause it to have a cloverleaf structure and an L-shaped tertiary structure, which is stabilized by nonstandard hydrogen bonds. It can undergo the so-called wobble, or substitution of individual bases with no effect on the anticodon. Ribosomes contain two binding sites for aminoacylated versions of it, both of which are used to make peptides. For 10 points, name this RNA molecule crucial to translation.;;t(ransfer) r(ibo)n(ucleic) a(cid)
American Literature;;Its twelfth section mentions various places in America, such as the poet's "own Manhattan with spires" and "Ohio's shores and flashing Missouri". The poet asks what he shall "hang on the chamber walls" and claims that he will "warble" himself, just as the gray-brown thrush warbles a "carol of death". The "western orb" frequently mentioned represents a recently deceased hero, and the poet breaks off a sprig of the titular flower, with "heart-shaped leaves of rich green," to symbolize his mourning. For 10 points, name this Walt Whitman poem that, like "O Captain! My Captain!" was composed to commemorate the death of Abe Lincoln.;;When Lilacs Last in the Dooryard Bloom'd
Chemistry;;A catalytic dehydrogenation of this molecule is named for Eugene Houdry, and it can be used to make acetylene and ethylene in the Wulff process. Harry Emeléus was the first to prepare its silicon analog, tetrasilene. Because its boiling point is around negative twelve degrees Celsius, the "iso" form of this compound is sometimes used in refrigeration. It is the heaviest alkane to be a gas at room temperature, as well as the simplest alkane to have more than one isomer. For 10 points, name this hydrocarbon that is often liquefied under pressure for use in cooking and lighters, which has formula C4H10.;;Butane
World History;;Its king Archelaus (arr kuh LAY ous) transferred the royal residence from Aegae (EYE jiy) to Pella. It can be divided into Argead (arr Gee ed) and Antipatrid Dynasties, and it came under foreign domination during the reign of Perseus after the Battle of Pydna, ending the fourth of its namesake wars with Rome. Its early kings included Amyntas I and Perdiccas I, but its smashing of the Sacred Band at Chaeronea (kar uh NAY uh) came under Philip II. For 10 points, name this kingdom to the north of Greece that produced Alexander the Great.;;Macedon(ia)
Art;;The artist places an earlier 1859 drawing depicting Black Lion Wharf in the background of this painting, and the sketch appears framed on the otherwise empty wall. A bright floral pattern livens up the somber black curtain that fills the left hand side of the scene. Similarly, the subject of the painting only has white lace cuffs and a white bonnet to contrast with her austere black dress as she sits in profile facing left. For 10 points, identify this "arrangement in gray and black" portraying the distaff ancestor of James Whistler.;;Whistler's Mother|Arrangement in Gr(a|e){1}?y and Black ((Number|No(.)) 2|The Artist's Mother){1}?|(the) Artist's Mother
British Literature;;One character in this novel suggests to Cardinal Morton that England abolish the death penalty for theft and do more to prevent gambling. He then travels to a crescent-shaped island about five hundred miles in perimeter, which is divided into fifty-four shires with its capital city at Amaurote. Euthanasia is frequently used there, gold and silver are used to make chamber pots, and its people are required to work on its communal farms. For 10 points, Raphael Hythloday narrates to Peter Giles what Thomas More novel about an ideal country?;;Utopia
Astronomy;;In May 2005, pictures of one of them, the densely cratered Epimetheus, revealed an age of several billion years. Two of them were discovered in August 2004 between Enceladus and the so-called "death-star" Mimas. Phoebe moves in a retrograde fashion, Helene librates about the leading point of Dione's (dee OH nayz) orbit, and Telesto and Calypso librate about some Lagrange points of Tethys. For 10 points, Pandora and Prometheus hold the F ring in place and are members of what group of bodies whose largest examples are Rhea and Titan?;;Moons (of) Saturn;;moons
World History;;Towards the end of his life he co-authored the book A Second Look at America. Captured by Frederick Funston, this author of the Malolos constitution led a band of followers including the clergyman Gregorio Aglipay and the future politician Manuel Quezon, who defeated him for the presidency in 1935. His early exploits included the signing of the Biac-na-Bato with Spain and his leadership of the nationalist organization Katipunan. For 10 points, identify this independence leader in the Philippines.;;(Emilio) Aguinaldo
Music;;The son of Matthew Arnold, a dog swimming in the Wye, and quotes from Mendelssohn's "Calm Sea and Prosperous Voyage" appear in sections ranging from "C.A.E". to "E.D.U". Its most analyzed passage represents a discussion about the slow movements of Beethoven. Its principal melody is allegedly a counterpoint to "Auld Lang Syne" or "Rule Britannia," and the noted ninth section is a portrait of A. J. Jaeger entitled "Nimrod". For 10 points, fourteen people and a dog are "my friends pictured within" what work of Edward Elgar?;;Enigma Variations
United States History;;A failed attempt to prevent this conflict was the calling of the Long Assembly, which was followed by its namesake's raid on a Pamunkey camp. Its leader produced the manifesto "The Declaration of the People," expressing outrage at events like a Doeg attack on a settler's plantation, which prompted participants in this conflict to attack the neighboring Susquehanaug and Appomattox tribes. Rooted heavily in its leader's animosity towards Governor William Berkeley was, for 10 points, what colonial Virginia rebellion that occurred in 1676?;;(Francis) Bacon's Rebellion
Geology;;They are far less destructive in areas dominated by mafic or basaltic rock because of the low viscosity of leftover magma. Wizard Island is an example of a resurgent one that exists now as the remnant of ancient Mount Mazama and rises as a dome near the rim of Crater Lake. They are accompanied in their formation by large pyroclastic flows. For 10 points, name these depressions that form when a magma chamber becomes depleted and unable to support the roof of a volcano, named from the Spanish for "cauldron".;;Caldera
United States History;;Currently led by John F. McManus, it was founded in Indianapolis by a former candy manufacturer. Its publications, such as the magazine American Opinion and its namesake "Blue Book," accused J.F. Dulles and Earl Warren of being Communist agents. This group's origins lie in a book called The Politician criticizing Eisenhower's foreign policy. For 10 points, the death in China of the namesake American Baptist missionary inspired Robert Welch's vigorous leadership of what archetypical right-wing organization that pressed for a hard line on the Cold War?;;John Birch (Society)
Philosophy;;This work defines the confina of humor and irony, and its second section describes the love of Don Giovanni as "not faithful but totally faithless," loving "not one but all". Published under the name Victor Eremita, its opening volume includes the sections "Silhouettes," "The Unhappiest One," and "The Seducer's Diary," the latter possibly based on the author's broken engagement to Regine Olsen. The title concept is in contrast to the synthesis of Hegel and creates the distinction between the aesthetic and the ethical. For 10 points, name this work of Soren Kierkegaard.;;Either/Or
American Literature;;The protagonist plays three-handed bridge with an Englishman named Harris and billiards with the successful Count Mippipopolous. In this novel, we meet Bill Gorton on a fishing trip, while Mike Campbell goes on ahead to the hotel with his new girlfriend. A key moment occurs during Montoya's discussion with the main character, about the cautionary tale of Algabeno, in order to discourage his former lover's romance with Pedro Romero. For 10 points, the line "Robert Cohn was once middle-weight champion of Princeton" begins what 1926 work that revolves around the affair between Lady Brett Ashley and the impotent Jake Barnes, a novel by Hemingway?;;(The) Sun Also Rises
United States History;;This incident was spawned by an altercation between young apprentice Edward Garrick and Private Hugh White, which attracted crowds on both sides. Captain Thomas Preston, who was defended in court by Josiah Quincy and John Adams, was acquitted of murder charges for his role as leader of the soldiers involved in this incident, which left five men dead, including Crispus Attucks. For 10 points, name this 1770 event where Redcoats fired upon locals in a Massachusetts city.;;Boston Massacre
British Literature;;One character in this play asks the audience, "was there ever such a sober, sentimental interview" after becoming bored with the protagonist. Hastings tries to elope with Constance Neville, but they are foiled, and they take their frustrations out on the illiterate Tony Lumpkin. Subtitled "or, the Mistakes of a Night," such mistakes end when the protagonist's father shows up at Mr. Hardcastle's house, which the protagonist had earlier believe was a village inn. For 10 points, name this play about Charles Marlow's attempts to woo Kate Hardcastle, a comedy by Oliver Goldsmith.;;She Stoops to Conquer
Psychology;;He analyzed the "Hermetic tradition" from gnosticism through alchemy as a necessary expression of the unconscious that he saw as suppressed by mainstream Christianity. To explain the phenomena encountered in his Burghölzli experiments with word association, he coined the term "complex". He believed that "individuation," or the person's relationship with history and mythology, could give meaning to the elderly, and he divided people into introverts and extroverts. For 10 points, name this man, whose insistence on a non-sexual origin for neuroses caused his rift with Freud, after which he coined such terms as "archetype" and "the collective unconscious".;;(Carl) (Gustav) Jung
Chemistry;;The Serpak process was invented to replace it but never became popular, and it was a major improvement over the Birkeland-Eyde process and the Frank-Caro process. The reaction forming the basis of this process releases about 92 kilojoules of energy, and it uses a catalyst of iron oxide and generally takes place at pressures from 30 to 60 megapascals and about 500 degrees Celsius The most economical form of nitrogen fixation, the high-pressure methods associated with it were developed by Carl Bosch, who won a Nobel Prize in Chemistry thirteen years after its namesake did in 1918. For 10 points, name this industrial process used to produce ammonia, named for a German chemist.;;Haber(-Bosch) (Process)
European History;;A key moment in this battle was the decision to wait out the initial attack on Eritria. After an eight-day standoff near the Charadra River, the defenders decided to make a move under the advice of Callimachus. The army of Datis was caught by surprise when the opponents left the center wide open, and Militiades was able to send the Persians scurrying. However, this battle may now be better remembered for the exploits of Pheidippides. For 10 points, name this battle which, depending on one's source for the legend, either preceded or followed a messenger's very long run.;;(Battle) (of) Marathon
Chemistry;;In fluid mechanics, Crocco's equation relates its gradient to a fluid's vorticity. For an ideal gas, it is given by the Sackur-Tetrode equation, and the Kolmogorov-Sinai invariant is a measure of this for a transformation on a probability space. A formulation of it can be found on Boltzmann's tombstone, which expresses it as the logarithm of the number of microscopic states. Clausius defined its change as a change in heat divided by temperature, which is never negative for an isolated system. For 10 points, what is this thermodynamic quantity commonly described as a measure of a system's disorder?;;Entropy
Music;;They were written while their composer was staying with Johann Peter Salomon following the death of his patron, Prince Nikolaus. Numbered 93 through 104 in the Hoboken catalog, the half of them that are named include the "Clock" and "Drumroll". Written from 1791 to 1795, they also include the "Military," "Miracle," and "Surprise". For 10 points, identify these works written on a foreign excursion from the Esterhazy court by Franz Haydn.;;London Symphonies
American Literature;;It centers on the interpretation of the Hebrew word "timshel" found in the book of Genesis, which some characters conclude should mean "thou mayest rule over sin". The Chinese servant Lee serves as a mouthpiece for the author's own philosophical and religious beliefs, while Samuel Hamilton looks after a barren wasteland of a farm. The evil woman Cathy Ames causes Adam to abandon his two sons, the religious Aron and the impulsive Caleb, and the latter indirectly kills the former by revealing that their mother is in fact alive. For 10 points, name this novel set in Salinas, California that focuses on the Trask family, a treatment of the Cain and Abel story by John Steinbeck.;;East of Eden
Physics;;The Essen coefficient is equal to this quantity divided by the volume enclosed in the air gap of an engine, and its observed absence in the Trouton-Noble experiment supports the theory of special relativity. Its value on a current-carrying coil can be calculated from the cross product of the dipole moment and magnetic field. The net amount of it always sums to zero in any kind of statics problem, and it can be calculated by multiplying the angular acceleration and the moment of inertia of a body. Power is provided from a car's engine as, for 10 points, what quantity defined as the cross product of a force and its lever arm, generally a twisting or rotating force?;;Torque
Music;;While the Roman cavalry used trumpets, the infantry used this instrument for the same purposes. The Bulgarian gaida and the East European dudy are equivalents that incorporate cowbells, while France's cornemuse is the traditional accompaniment of the hurdy-gurdy or the bombarde at Christmas. The archetypical classical kind, the "piobroch," was created by Iain Odhar and the MacCrimmon family. For 10 points, name this musical instrument whose distinguished sound is produced by the contrast of a chanter and several drones, similar to the Irish "union pipe" but originating in Scotland.;;Bagpipe(s)
European History;;This monarch died in Rome after unsuccessfully attempting to regain the throne in 1660. This ruler had left for Innsbruck in disguise five years earlier and converted to Catholicism. Although historians are not sure whether the abdication was influenced by a clandestine love for Cardinal Decio Azzolino, we do know that this ruler received educateion from Jorge Stiernhelm. Count Oxenstierna, and Rene Descartes. For 10 points, identify this daughter of Gustavus Adolphus and queen of Sweden.;;(Queen) Christina
Religion;;Its ancient practitioners chose between two cosmologies, one placing the Plain of High Heaven physically above the Earth, and another in which the Perpetual Country existed beyond the sea. This faith emphasizes four affirmations: physical cleanliness, tradition and family, love of nature, and worship of sacred entities. Believers aspire to display "makoto," or having a true heart. Much of its dogma comes from the Rokkokushi and the Kojiki. For 10 points, the Folk, Sect, and Shrine divisions all worship Kami deities in what former state religion of Japan?;;Shinto
World Literature;;The two main characters meet the widow Rosa Diamond, and while one character becomes the gaucho Martin de la Cruz in order to serve her, the other is taken to an illegal immigrant detention center and finds his friend Jumpy Joshi. Opening with those characters embracing each other and performing "geminate cartwheels" as they fall from an Air India jet that has been blown up by Sikh terrorists, it follows the transformation of Gibreel Farishta and Saladin Chamcha. For 10 points, name this novel whose alternative take on the Quran and the life of Mohammed earned a fatwa from Ayatollah Khomeini for its author, Salman Rushdie.;;(The) Satanic Verses
Biology;;A sukhovei [SOO-koh-vay] often brings with it this condition to the Russian steppes. The Palmer Index measures their severity as negative one to negative six, though the scale's usefulness is limited by inherent time lag and sensitivity to soil type. The Fescue  grasses are particularly resistant to, for 10 points, what long-term meteorological condition in which there is significantly much less precipitation than normal in a given area of land.;;Drought
United States History;;According to his own writings, this man joined the Hapsburgs in Hungary and Wallachia before his capture by the Turks, though his seduction of an Arabic princess allowed him to escape captivity. Taken by pirates in 1615 and returning home to England penniless, he made a large fortune via his writings of his adventures in the New World, describing the iron discipline he exercised in the Chesapeake from 1607 to 1609 in True Travels and A General History of Virginia, New England, and the Summer Islands. For 10 points, name this Jamestown founder whose works also describe his capture by Powhatan and his dramatic rescue by Pocahontas.;;John Smith;;Smith
European Literature;;"China Song in Europe" and "Waltz in the Branches" were part of his collection of works for children, The Cricket Sings, while his more adult verses could be found in First Songs. He wrote an ode to Walt Whitman and a lament upon the death by goring of Ignacio Meijas. Other works include his Six Galician Poems and the puppet-plays The Shoemaker's Prodigious Wife and The Butterfly's Evil Spell. For 10 points, identify this Spanish author of The House of Bernarda Alba, Yerma, and Blood Wedding.;;(Federico) Garcia (Lorca);;Lorca
Art;;Often omitted from reproductions of the painting are the three lunettes containing the coat-of-arms of the Sforza family, which commissioned it. A doorway was cut into it in 1656, as by that time the work was unrecognizable. The most extensive reconstruction effort on it was spearheaded by Pinin Barcilon [bahr shee LOHN] between 1978 and 1999 at its home in the convent of Santa Maria della Grazie in Milan. For 10 points, a Maundy Thursday meeting of thirteen people is depicted in what painting by Leonardo da Vinci?;;(The) Last Supper
Astronomy;;In 2001, a stream of heavy elements showed that it has captured smaller objects from its neighbors, such as NGC 205 and M32. Vesto Slipher showed via spectrographs that it was moving towards the sun at 300 kilometers per second. The Hubble telescope revealed that it contains the globular cluster Mayall II, and some projections indicate that it will collide with its "little sister" in approximately three billion years. For 10 points, name this most distant object visible with the naked eye.;;Andromeda (Galaxy)
World History;;He created a minor scandal in Rome when he defied traditions of using Latin in all official business by addressing the assembly of Syracuse in Greek. Also during his time as quaestor in Sicily, he described the tombstone of Archimedes in his Tusculan Disputations. The aristocracy distrusted this upstart "New Man" from Arpinum, despite his efforts to save the state from the sedition of Catiline while consul in 63 BCE. For 10 points name this defender of Milo who assailed Antony in a series of the speeches for which he was noted.;;(Marcus) (Tullius) Cicero
Math Theory;;Browkin's theorem states that for every positive integer n, there exists one of these in the plane that contains exactly n lattice points, though that theorem was later extended to cover any given figure. One can be constructed with a compass and straightedge by drawing two diameters of a circle perpendicular to each other, bisecting the angles formed by the intersection of those diameters, and connecting resulting points on the circle's circumference. The diagonal of one with side length 1 is equal to Pythagoras's constant, or approximately 1.41. For 10 points, name these polygons that have four sides of equal length and four congruent interior angles.;;Square(s)
World History;;In his initial rise to power, he won the support of the CGT, and the backing of trade unions, or "shirtless ones," helped win him the presidency in 1946. Overthrown by a 1955 military coup, he returned from exile in 1973 and became president again. His second wife Isabel took over after his 1974 death, as his country fell into chaos due to clashes between his right wing supporters and the leftist Montoneros. For 10 points, name this former president of Argentina and husband of "Evita".;;(Juan) Peron
American Literature;;Her short story "A Letter of the Times" discusses the idea that God can be found in all humans. The story is anthologized in her collection You Can't Keep a Good Woman Down. In Search of Our Mothers' Gardens revealed that she had suicidal thoughts after being shot in the eye with a BB gun. A markedly different outlook permeates "To Hell with Dying" and her 2004 novel Now is the Time to Open Your Heart. For 10 points, name this author who described the love of Albert and Celie in The Color Purple.;;(Alice) Walker
Mythology;;The scene of Dionysus bringing this drunken god up to Olympus slumped over the back of a mule was often depicted in Greek art. In another legend this god was married to Athena, who left him, after which he spilled his seed on the earth to produce Erechtheus, a king of Athens. The woman more commonly known as his wife was given to him in exchange for releasing Hera from a trick throne he had built. For 10 points, name this husband of Aphrodite who was lamed when he fell from Olympus to Lemnos, under which he built his forge.;;Hephaestus
European Literature;;Despite a brutal grade-school education in which he was constantly beaten by his schoolmaster Orbilius, he was able to go to Greece for higher education just in time for the battle of Philippi. Like Archilochus, whose iambic style he imitates in his work Epodes, he too threw away his shield and ran. He eventually ingratiated himself with the patron Maecenas and devoted himself to literature, producing a Carmen Saeculare for Augustus and his Satires and Odes. For 10 points, name this Roman poet from Venusia, who also dabbled into literary criticism in his Ars Poetica.;;Horace
Biology;;Treatment with caffeine prevents it from occurring, as the conversion of membrane tubes into a tubulovesicular network is inhibited after the formation of a phragmoplast. In 1996, Michael Liu discovered a pea plant incapable of undergoing this process, as it lacked sufficient vesicle secretion for the creation of the cell plate. Divisions in the insect embryo often occur without it, and in animals, it results from the collective action of actin microfilaments, which produce the necessary cleavage furrow by which it usually occurs. Rarely complete at the end of telophase and literally meaning "cell movement", for 10 points, name this process defined as the splitting of one cell into two daughter cells.;;Cytokinesis
World History;;One who left his employer became a nukenin, and his family became obligated to kill or retrieve him. By the Sengoku period, they were already the subject of folklore, as in the widely held belief that the Clan of Sanada could defeat an army twenty times its size. Okite [oh-kee-tay] was their code of conduct, and they were experts at mixing gunpowder and using colored rice grains to communicate. A few actually did use shuriken, or throwing stars. For 10 points, name these spies and assassins that practiced a variant of jujitsu and kenjutsu, the purpose of which, according to the Internet, is "to flip out and kill people".;;Ninja(s)
World History;;Its last colonial governor was Lord Christopher Soames, who presided until its first election saw the UANC ticket win. However, after a meeting attended by former prime minister Ian Smith, new elections were held in 1980 and the ZANU party emerged an overall winner, while Canaan Banana became its first president. Now embroiled in controversy over its current leader's seizure of land from white settlers is, for 10 points, what country formerly known as Rhodesia?;;Zimbabwe
Economics;;Internationally, they are regulated under the regime known as Basel Two. In the U.S., these entities were deregulated by the Garn-St. Germain Act, which removed the limitation on the services they could offer under Regulation Q of the Glass-Steagall Act. Also revoked in recent years was the Pepper-McFadden Act, which prohibited them from operating in more than one state. For 10 points, what are these institutions that usually belong to the FDIC, or Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation?;;(Interstate) Bank(s)
American Literature;;Corruption is revealed in this work through a letter to Mrs. Littlepaugh, who exposes a scandal to the narrator. The narrator's father commits suicide when blackmailed about a bribe from American Electric Power Company, and the cover-up of that bribe allows the narrator to blackmail a famous surgeon into heading a hospital. The hospital deal is called off after Tom breaks his neck playing football, and the revelation that Anne has been sleeping with Willy causes Adam Stanton to plan an assassination. Narrated by Jack Burden and centering on the political career of Willy Stark is, for 10 points, what novel by Robert Penn Warren based on the career of Huey Long?;;All the King(')s Men
Art;;On the left, a bearded man hangs his feet over the foam-covered water as he stirs his oar, while another man just in front him faces the viewer as he paddles his own oar. Several boats can be seen in the background on the right, as can a man in green who faces the center as he steers. The dominant image is an American flag, positioned upright in the center of the boat, behind the title character, clad in a general's uniform and standing on one knee at the edge of the boat. For 10 points, name this Emmanuel Leutze painting of the future first president and his men rowing towards Trenton.;;Washington Crossing the Delaware
Chemistry;;Vinyl groups can be produced on them with the use of a saturated solution of cuprous chloride, and they themselves can be produced from the dehalogenation of tetrahalides or the reaction of sodium acetylides with primary alkyl halides. Their most notable feature allows them to produce nitriles when reacted with ammonia, and they undergo reactions with Lindlar's catalyst to produce the less saturated of their two sister groups. For 10 points, name these straight-chain hydrocarbons, of which acetylene is the smallest member, and which contain a carbon-carbon triple bond.;;Alkynes
World History;;In 1878, a brigade named after them was established in Persia. Their villages were largely self-governed locally by "atamans" and nationally by "hetmans". Key figures in their history include Stenka Razin, who led a peasant's revolt in 1670, and Ivan Mazeppa. Divided into the communities of the "Zaporog" and "Don," they were long the cavalry and domestic enforcement arm of the tsars. For 10 points, identify these romanticized frontiersmen of Russia.;;Cossacks
Mythology;;Unable to tell whether her suitor Glaucus was a monster or a fish-god, this daughter of Phorcys fled to the land, where Glaucus could not follow. Circe then fell in love with Glaucus and poisoned the waters near the toe of Italy, where this woman was bathing, changing her into a monster. In the Odyssey, the sailors are advised to take the path past her, for it was better to lose six men than lose the entire ship in a whirlpool. For 10 points, name this creature with six heads, twelve legs, and a lower body made of barking dogs, the counterpart of Charybdis.;;Scylla
United States History;;He found a creative way to avoid his state's then-current one term limit for governors by having his wife Lurleen successfully run, though his wife died two years later and was replaced by Albert Brewer. In the meantime, he broke from the Democratic Party and prepared a third party presidential run by recruiting Curtis LeMay as a running mate. He ran in the Democratic primaries for the next presidential election, but his plans were ended when Arthur Bremmer shot and paralyzed him in May 1972. For 10 points, name this Alabama governor remembered for his vocal support of segregation.;;(George) Wallace
Biology;;A patch of it is unexpectedly found in the crater of Mauna Kea at an elevation of over 13,000 feet, and the Russian term "talik" describes regions that lie above it but below the active layer. Often the site of mounds called pingos, it is formed by a process known as pergelation. Estimated to comprise around twenty percent of the world's land surface, it can maintain its integrity if it is composed of well-drained, coarse-grained sediments as opposed to finer-grained soil with lots of ice. Mostly located at latitudes greater than 60 degrees, for 10 points, what is the term for ground that is kept below 0 Celsius for a period of at least two years?;;Permafrost
British Literature;;She was inspired by Sir Walter Scott to write the unpopular novel The Fortunes of Perkin Warbeck. A forced sojourn in Scotland inspired her Mathilda, and she wrote about the "Life and Adventures of Castruccio, Prince of Lucca" in the novel Valperga. She created a portrait of her deceased husband in a novel in which a plague kills all but one person on Earth, The Last Man, but she is best known for a novel whose story is told to Robert Walton by the title character. For 10 points, name this English author, the wife of the poet Percy and the author of Frankenstein.;;(Mary) (Wollstonecraft) Shelley
European History;;Later incorporated into a declaration by the United Nations as a "common program for purposes and principles," it asserted eight planks including "open access to markets," and "freedom from want and fear". Signed aboard a pair of vessels anchored in Placentia Bay, Newfoundland, it also assured American entry into World War II. For 10 points, identify this August 1941 manifesto that was signed during a secret meeting by Winston Churchill and Franklin Roosevelt and is named for a certain body of water.;;Atlantic Charter
Music;;On his triumphant first tour of England, he premiered the New Grand Overture and its associated opera Don Sanche. His four years in Switzerland and Italy with Countess d'Agoult are remembered in his three volumes for solo piano "Years of Pilgrimage". This virtuoso composed a cantata for the Beethoven Festival of 1845, five years after his return home spurred an interest in Roma music that led to his nineteen-part nationalistic series of piano pieces. For 10 points, name this piano virtuoso and composer of the Hungarian Rhapsodies.;;(Franz) Liszt
Religion;;Its author claimed that it came to him in an inspiration while using an ancient Israelite divination process called Urim and Thummim. In the Books of Mosiah, Alma, Enos, and Ether, it recounts the journey of Jared during the building of the Tower of Babel. Events discussed include the second coming of Jesus to the Nephites before that group is destroyed by the Lamanites. For 10 points, name this book attributed to a set of golden plates delivered by Moroni, first published in Palmyra, New York, in 1830 by Joseph Smith.;;Book of Mormon
Philosophy;;Confucius equated overly enthusiastic participation in this with violence. In Plato's Philebus, Socrates condemns this action as base pleasure taken from another's pain. In The Republic, Socrates explains to Ademantus that the guardians of the city-state must avoid it, as it causes a change in mood that could keep guardians from fulfilling their duty. In Thus Spake Zarathustra, Nietzsche describes this when done "from the height," based on one's superior position, or "from the herd," done based on common assumptions. For 10 points, what is this common behavior analyzed in a treatise by Henri Bergson and attributed in a nickname to the philosopher Democritus?;;Laughter
United States History;;He published a weekly paper called the American Progress after beginning his political career as a contributor to the gubernatorial campaign of John Parker. Henry Fuqua defeated this man in 1924, but he became governor in 1928. He joined the Senate in 1932  in name only, not traveling to Washington for years. He gave many long filibusters opposing New Deal legislation, particularly those involving banking, and sought to organize a quasi-socialist program he called the "Share our Wealth Society". For 10 points, identify this man who was assassinated by Dr. Carl Weiss after ruling Louisiana as the "Kingfish".;;(Huey) Long
Geography;;Named after Francis Egerton, this landmass contains the Manson and Prince of Wales Icefields as well as the settlements of Eureka and Grise Fiord. The United States Range lies on this island, whose northern lobe is known as Grant Land. Within its British Empire Range is Mount Barbeau, the highest point east of the Rocky Mountains in North America. For 10 points, name this largest of the Queen Elizabeth Islands in Canada and home of Alert, the northernmost settlement in the world.;;Ellesmere (Island)
Art;;While it presents the appearance of perfect straightness and regularity, there is not a single straight line employed anywhere in this structure, with most horizontals and verticals curved, through a procedure known as entasis, to give the illusion of straightness to the eye. It sported a golden onion-shaped dome during its service as a mosque, and it lost its roof when Venetian cannon fire ignited the gunpowder stored inside. For 10 points, Ictinus and Callicrates designed what Doric temple dedicated to the Virgin Athena on the Acropolis?;;Parthenon
Biology;;Regulated by a specific acetyltransferase, its second step is catalyzed by a simple aconitase, while its first step is performed by a synthase. A student of its namesake, Hans Kornberg, discovered an alternative to it centered around pentose phosphate. Producing two carbon dioxide molecules, its third product can produce glutamate, and formation of intermediates such as succinate and malate requires formation of NADH molecules. For 10 points, the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex often precedes what pathway that produces two ATP molecules and begins with the reaction of oxaloacetate and acetyl-CoA?;;(Krebs|Citric Acid){1}? (Cycle)
British Literature;;His friendship with Arthur Onslow, the Speaker of the House of Commons, helped his printing house secure lucrative contracts for the Journals of the House. Harriet Byron's relationship with the titular baronet is the subject of his Charles Grandison, while nonfiction works include The Apprentice's Vade Mecum and Familiar Letters. Scandalized by the morality of young women, he was inspired to write a story about a maidservant whose virtue is eventually rewarded with marriage. For 10 points, name this writer of the epistolary novels Clarissa and Pamela.;;(Samuel) Richardson
Physics;;A geostrophic current is achieved when this exactly balances with the horizontal pressure gradient force, and the Rossby number is the ratio of the inertial force to it. In a noninertial, rotating reference frame, it appears as a term given by the cross product of angular velocity and velocity in the rotating frame. For a velocity tangential to a sphere, its horizontal component is perpendicular to the velocity, and it thus causes circular motion. For 10 points, circular weather patterns on the Earth are thus caused by what fictitious force that produces opposite motion in the northern and southern hemispheres?;;Coriolis (Force)
American Literature;;In this author's memoir The Story of a Novel, he describes his relationship with the editor Maxwell Perkins, a man who aided in the mammoth task of reducing this author's manuscripts. His novel The Journey Down is a semi-autobiographical account of his relationship with Aline Bernstein, and in his play Welcome to Our City, his native Asheville first appears as the fictional Altamont, which shows up again in The Web and the Rock. For 10 points, name this author pf You Can't Go Home Again who wrote about Eugene Gant in Of Time and the River and Look Homeward, Angel.;;(Thomas) Wolfe
World History;;This 1920 event was retaliation for a massacre of agents in the Cairo Gang, and saw twelve civilians killed in Croke Park as the Black and Tans opened fire during a soccer match. This term also describes an incident where thousands of unarmed workers led by Father Gapon were shot while demonstrating outside the Winter Palace on January 22, 1905. For 10 points, give the common term describing these violent events, also applied to the killing of thirteen protestors in Derry, Northern Ireland on January 30, 1972.;;Bloody Sunday
European History;;The first was Paolo Lucio Anafesto, elected under the supervision of the Byzantines;  the last, Ludovico Manin, was deposed by Napoleon in 1797. Andrea Contarini, Francesco Foscari, and Enrico Dandolo wielded immense power although checked by Council of Ten. Giovanni and Bartolomeo Bon designed their noted palace at the Piazza San Marco. For 10 points identify this title given to the executives of republican Venice.;;Doge(s) (of) (Venice)
Physics;;The Abrikosov-Suhl variety occurs in materials that display the Kondo effect, and the Schumann variety is caused by lightning-induced radiation becoming trapped between the Earth's surface and the ionosphere. It occurs when the graph of energy as a function of forcing frequency has a Lorentzian peak at a fixed energy. It is characterized by a large factor called Q, for "quality," which measures stored energy divided by dissipated energy. Blamed for the collapse of the Tacoma Narrows Bridge, for 10 points, what is this phenomenon in which a system has a natural frequency characterized by large oscillations?;;Resonance
Mythology;;His belt doubles his strength, and he also wears iron gloves known as Iarngreiper. He generates too much heat to reach his hall Bilskirnir by normal means, and his frequent absence may explain his many obscure children, including Veggdegg and Saeming. His more prominent associates include his servant Thialfi and his daughter Thrud. His exploits included slaying Hymir after Hymir let the Midgard Serpent escape. For 10 points, who disguised himself as Freya to regain from Thrym the stolen hammer Mjollnir, which he wielded as the second son of Odin and Frigg and the Norse god of thunder?;;Thor
Linguistics;;It contains the now-extinct Tocharian branch of China's Tarim Basin, which included Kuchean and Turfanian. Its hypothesized split from the Anatolian group has led to a modern movement for reclassification of the Hittite branch. Rasmus Rask, Franz Bopp, and William Jones deduced its existence by studying similarities in Norse, Latin, and Greek to Sanskrit. For 10 points, name this language family that also contains Hindi, French, German, and English.;;Indo-European (language) (family)
British Literature;;He attacked secular education in essays such as "Vivisection as a Sign of the Times" and "Natural Science at Oxford," though he is better known for his fiction. He attempted to reconcile the existence of Fairies with Christianity in the novel Sylvie and Bruno. He also created such words as "boojum" and "brillig," while his major claim to fame springs from his infatuation with a young girl whose last name was Liddell. For 10 points, name this English author of poems such as "The Hunting of the Snark" and "Jabberwocky," the latter of which is taken from the novel Through the Looking-Glass about a girl named Alice.;;(Lewis) Carroll
Music;;Among twentieth century composers, the foremost sets in this genre are Béla Bartók's six and Dmitri Shostakovich's fifteen. Arnold Schoenberg's second unusually requires a soprano soloist, while a movement of Samuel Barber's first was later re-orchestrated as his Adagio. Luigi Boccherini wrote ninety-one of them; Schubert wrote fifteen, including Death and the Maiden and Rosamunde; and Beethoven's fifteen include the Grosse Fuge [GROW suh FOO guh]. For 10 points, identify this musical genre written for cello, viola, and first and second violins.;;String Quartet(s)
United States History;;At his death, he insisted that he be buried in a black cemetery, and his tombstone reads "Equality of Man Before His Creator". He gained prominence as an Anti-Mason, and during his term in the Pennsylvania legislature, he helped defeat a bill to abolish public schools. He served as chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee during the Civil War and helped draft the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution. For 10 points, identify this leader of the Radical Republicans who led the charge to impeach Andrew Johnson.;;(Thaddeus) Stevens
Physics;;They often contain Pitot tubes at various points for use as data-gathering probes. Examples include Germany's Heeresversuchsanstal and the Boundary Layer Laboratory at the University of Western Ontario. Frank Wenham is credited with inventing it in 1871, while George Cayley created its precursor, the "Whirling Arm". With the help of Octave Chanute, the Wright Brothers developed a horizontal version in 1901, a square box with cross-section of 16-by-16 inches. For 10 points, name this instrument that creates a large flow of air, used to test building materials and air vehicles.;;Wind Tunnel
American Literature;;A description of the angelus as "the bell-rope that gathers God at dawn" opens his "The Broken Tower". Early works like "Emblems of Conduct," "Voyages," and "At Melville's Tomb," strove to combat the pessimism of Modernism, although these works were preceded by the more solemn "Black Tambourine" and "Chaplinesque". Following his first volume of poetry White Buildings, his most famous work includes sections like "Ave Maria," "Quaker Hill," and "The River," as it conjures up characters like Isadora Duncan and Seneca, all the while celebrating a New York landmark. For 10 points, identify this American writer of the epic poem The Bridge.;;(Hart) Crane
Biology;;This condition can result in acute chest syndrome in adults and jaundice in teenagers, but there is no cure for it. The drug hydroxyurea is used to treat its symptoms, the most major of which is generalized body pain. Affecting one in twelve African-Americans, it is caused by the substitution of a valine for a glutamic acid in an abnormal form of hemoglobin, HbS, which causes red blood cells to clump together and obstruct circulation in the body. For 10 points, name this disorder that takes its name from the shape of these red blood cells.;;Sickle-Cell (Anemia)
Mythology;;In one version of his story, he helps a goddess build a bed and chair from a huluppu tree and in return she gives him a pikku and mikku, interpreted to mean a sacred drum and drumstick. The son of Lugalbanda, he meets the Scorpion Man, the ale-wife goddess Siduri, and ultimately flood-survivor Utnapishtim, who helps him acquire a plant of eternal youth which he loses. Earlier, he had joined with the slayer of the Bull of Heaven to fight the giant Humbaba. For 10 points, name this 2/3 god and king of Uruk, whose adventures with Enkidu form the main part of his eponymous epic.;;Gilgamesh
Geology;;One of these natural phenomena is called Porkchop, and the oldest one in the world is thought to be Castle. A necessary condition for them to appear is a material of silicon dioxide which is dissolved from rocks, and which makes various channels pressure-tight and unable to leak into loose gravel or soil. When there is not enough water present to form one, a fumarole appears which can develop into a mud pot. Existing in "cone" and "fountain" varieties, they are created when hot volcanic rock superheats water that eventually forces the water above upwards. For 10 points, name this natural phenomenon that attracts many tourists to Yellowstone National Park to see Old Faithful.;;Geyser(s)
Art;;A popular anecdote tells how this painting's artist was heavily distracted by two swans as he painted its background while on the banks of the Hogsmill River. Another story describes how Elizabeth Siddall, the model for the title character, caught a cold after posing in a bathtub for hours. Flowers and plants are portrayed in painstaking detail in this Pre-Raphaelite work, including the necklace of violets around the titular literary character as she lies drowning in the river. For 10 points, name this John Millais painting of a female character from Hamlet.;;Ophelia
European History;;Long a protector of the Waldensians, he was tricked into signing an order exterminating that sect when unable to read on his deathbed. His defeat of Massimiliano Sforza and Pope Leo X's Swiss mercenaries at the Battle of Marignano heralded his ascension, and during his rule he patronized Jacques Cartier's expeditions. His rivalry with Charles V led to his formation of the League of Cognac, to his eventual defeat at Pavia, and to a meeting with Henry VIII at the Field of the Cloth of Gold. For 10 points identify this man, the first of the Angoulême branch of Valois to rule France.;;Francis I
Mythology;;None of this island's first three races, led by Ladhra, Partholon, and Nemed, could withstand the attacks of the Fomorians, but the Fir Bolg were able to survive. The Tuatha De Danaan then conquered the island, and the Tuatha De goddess Eriu declared to later invaders that the island would bear her name. For 10 points, name this island whose later mythic figures would include Deirdre of the Sorrows and Cu Chulainn [COO COO-lain].;;Ireland
World History;;This chief of the Kwantung Army advocated preemptive air strikes on China and the USSR in order to contain the designs of Stalin. Nicknamed "kamisori" or "the razor," he succeeded Fumimaro Konoye as prime minister but resigned from the post after his forces lost Saipan in 1944. For 10 points, name this Japanese military leader who was hanged for war crimes seven years after he ordered the bombing of Pearl Harbor.;;Tojo (Hideki)
Physics;;The energy increase that counterbalances crystal distortion in the Jahn-Teller effect is governed by this law. Its application to molecules states that the bond deformation energy is equal to the sum of one-half times the restoring force constant, times the square of the difference between the current length of a bond and its resting length, for all bonds in the molecule. Coefficients used in its generalized relations are known as the compliance constant, elastic constant, and stiffness constant, and Young's Modulus is derived from this law. For 10 points, name this law of physics which states that the stress on a solid object is directly proportional to the strain upon the object, and is often applied to the motion of springs.;;Hooke('s) (Law)
European History;;Peripheral figures involved in it included Henry Garnett, a superior of the English Jesuits. Suspicions were aroused after Lord Monteagle received a mysterious letter from Francis Tresham, urging Montagle to stay home. The investigation led by the First Earl of Salisbury netted figures like Thomas Bates, Thomas Percy, and Robert Catesby. For 10 points, a Catholic takeover by means of hiring a cellar under the House of Lords and using iron bars and firewood to obscure thirty-six barrels was the objective of what Guy Fawkes-led plan to blow up the English Parliament?;;Gunpowder Plot
American Literature;;Painting plays a role in stories by this author such as "After Holbein" and "The Rembrandt". She pondered the morality of euthanasia in The Fruit of the Tree. Though World War I novels such as The Marne and A Son at the Front were flops, she found her niche writing about the society of New York in novels such as Hudson River Bracketed, The Buccaneers, The Custom of the Country, and a novel which features the characters Lawrence Selden and Lily Bart. For 10 points, name this American author who created Newland Archer for The Age of Innocence, wrote The House of Mirth, and had the main character crash a sled in Ethan Fromme.;;(Edith) Wharton
United States History;;An outbreak of malaria cut short the inaugural meeting of this body consisting of twenty-two members. It convinced George Yeardley to overturn a law imposed by Thomas Dale and later failed to gain the approval of Governor Fauquier when it adopted Patrick Henry's Stamp Act Resolves. Distinguished members included Captain Francis West and Reverend William Wickham. John Pory was the first designated secretary and speaker, presiding over a meeting with two representatives each from such plantations as Kiccowtan, Henricus, and James City. For 10 points, colonial Williamsburg today contains a replica of what 1619 representative assembly, the first such in America?;;House of Burgesses
Geography;;It is connected to Thredbo with a steel-mesh chairlift and walkway system constructed to allow sunlight to pass through to its plants. Surrounded by Townsend, North Ramshead, and Carruthers, this mountain is an excellent place from which to view Watsons Crags on Twynam. While studying Bogong moths in 1840, Paul Strzlecki became the first European to scale this mountain and named it. For 10 points, name this summit, an easy ascent via Charlotte Pass, which forms the highest point in the Snowy Mountains, the Great Dividing Range, and Australia.;;(Mount) Kosciuszko
Religion;;Called the "Precious Conqueror" in the native tongue, the common title for this position was coined by Altan Khan and means "ocean of wisdom" in Mongolian. The first was the abbot of Tashilhunpo, Gedun Drub, who was a disciple of Tsongkapa, founder of the Dge-lugs-pa or Yellow Hat order. When each one dies, the newest is selected by the oracle of Nechung. For 10 points, name this title that refers to the incarnations of Chenrezig and is currently held in exile in India by Jamphel Ngawang Lobsang Yeshe Tenzin Gyatso, the spiritual leader of Buddhists in Tibet.;;Dalai Lama
Music;;Formally entitled "Couplets," it marks the last time we hear from Sergeant Moralès. Written in modified binary form, each half opens with an extended solo by the baritone, singing about the spectacle and pageantry of the title occupation, before the remaining soloists and chorus join in, their refrain ending with the line "love awaits you". Beginning with the line "Votre toast je peux vous le rendre," it is the first appearance of Escamillo. For 10 points, name this song from Carmen about Escamillo's occupation.;;Toreador (song)
Physics;;It is dependent on the "snark" of Danilo Blanusa and constructs of Kittell and Errera. The Heawood conjecture can be used to show that it holds for all surfaces of genus 0, with the exception of the Klein bottle. Though Francis Guthrie proposed it in 1852, Kenneth Appel and Wolfgang Haken used a computer to prove it in 1976. For 10 points, name this theorem that states that any map can be painted using only a certain number of colors such that regions sharing a common boundary do not share a common color.;;Four-color (Theorem)
World History;;In this man's youth he was not above indiscretions like sleeping with Caligula's sister, nor above writing such satires as The Transformation of the Emperor Claudius into a Pumpkin. A practicing stoic whose precepts are found in such philosophic dialogues as On Anger, On Mercy, and On Leisure, he was nevertheless better known as a playwright synonymous with bloody revenge in such works as Thyestes and Hercules Insane. For 10 points, name this Roman philosopher and playwright from Cordoba, whose other role as advisor to Nero ultimately led to his execution, and who shares his name with an important constituent of the Iroquois League.;;Seneca (the) (younger)
Biology;;A more general version occurs in some cnidarians, parasitic flatworms, and the malaria parasite Plasmodium. Also known as metagenesis or heterogenesis, it can result in heteromorphic or isomorphic phases, as is the case with red algae. One of those phases can contain archegonia or antheridia, and, overall, it requires both the processes of syngamy and meiosis in ferns and liverworts. For 10 points, name the mechanism by which plants switch between the gametophyte and sporophyte forms, thus producing a haploid-diploid life cycle.;;Alternation of Generations
Music;;Previous recordings omitted a prominent percussion instrument or replaced it with an attacca on the drum. For several years in its composer's home country, Mikhail Glinka's "Glory" replaced "God Save the Tsar" at the end of this work, although La Marseillaise remained in this depiction of the victory at Borodino. For 10 points, name this piece scored for orchestra and a cannon, by Pyotr Tschaicovsky.;;1812 (overture)
Chemistry;;The McLeod gauge uses this law to measure the strength of a vacuum. Daniel Bernoulli derived it in his text on hydrodynamics, and this law was also shown by the French physicist Edme Mariotte. Derived from three years of experimenting with an air pump, it can be used to understand the mechanical functioning of the diaphragm in the human body. Derivable from the ideal gas equation by holding temperature and moles of gas constant, for 10 points, name this gas law stating that the pressure of a gas is inversely proportional to its volume, named for an English physicist.;;Boyle(s) (Law)
American Literature;;After editing Outcropping, a book of Western verse, he was appointed editor of the new Overland Monthly magazine. His poem "Plain language from Truthful James" was published accidentally and came to be known by the name "The Heathen Chinee" [chy-NEE] in the same year as he published East and West Poems. The title character tries to save his best friend from the noose in the town of Sandy Bar in "Tennessee's Partner," while the birth of the title character changes the lives of Stumpy and Kentuck in The "Luck of Roaring Camp," but he is best known for a story about John Oakhurst's exile in the company of two prostitutes and a drunken thief. For 10 points, name this writer known for "The Outcasts of Poker Flat".;;(Francis) (Bret) Harte
Physics;;An analogous device that emits ultraviolet radiation can be constructed using diamonds. In 1962, Nick Holonyak, Jr., of General Electric used gallium arsenide phosphide to successfully demonstrate its use. In the 1990's, Shuji Nakamura of Nichia found that indium gallium nitride could be used to make the elusive blue kind. For 10 points, name this solid-state technology that uses a biased semiconductor to achieve greater efficiency than incandescent or fluorescent illumination.;;L(ight) E(mitting) D(iode)
World History;;At first, it was threatened with extinction due to drought and wars with the native Grebo peoples. Originally conceived in 1821 when rights were granted to Cape Mesurado, it was not until its first governor, Jehudi Ashmun, had passed on, that Joseph Jenkins Roberts became the first black man in charge of this settlement. Its existence sparked a great debate between Frederick Douglass and Martin Delany about the relationship of black Americans to Africa, but its more recent history has been marked by constant strife much like that of its neighbor, Sierra Leone. For 10 points identify this nation whose capital can still be found at Monrovia.;;Liberia
Physics;;A G-line can be used to transmit it, and its non-ionizing nature means it cannot break bonds between atoms. C.L. Hogan invented a gyrator for it, the Suhl amplifier uses the instability of spin waves to amplify it, and the Gunn diode generates it. It is emitted by a magnetron at a frequency of 2.45 gigahertz in a common application. For 10 points, name this type of electromagnetic radiation that has a wavelength roughly between 0.3 and 30 centimeters, is amplified in a MASER, and is located between infrared radiation and UHF radio waves on the EM spectrum.;;Microwave
British Literature;;Minor characters in this play include the maidservant Paulina and the rogue Autolycus. Mamillius dies out of grief after his father attempts to discredit the oracle of Apollo who acquitted his wife of adultery with Polixenes. Polixenes' son Florizel falls in love with Mamillius' sister who as a baby was left in the care of a shepherd by Antigonus, who, shortly after, was killed by a bear. For 10 points, name this tragicomedy in which Perdita, Leontes and Hermione are reunited in the end, a work of William Shakespeare.;;(The) Winter's Tale
Psychology;;The Sperling experiments suggest that it can hold up to twelve items. It is subject to a type of interference called "backward masking," in which a new stimulus erases a previous one in the same place. It includes haptic, echoic and iconic components, and the process of attention can move information from it into working or short term memory. For 10 points, name this type of memory that captures stimuli for several seconds.;;Sensory (memory)
Mythology;;He is on occasion advised by the primordial god Nun, from whose mists he is said to have arisen. He created the pair of divinities Hu and Sia, representing thought and incantation, from the blood of his penis, and he created all humans with his tears. His three natures include Khephri in the morning and Atum at night, and he was forced to disclose his secret name to Isis in exchange for cure from snakebite. For 10 points name this Egyptian deity who must fend off the attacks of Apopis from his barge carrying the mid-day sun.;;(Amon-)Ra
European History;;It had outposts as far east as Novgorod and helped found such towns as Riga and Tallinn in the Baltic. Its successful naval campaign against King Waldemar IV culminated in the Treaty of Stralsund, which entitled it to fifteen percent of the profits from Danish trade. Developing as an extension of an alliance between Hamburg and Lubeck, this network had well over a hundred members and a strong trade monopoly until its collapse in the sixteenth century. For 10 points, name this medieval German league of merchant cities.;;Hanseatic League
Religion;;The most basic mantra of this religion is the Navkar, which includes the five bowings-down that will destroy all sins. Followers strive to cleanse the soul, or jiva, of accumulated karma in the process known as nirjara. Followers often carry a broom to sweep away insects in their path, so as to practice ahimsa. Chiefly divided into the Svetambara and Digambara sects is, for 10 points, what pacifistic religion of India?;;Jainism
United States History;;An incident leading up to it was the theft of General Jose Castro's horses, which was perpetrated by a band led by Ezekiel Merritt. Soon after, Merritt's men captured the house of Colonel Mariano Vallejo and worked with the Grigsby-Ide party in Sonoma to grant territorial control to the American settlers. For 10 points, identify this 1846 California independence uprising named after an ursine banner.;;Bear Flag (Revolt|Republic)
Chemistry;;The Goldmann-Hodgkin-Katz voltage equation for membrane potential reduces to it in the case of one ion. At standard state and with the use of a base-10 logarithm, the constant term in it comes out to about 0.0592, and it can be derived from the equation linking the free energy change of a reaction to its reaction quotient. Most often used in concentration cells with nonstandard cell potentials, for 10 points, name this equation of electrochemistry named for a famous formulator of the Third Law of Thermodynamics, the German winner of the 1920 Nobel Prize in Chemistry.;;Nernst (Equation)
World Literature;;He collaborated with Krishna Shah to write the play Sponono. Short stories such as "A Life for Life" and "Debbie Go Home" explore the struggles of people of mixed race, while "The Elephant Shooter" and "The Worst Thing of His Life," which are also found in the collection Tales from a Troubled Land, are vignettes that describe the staff of the Diepkloof reformatory. The policeman Pieter van Vlaanderen is highly respected until he has sex with a woman of color in Too Late the Phalarope, and in other works such as Ah, But Your Land is Beautiful he describes the pain of keeping a racially segregated community. Best known for a novel that tells the story of Steven Kumalo, for 10 points, name this South African author of Cry, the Beloved Country.;;(Alan) Paton
Astronomy;;Roughly 500 light years from earth, this white star cluster appears in the Taurus constellation from our perspective. From the northern hemisphere, it can be found above and to the right of Orion the Hunter. The four brightest stars within this cluster are Alcyone, Merope, Maia, and Electra. Two more can be seen with the naked eye, and another is visible beyond those with most backyard telescopes. For 10 points, what star cluster actually contains between 250 and 500 stars, despite being commonly called the Seven Sisters?;;Pleiades
Art;;In his last year alive, he completed The Fair Captive, which shows a tuba in front of an easel setup on a beach. The easel theme was also explored in his Call of the Peaks and The Human Condition, both of which feature images of painted canvases blending seamlessly into their background landscapes. He also painted a locomotive coming out of a fireplace in Time Transfixed and drew a pipe with the caption "This is not a pipe". For 10 points, name this Belgian surrealist whose The Son of Man depicted a man with an apple covering his face.;;(Rene) (Francois) (Ghislain) Magritte
European History;;A turning point occurred when both sides spotted a smoking merchant vessel and sent scouts to investigate. A previous engagement at Dogger Bank had taught one side that turrets were particularly vulnerable, knowledge used to sink the Invincible and Black Prince. Eventually, Hipper had to retreat from the shelling given by Beatty's forces and turned back to the coast where Jellicoe was waiting. However, through a combination of Scheer's tactical brilliance and bad weather, the Germans were able to escape from the Skagerrak at, for 10 points, what 1916 battle off the coast of Denmark, the chief naval engagement of World War I?;;(Battle) (of) Jutland
Math Theory;;The generalization of it named after Enrico Fermi can reduce to a covariant variety of it when the time-like curve on which it operates is geodesic, and its Schwarzian variety is used in chaos theory. The Lagrangian, or convective, variety uses the dot product of the gradient and the velocity of a fluid, and Faá di Bruno's formula gives an equation for the nth one of the composition f(g(t)) [eff of gee of tee]. Called a fluxion by Isaac Newton, its most common definition states it is the difference of a function at two values divided by the difference between those values as the difference approaches zero. For 10 points, name this operation, to which the power rule, chain rule, and quotient rule apply, a procedure which one might use to find the slope of a line tangent to a curve.;;Derivativ(e|ion){1}?
Philosophy;;He claims that Simmias the Theban has brought money to help and that the Thessalians will give his friend no trouble. After arriving at daybreak with news that the ship from Delos should arrive today, he argues that his friend's children will suffer by his death while his enemies will prosper. However, this man's arguments are refuted by appealing to an implied social contract. For 10 points, name this title figure of a Platonic dialogue, who tries to help Socrates escape from prison between the events of the Apology and Phaedo.;;Crito
Religion;;He became the senior member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles in 1835 and he gained his most important post when he returned to Winter Quarters in 1847. His adopted son John D. Lee led the Mountain Meadows Massacre eight years after he became the governor of the state of Deseret. For 10 points, name this father of forty-seven children with twenty wives, the second leader of the Mormons and namesake of a school in Provo.;;(Brigham) Young
Music;;Popular arias in this opera include the soprano "Caro nome," sung by a lovestruck Gilda before she is kidnapped by courtiers, and the tenor arias "Questa o quella" and "La donna è mobile," both of which celebrate the romantic flings of the Duke of Mantua. The plot is driven by a curse Monterone invokes upon the title character, whose daughter Gilda dies at the hands of the assassin Sparafucile. For 10 points, identify this Verdi opera about the tragedies that befall a court jester.;;Rigoletto
European Literature;;The protagonist gives a speech on Arms and Letters, and the reader learns about the shepherdess Marcela who does not reciprocate when Grisostomo falls in love with her. At the end, Sanson Carrasco knocks the title character off his horse, though the title character sees Sanson as the Knight of the White Moon and that skinny nag as the powerful Rocinante. For 10 points, name this novel in which the title character travels the countryside with his companion Sancho Panza in search of his love Dulcinea and fights some windmills, the masterpiece of Miguel de Cervantes.;;Don Quixote
Geography;;The government of this archipelago also administers Shag and Clerke rocks, South Georgia, and the South Sandwich Islands. This island group, whose highest point is Mount Usbourne at 2314 feet above sea level, consists of two main islands, the eastern one having the alternate name Soledad, and several hundred smaller islands, including Pebble, Sealion and Saunders. Penguin habitats and sheep farms dominate the landscape of this group. For 10 points, name this overseas territory of the United Kingdom, found three hundred miles to the east of the South American mainland and governed from Stanley, not Argentina.;;Falkland (Islands)
Physics;;The Mark-Houwink equation relates its intrinsic variety to molecular weight for certain polymers. One empirical measure of it is known as the Saybolt Universal variety, and Jeans' equation states that, in a gas, it is proportional to the temperature raised to a constant power. Usually calculated by dividing stress to shear strain, the kinematic variety can be multiplied by mass density to derive the absolute or dynamic variety, which is usually a collective measure of friction, adhesion, and cohesion. For 10 points name this quantity measured in units of either poise or stokes, the resistance to flow found in both gases and liquids.;;Viscosity
United States History;;In 1781, this Frenchman succeeded his father as head of the translation department at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, and in the following year Catherine the Great expelled him from Russia for his incessant enthusiasm for the French Revolution. Later in his life, he married the daughter of New York Governor George Clinton and became a farmer. For 10 points, identify this French emissary to the United States who conspired to entangle the United States in France's war with the British, given the nickname "Citizen" by his American supporters.;;(Edmond) (Citizen) (Genet)
American Literature;;His experience at Gaylord Farm, a tuberculosis sanatorium, influenced his play The Straw, and later in his life he worked on a cycle of plays known as "A Tale of Possessors Self-Dispossessed". Earlier works set on the S.S. Glencairn include The Dreamy Kid, Fog and Ile, and Bound East for Cardiff. The creator of Harry Hope's saloon and characters such as James Tyrone, he only wrote one comedy, Ah Wilderness!. For 10 points, name this American playwright behind dramas such as A Moon for the Misbegotten, The Hairy Ape, All God's Chillun Got Wings, Desire Under the Elms, and Long Day's Journey into Night.;;(Eugene) O'Neill
Economics;;Its relationship with output growth is considered under the "flexible-accelerator model". Due to globalization, the "foreign direct" kind of this may render obsolete the hypothesis that this quantity must equal savings in the long run. It is still known to change directly with change in inventory sales, and inversely with interest rates. For 10 points, name this most volatile component of the GDP, consisting of the purchase of new capital in the hope of generating future profit.;;Investment
Art;;A small bridge spanning the central brook in this painting separates the white buildings in the distant background from the stone ruins and the vast shrubbery that form the backdrop of the foreground scene. The only people depicted are a soldier in red, calmly holding a staff on the left side, and a half-nude woman in white on the right, nursing her baby on the riverbank. For 10 points, thunder flashes in the sky of what Giorgione painting, whose title refers to the background's brewing storm?;;(the) Tempest
Math Theory;;Its discoverer was a friend of Einstein who later constructed "rotating universe" solutions in which time travel could occur. The central idea of his most famous early work was an ingenious way of encoding mathematical statements in natural numbers. This sheds light on which statements can prove other statements. Such reasoning led to the downfall of Hilbert's quest for a complete, consistent axiomatic framework for mathematics. First published in On Formally Undecidable Propositions of Principia Mathematica and Related Systems, for 10 points, what is this theorem, which shows that in an axiomatic framework for the natural numbers there are always statements that can neither be proved nor disproved?;;Godel's Incompleteness Theorem
Religion;;Biblically, it was known as Shabbat Shabbaton and was the day in which the scapegoat was driven into the wilderness after the high priest made the yearly sacrifice in the Holy of Holies. On this day, many orthodox believers wear the kippelot or kittel, a white robe signifying purity. The evening services begin with Kol Nidre on this day, considered the time at which God's judgement is sealed in the book of Life. Meant for expiation of sins against God is, for 10 points, what conclusion of the High Holy Days in Judaism, the most important holiday on the Jewish calendar?;;Yom Kippur
European History;;Its contents were collected under oath by agents known as "legati" and it is composed of answers to a series of questions known as the Inquistio Elienis. Although it is still occasionally consulted to settle disputes involving genealogy, the original is usually passed over in favor of reprinted versions like the Victoria County Histories. This work attempted to ascertain the size, resources, and ownership of every plot of land belonging to the newly Norman nation. For 10 points, identify this product of a 1086 survey that helped William the Conqueror take stock of his kingdom.;;(Doomsday|Domesday){1}? Book
American Literature;;He lives in a mansion in Fauborg St. Germain with a rich young man he met in a bookstore. He takes the line "So funereal a design, if it is not worthy of Atreus, it is worthy of Thyestes" to describe the scheme of Minister D to hide a valuable object in plain sight, and he exonerates a French sailor named Le Bon from crimes committed by his pet, all to prove his superior intellect. For 10 points, identify this detective who solved "The Mystery of Marie Roget," "The Purloined Letter" and "The Murders in the Rue Morgue".;;(C. Auguste) Dupin
Biology;;Along with the floor plate, its structure is mediated by the sonic hedgehog gene. Comprised of a group of large cells within a firm connective tissue sheath, the length of its presence can vary in some organisms. Embryonically, it forms during gastrulation between the hypoblast and the epiblast from mesodermal cells, and it is later incorporated as the centers of the nuclei pulposi, or the intervertebral discs. Incompressible and crucial to nervous system development, for 10 points, name this longitudinal rod-like structural element present in all members of the phylum Chordata.;;Notochord
United States History;;Their biggest success came in disputes against the Wabash Railroad and Union Pacific, and this group, which made an effort to be inclusive of women and blacks, had over 700,000 members by 1886. Founded by a tailor named Uriah Stephens, it was later led by Terrence Powderly, until it collapsed due to backlash against its members for the Haymarket Square Riot. For 10 points, name this early labor union that eventually was replaced by the American Federation of Labor.;;Knights of Labor
Sociology;;His first fieldwork involved studying the Central Eskimos on Baffin Island. His "four field" approach divided his work into the study of human evolution, archaeology, language, and culture, and his writings include Anthropology and Modern Life and The Mind of Primitive Man. His students included Alfred Kroeber, Melville Herskovits, Zora Neale Hurston, Ruth Benedict, and Margaret Mead. For 10 points, name this "father of American anthropology" who began a noted doctoral program in the subject at Columbia.;;(Franz) Boas
Mythology;;At one point in this work the protagonist is swallowed by a giant while attempting to recover the magic words necessary to complete the construction of a ship, the third task necessary to woo the daughter of a notorious witch. The protagonist competes with the divine smith for the hand of that daughter, and then eventually joins forces with him and the warrior-hero to recover an object originally made for the witch by Ilmarinen. In the end, Marjatta swallows a cranberry that leads to an immaculate conception, causing the protagonist to sail away. For 10 points, name this work about Väinämöinen's quest to recover the Samppo, the national epic of Finland.;;(The) Kalevala
Chemistry;;Its namesake discovered the oxidation of sugars to saccharic acid, and this law was discovered in experiments with sulfuric acid. Essentially a consequence of the first law of thermodynamics, its importance in chemistry arises due to the fact that unlike heat and work, energy changes are state functions. Generally known as a law of summation, for 10 points, name this law stating that the heat absorbed or evolved in a chemical reaction is independent of the path of the reaction taken, named for a Swiss-Russian scientist.;;Hess(s) (Law)
Music;;Francis Poulenc wrote two sets of four of these works, for both Lent and Christmas. Thomas Tallis's Spem in Alium (spem een AH lee oom) is an extended one for eight five-part a cappella choruses. Among Anton Bruckner's best-known works in this genre are "Ecce sacerdos" (EH chay sa CHAIR dohs) and "Os justi" (ohs YOO stee). In medieval times, they were typified by a discant singing over a cantus firmus, often in separate languages. Their modern connotation developed in Renaissance times, when they became the religious counterpart of the madrigal. For 10 points, identify this musical genre whose five-letter name is derived from the Latin for "to move" or the French for "word".;;Motet
Mythology;;Folklore in the Italian city of Siena attributes the founding of the city to this man's son Sienus. His capture during the Lupercalia rites of 753 BCE led to the discovery of his true identity by Numitor. One legend says that he was killed after jumping over the low walls built by his brother, while another says that he was angry after only six vultures flew over his head. For 10 points, name this son of Mars who was placed by the Tiber as an infant along with his brother Romulus.;;Remus
Biology;;Its effective radiational temperature is known as the ertor, and an anomaly of scattered sunlight known as Umkehr effect is caused by its presence. In the 1930s, Sidney Chapman demonstrated how it could be formed, though it was discovered two decades earlier by the Frenchmen Henri Buisson and Charles Fabry. Located between the altitudes of 10 and 50 kilometers, NIMBUS 7 detected a 3% decrease in its concentration since 1978. For 10 points, name this region in the atmosphere that keeps most of the solar ultraviolet radiation from reaching the earth.;;Ozone Layer
World Literature;;Francois Mauriac influenced this author's early novel Thirst for Love. His plays include Tenth Day Chrysanthemum and his final work, Moon Like a Drawn Bow, which ends in ritualistic suicide. He showed ultra-conservative tendencies in the works Sun and Steel and My Friend Hitler, though he is better known for books such as The Sailor Who Fell from Grace with the Sea and a book in which he explored his sexuality, Confessions of a Mask. For 10 points, name this Japanese author who committed suicide by seppuku in 1970, the author of The Sea of Fertility tetralogy and The Temple of the Golden Pavilion.;;(Yukio) Mishima
United States History;;Its vague terms demanded that neither party "occupy, ... fortify, ... colonize, or assume or exercise any dominion over" the region in question, despite the fact that one of the signatories maintained control over the Mosquito Coast and the Bay Islands. It was drafted to ensure that neither of the two signers dominate the services of a putative engineering process, though public opinion led to its abrogation in 1901 in favor of the Hay-Pauncefote Treaty. For 10 points, name this agreement by which the US and England agreed to share a potential Panama Canal.;;Clayton-Bulwer (Treaty)
Music;;Its three styles are jondo, intermedio, and chico. The "alboreás" form is seen at weddings, while the "martinetes" incorporates a hammer and anvil. Using the "palo seco," a stick used to create a rhythm on the floor, it includes the interpretive footwork known as "zapateado," the solo passages called "solea," and the transcendent state of "duende". For 10 points, name this style of dance that sometimes blends with fandango, originating in India and brought to Spain by migrating Roma.;;Flamenco
British Literature;;He created portraits of himself and his wife in the characters Richard and Harriet Somers in the hastily written novel Kangaroo, and he wrote tales such as "The Fox," "The Captain's Doll," and "The Virgin and the Gipsy". He explored the theme of "bullying" shortly thereafter in a novel about Aaron Sisson entitled Aaron's Rod, and he explored the eroticism of the cult of Quetzacoatl in The Plumed Serpent, but better known are his novels about the Brangwen family. For 10 points, name this author of The Rainbow, Women in Love, and Sons and Lovers.;;(D(.)(avid)) (H(.)(erbert)) Lawrence
Chemistry;;With Georg Bredig, he researched the transition metals, and a device invented by Wilhelm Pfeffer is based on his work as well. Independently of J.A. le Bel, he proposed that carbon has a tetrahedral structure. His namesake isochore relates the equilibrium constant to temperature, while his magnum opus Studies in Chemical Dynamics described new methods for finding orders of reactions and introduced the concept of chemical affinity. Also the formulator of an equation relating osmotic pressure to membrane potential and temperature, for 10 points, name this Dutch winner of the first Nobel Prize in Chemistry.;;(Jacobus) (henricus) van't Hoff
British Literature;;A commotion is caused in this novel when the protagonist throws away a copy of Sir Walter Scott's The Lay of the Last Minstrel after reading a disturbing passage. The drab state of the protagonist's army uniform leads to his adopting the nickname "Plain Buttons," which sticks until he dies on the Levant. His defiance shocks Colonel Morgan during his trial, which leads him to be set adrift on naval ships with a letter instructing the officers not to mention a certain place. For 10 points, name this novel about Philip Nolan  by Edward Everett Hale.;;(The) Man Without a Country
Geography;;Flanked on its north side by its eponymous five lakes, it is found at the confluence of the Eurasian, Okhotsk and Philippine plates and overlooks the Hakone forest region and Saruga Bay. The whole formation is named from a word meaning "everlasting life". For 10 points, Hoei-zan [hoh-AY-zan] is the newest of eight peaks on what mountain located on the border of Yamanashi and Shizuoka prefectures, the highest point in Japan?;;(Mount) Fuji
Geology;;Ulrich Grubenmann divided their zones of formation into the epizone, mesozone, and katazone, while Theodor Kjerulf and Karl Rosenbusch made key discoveries about them. Pelitic, calcareous, felsic, and mafic refer to the chemical composition of this general class, but the actual number of minerals they contain is limited by the laws of thermodynamics. They can also be classified structurally into mylonites, cataclastites, hornfels, gneiss, and schist. For 10 points, name this classification of rocks which, due to intense pressure or temperature, transform.;;Metamorphic (rocks)
World History;;In The Myth of the Birth of the Hero¸ psychologist Otto Rank makes much of the similarities between the legends of Romulus, Moses, and this man, who was supposed to have been placed in a basket by his priestess mother and rescued from the Euphrates by the gardener Akki. Eventually rising through his own merits to become royal cupbearer of King Ur-Zababa of Kish, he took the throne himself and destroyed Lugalzagesi of Uruk. For 10 points name this ancient ruler and soldier, whose grandson and successor Naram-Sin assumed the throne of both Agade and the Akkadian Empire he had built.;;Sargon (I|the First|the Great)
Mythology;;This god survived the change of religions in his land of origin, becoming a Yazata who rode a chariot pulled by white horses and had ten thousand eyes and ears. He was venerated in artificial caves that commemorated his place of birth, and the central act of his mythology is the creation of plants and animals from the blood of a beast. For 10 points, name this patron of contracts and god of light in the pre-Zoroastrian pantheon of Iran, whose slaying of the diving bull became the object of a cult in Rome.;;Mithra(s)
World History;;Also known as the "Nizaris," their most important fortress was called Alamut. The Syrian branch was eventually subjugated by Baybars, while Hulagu Khan destroyed their Persian sect. Led by a man known as "the Old Man of the Mountain," one of their most prominent enemiess was the vizier of Malik Shah, Nizam al-Mulk. They were organized by Hassan al-Shabbah into strict classes, the most important of which were the "devotees" who were treated to nights of great pleasure. For 10 points, identify this secret sect of opiate-abusing Ismaili warriors and masterful killers, whose name is now used to identify politically motivated murderers.;;Assassins
United States History;;Tipped off by Canadian allies, he repelled a siege at the fight of Bloody Bridge, a few years after he confronted Major Robert Rogers of New Hampshire near Cleveland. He made peace with Sir William Johnson at a meeting in Oswego, after earlier capturing eight out of twelve garrisons including St. Joseph, Venango, Miami, and Sandusky as part of a planned conspiracy. He failed in his goal of taking Detroit, but, for 10 points, name this man who succeedws in prompting such measures as the Proclamation of 1763 by leading a rebellion as the chief of the Ottawa against encroachment on Indian land.;;Pontiac
Chemistry;;The compound lachesne, used in ophthalmology, crystallizes from a solution of acetone and this substance. The Dean-Stark apparatus is often used to remove it azeotropically from mixtures, and benzene is used to obtain this substance in its purest form, as the benzene allows water to be removed. A major by-product of the Fischer-Tropsch process, the Acetobacter genus of bacteria oxidizes it into acetic acid, and a namesake hydrogenase enzyme converts it into acetylaldehyde in the liver. For 10 points, name this chemical often used as a solvent with formula C2H5OH, which can be produced via the fermentation of hexose sugars and imbibed.;;Ethanol
British Literature;;Critics such as Spender and MacNeice claim that it prophesizes the rise of fascism, though Jon Stallworthy showed that the poet removed allusions to the Russian Revolution and World War I. A "vast image out of Spiritus Mundi troubles" the speaker's sight, and a "blood-dimmed tide is loosed" during the titular event. Originally published in the collection Michael Robartes and the Dancer, it begins, "turning and turning in the widening gyre, the falcon cannot hear the falconer". The source of the title for Achebe's Things Fall Apart, for 10 points, name this poem which asks "what rough beast, its hour come round at last, slouches towards Bethlehem to be born," a work by William Butler Yeats which alludes to the return of Christ.;;(The) Second Coming
Music;;Such works as Legend of the Invisible City of Kitezh were inspired by his voyage on the Almaz. He edited Mussorgsky's works for publication and created Le Coq d'Or. The composer of the operas The Tsar's Bride and The Tale of Tsar Saltan, his Fantasy on Serbian Themes inspired Vladimir Stasov to proclaim that Russia had "a mighty heap" of native composers. For 10 points, name this composer of Capriccio Espagnol, Scheherezade, and The Flight of the Bumblebee.;;(Nikolai) Rimsky-Korsakov
World History;;The first one created the Military Staff Committee, and three of the first five were concerned with "the Iranian question". Number 85 allowed the Republic of Korea to defend against foreign attacks, number 687 defined "weapons of mass destruction," number 478 addressed the status of Jerusalem, and number 794 created a task force for the Somalian conflict. To pass one of these, at least nine members of the issuing body including all five of the permanent members must approve. For 10 points, name these directives issued by the most powerful body within the United Nations.;;(United Nations) Security Council Resolution(s)
American Literature;;In the final act of this work, a main character cries that "the world is lit by lightning" and that "time is the longest distance between two places," indicating that he must blow out a metaphorical candle to rid himself of the memories of his sibling. Instead of learning to be a typist, that sibling wanders to a greenhouse named the Jewel Box, even though she wears a bulky brace on her leg. Her teenage crush, Jim O'Connor, comes over and they dine by candlelight, but he accidentally breaks her heart when he reveals he is engaged and breaks her favorite figurine, a unicorn. For 10 points, Amanda goads Tom Wingfield into finding his shy sister Laura a "gentleman caller" in what play by Tennessee Williams?;;(the) Glass Menagerie
Astronomy;;Corkscrew jets of particles are seen on the rotation axes of its magnetic field, and a transition in these jets marks the location of the optical feature known as its "sprite". Its name sometimes lends itself to a unit of flux density used by X-ray astronomers, and Virginia Trimble determined that it is located 6,300 light years from the Earth. The remnants of the 1054 supernova CM Tauri, it got its faunal name from an inaccurate 1844 sketch of it done by William Parsons, a.k.a. Lord Rosse. For 10 points, name this stellar object located in the constellation Taurus, Messier Object 1, which has a name better suited to the constellation Cancer.;;Crab Nebula
World History;;He became popular after defeating Greece in the Battle of the Sakarya. Enunciating "Six Arrows" for his Republican People's Party, he refused to acknowledge the Treaty of Sevres, and he forced European powers to acknowledge his nation in the Treaty of Lausanne after a successful campaign in Anatolia and his ouster of Muhammad VI, which ended the rule of the sultanate. For 10 points, name this man who became the first president of Turkey in 1923.;;(Mustafa) Kemal|Ataturk
Mythology;;In the Vedas, her name is used for the black tongue of Agni. As a classical Hindu god, her upper left hand holds a bloody sword, and her lower left hand holds the severed head of a demon. Unlike Shiva, her skin is black, and she is often depicted dancing on a dead body. She wears a necklace of human skulls that may correspond to letters of the Sanskrit alphabet, and the Thuggee cult was devoted to her. For 10 points, name this Hindu goddess of destruction, depicted with wild eyes and protruding tongue.;;Kali
European History;;After his fall, he was installed as the puppet ruler of the Social Republic at Saló. Once expelled from Switzerland for vagrancy, he returned home to Forli and became the editor of the Socialist newspaper Avanti!. He later ran Il Popolo D'Italia and nurtured a grudge against the Socialists for expelling him. His "fighting bands" stuck together like the rods and axes carried by the lictors in ancient Rome that gave his party a name. Solidifying his power in the Matteoti Crisis and March on Rome was, for 10 points, what leader of the Fascist party who led Italy into World War II?;;(Benito) Mussolini
American Literature;;A year after its publication, its author wrote a "key" to this novel to document the real-life sources of the events described and refute disbelievers. In the novel itself, Mr. Loker reforms his ways after being healed by Quakers. Earlier, Topsy is given to Ophelia to help Ophelia overcome her prejudices, and Augustine St. Clare is killed in an attempt to settle a brawl. The title character's fate is sealed when he refuses to reveal the whereabouts of Emmeline and Cassy. Ending with the title character getting beaten to death by Quimbo and Sambo, the overseers of Simon Legree, is for 10 points, what landmark work by Harriet Beecher Stowe?;;Uncle Tom's Cabin
Chemistry;;The cathecol group is a kind of these molecules that has two adjacent hydroxyl groups, and Korner's method is used to determine the absolute position of substituents in them. The Friedel-Crafts reaction adds an acyl group to this compound, and it can be reduced by the Birch reduction. An isomer of fulvene, it tends to undergo substitution reactions because of its stability, which arises from delocalized pi orbitals. The simplest compound to fit Huckel's rules, its structure was a puzzle to 19th-century chemists until Kekulé realized that it could have a ring shape. For 10 points, name this compound with formula C6H6, the simplest aromatic hydrocarbon.;;Benzene
Mythology;;To the Polynesians, this was Tama Nui-Te-Ra and was captured by Maui. Yi the Archer shot nine disobedient ones in Chinese myth, leaving just one. Deities of it include Tsoanohai to the Navajos, Malina in Greenland, Inti to the Inca, Shamash in Sumer, and Amaterasu in Japan. For 10 points, name this object that, in Greek myth, is carried by the chariot of Helios.;;(the) Sun
European History;;Its second version lasted for forty years before falling apart after a defeat by Philip of Macedon. In its initial incarnation, administrative tasks were conducted in the temple of Apollo, but after failed secession attempts by Thasos and Naxos and an invasion by Spartan allies, this group's treasury was moved to the Acropolis. For 10 points, what group, originally formed as an alliance against Persia and later becoming the Athenian Empire, was named for the island that served as its initial headquarters?;;Delian (League)
Physics;;Both are applications of Ostrogradsky's theorem, also known as the divergence theorem, and one is the electrostatic equivalent of Ampere's law. One of them is often derived using the solid-angle approach with Coulomb's Law, and the other disproves the existence of magnetic monopoles. Used to show that there cannot be an electric field inside an uncharged Faraday cage and expressed in differential form as del dot D equals rho and del dot B equals zero, for 10 points, what is the collective name of these two Maxwell's equations, which are themselves named for a German mathematician?;;Gauss' (Laws)
European History;;His chief agents were Alvise Cadamosto and Diogo Gomes. He was a distinguished fighter in the capture of Ceuta from the Moors and sponsored another successful campaign in Morocco in 1458. However, he spent more attention sending agents to the Madeira Islands, Cape Bojador, and Cape Blanco. His men colonized the Azores and began to push deeper into Africa, establishing a base at his school at Sagres. For 10 points, name this son of King Joao I, Portuguese royal known for his patronage of explorers.;;(Prince) Henry the Navigator;;(Prince) Henry
Biology;;One model for it is W.L. Brown's centrifugal model, in which it occurs outwardly from an epicenter. Early models for it included Ernst Mayr's vicariant model, which Richard Goldschmidt opposed, positing a "bridgeless gap" analogy in which it can only occur via "a fundamental reordering of chromosomal patterns". Mayr later developed the peripatric model for it, which is based on the founder effect as a method of physically separating two populations, just as a mountain range's development or a lake's drying out may cause it. For 10 points, name this splitting of one species into multiple species as a result of geographical separation of populations, the opposite of sympatric speciation.;;Allopatric Speciation;;speciation
Geography;;It is separated from the mainland to the east by the Kerch Strait, connected to the north by the Isthmus of Perekop, and indented on the west by the Bays of Karkinit and Kalamita. It is mostly steppe, with the Alpine Meadow Mountains running parallel to the forested coastline that contains the resort of Sudak. For 10 points, the Sea of Azov and Black Sea affront what Ukrainian peninsula, whose major cities include Symferopol, Yalta, Sevastopol, and Balaclava?;;Crimea(n) (Peninsula)
British Literature;;At one point in this novel the protagonist is put in the charge of an old hag named Ulrica, who helps him escape Torquilstone by starting a fire. He takes the disguise of the Disinherited Knight at a tournament in Ashby, which he wins with the help of the Black Sluggard. Sir Bois-Guilbert runs off with Rebecca and charges her with witchcraft, a charge that is dropped upon his defeat by the title character. King Richard then retakes the throne, and the title character is reconciled with his father, Cedric the Saxon, and his ward. For 10 points, name this Sir Walter Scott novel in which the title hero marries Rowena.;;Ivanhoe
Philosophy;;Leading figures in this sect include Demetrius and Crates (CRAY-teez) of Thebes. Bion of Borysthenes created the form of the "diatribe" for them, inspiring the Christian sermon. Like the Stoics, they believed in suppression of desire as part of a virtuous life, and their unconventional manners led to the dog being a symbol of them. For 10 points, living in a bathtub and carrying a lantern through Athens searching for an honest man were typical actions of what group performed by its prominent member Diogenes?;;Cynic(ism)
Astronomy;;One can use Kruskal coordinates to describe these objects when they fit the Reissner-Nordstrom solution, and they can be formed when an object surpasses the Oppenheimer-Volkoff limit. Carter's theorem states that only the Kerr-Newman metric is correct for describing a spinning charged one. Its temperature is inversely proportional to its mass and its entropy is proportional to its surface area. Laplace was one of the first people to conceive of the idea, but it was Schwarzschild who understood them in terms of relativity and John Wheeler who named them. For 10 points, what are these objects formed when stars collapse, from which light cannot escape?;;Black Hole
United States History;;Their death knell came with the dismal failure of a joint president ticket with the Anti-Monopoly Party that saw Benjamin Butler finish a distant third in the election of 1884. Formed as a reaction to the Panic of 1873, it established a platform advocating the mass production of currency, and nominated Peter Cooper for president in 1876 and future Populist James Weaver in 1880. For 10 points, identify this American political party that took its name from a popular slang term for paper money.;;Greenback(-Labor) (Party)
Art;;A small patch of white flowers in the lower left foreground provides a contrast to the dismal background and may represent the purity of the title character. Just above the flowers, a child, most likely John the Baptist, kneels in a praying position and holds a thin, elongated cross between his arms. On the right, the angel Uriel sits with the baby Jesus, while the title character sits in the center in a brilliant blue and gold dress that blends seamlessly into the darkness of the background through the artist's use of his trademark sfumato. For 10 points, name this Leonardo da Vinci painting of Mary in a stone-filled cave.;;Madonna of the Rocks
World Literature;;The final one tells of Juan Dahlmann, who just wants to read The Thousand and One Nights, but is goaded into a fight. Another describes "The Sect of the Phoenix, and still another describes the ordering of Herbert Quain's works. Divided into two sections that were originally published separately, this 1944 work also discusses the characters Funes, who can never forget anything, and Pierre Menard, the true author of Don Quixote. Better known parts include "The Library of Babel" and "The Circular Ruins". For 10 points, identify this work that begins with "Tlon, Uqbar, Orbis, Tertius," a collection of short stories by Jorge Luis Borges.;;Ficciones|Fictions
American Literature;;The narrator senses doom is afoot as the clouds hang "oppressively low" and the day is "dull, dark, and soundless". The main characters have recently been recognized for their charitable deeds as they hope to absolve themselves of their "family evil". That evil, incest, causes one character to suffer from catalepsy. Mistaking this condition for death, Madeline's brother puts her in a sealed coffin, from which she escapes. This frightens Roderick so much that he dies along with his sister, ending his family's line and causing the Narrator to flee from the title building. For 10 points, name this gothic short story by Edgar Allen Poe in which the title edifice literally collapses into a mountain lake.;;(The) Fall of the House of Usher
United States History;;He asserted, "Democracy can not be shot into a nation. It must come spontaneously and purely from within". The phrases "Do not submit to intimidation," and "Assert your Rights" also adorned his allegations that the exemption for Quakers constituted discrimination and that the Conscription Act violated the Thirteenth Amendment. Such claims were contained in a mass mailing that sparked his conviction for conspiracy to violate the Espionage Act by urging draftees to dodge World War I. Justice Holmes opined that such actions constituted a "clear and present danger". For 10 points, identify the defendant in this case, in which wartime dissent was compared to "shouting fire in a crowded theater".;;Schenck (vs. United States)
World History;;The last year of his rule was disrupted when a group called the Gang of Eight tried to depose him in the August Coup. His accomplishments include the return of democratic selection in creating the Congress of People's Deputies, the signing of the INF arms limitation treaty and building diplomatic relationships with such leaders as Pierre Trudeau and Margaret Thatcher. After succeeding Konstantin Chernenko, he initiated liberal reforms in his country through programs he called glasnost and perestroika. For 10 points, name this Soviet leader who presided over the end of the Cold War.;;(Mikhail) Gorbachev
Chemistry;;The Vigreaux column, a long glass tube with indentations in it, was formerly used in this process, and a dephlegmator [dih-FLEG-meh-tor] is used for cooling during it. Laboratory versions of this process often use Fenske helices, Raschig Rings, ceramic chips, steel wool, or coiled class pipes called Liebig condensers to provide a greater surface area for condensation. Performed in large towers at refineries to separate petroleum into its components by exploiting their different boiling points, for 10 points, name this process by which a mixture of volatile liquids is separated into its components.;;Fractional Distillation;;Distillation
Religion;;One division of them labels each garbha-dhatu, in which many things become one, or a vajra-dhatu, which reverses the process. A common type is surrounded by four layers: the ring of fire, the girdle of diamonds, the circle of graveyards, and the lotus leaves. Often found in tanka paintings, a stone one forms a stupa at Borobudur, where one can walk the path from its outside inward that represents the cosmic cycle. For 10 points, the Sanskrit for "circle" names what often-impermanent construct used to contemplate the universe in Buddhism?;;Mandala
British Literature;;In letters to its author, both Stephane Mallarme and Maurice Maeterlinck expressed their appreciation while William Butler Yeats called its dialogue sluggish. Because of a law prohibiting theatrical presentations of biblical figures, it was written in French. Foreshadowing is a major player as a Page announces his interest in the Moon as if it were a woman rising from a tomb, while the Syrian describes it as wearing a yellow veil and dancing feet of silver. For 10 points, name this play by Oscar Wilde about the titular Princess who is killed by her stepfather Herod upon the death of the prophet Jokannan, or John the Baptist.;;Salome
United States History;;Later in life, this politician tried to establish a communal farm in Watkinsville, Georgia, but soon after that failed this former Representative returned to the national consciousness when a namesake "Brigade" marched on Washington to protest U.S. involvement in Vietnam. That stance against military aggression was consistent with this Republican's earlier decision to cast the lone dissenting vote against declaring war against Japan in 1940. Other policies pushed by this tireless activist include mediating a bitter copper strike in Montana, her home state. For 10 points, identify this first woman elected to the U.S. Congress.;;(Jeanette) Rankin
Physics;;Its adhesional variety in holding paper to plotter beds is similar to the fracture energy of class, and the area under any reversible path on the pressure-volume plane of a process is equal to it. For a body rotating on a fixed axis, it is equal to the magnitude of the torque times the angle rotated. Equal to the line integral of a variable force acting on a body over the path taken by a body, for 10 points, name this quantity which is defined as the product of the component of a force in the direction of the body's motion and the distance the body moved, given in units of Newton-meters.;;Work
Music;;Pogner's daughter is offered as the grand prize in the central contest, among whose participants are the snooty town clerk Beckmesser and the newcomer and knight Walther [VAHL tur]. Although not a member of the title guild, Hans Sachs [zahks], who is secretly in love with Eva, assists both Walther and David [DAH veed]. Having stolen Walther's entry, Beckmesser stumbles badly in delivery and flees in embarrassment, freeing Walther to win the contest and Eva's hand in marriage. For 10 points, identify this only comedy by Wagner, named for the guild whose members competed in verse and melody.;;(Die) Meistersinger (von N(ü|u){1}?rnberg)|(The) Mastersingers (of Nuremberg)
Religion;;In early manuscripts, it breaks off suddenly in Chapter 16, verse 8, with the words "for they were afraid". The King James and many other versions finish this book with another twelve verses, one of which mentions that believers will be safe when drinking poison or handling snakes. Its unique features include a theme of Jesus refusing to call himself the Messiah, instead using the "Son of Man" term, and language targeted at Roman converts. For 10 points, name this shortest of the synoptic gospels and book that devotes the most space to the Passion, traditionally placed second in the New Testament.;;Mark
Geology;;Tachylite is also known as the basalt variety of it, while marekanite is a rounded version of it found in masses of perlite. A namesake hydration method uses it for chemical dating, and alternate names for it include hyalopsite, mountain mahogany, and Iceland agate. The presence of iron or magnesium gives it a dark green to black color, while cristobalate crystals produce snowflake-like patterns. For 10 points, name this naturally occurring glass formed from the cooling of lava which derives its jet-black color is from an abundance of crystallites.;;Obsidian
United States History;;One of the primary negotiators involved in it was Madame de Villette, who communicated through an American banker named Pierre Bellamy and Swiss citizens Lucien Hauteval and Jean Conrad Hottinguer. After this incident, Elbridge Gerry was the only American envoy to continue his interest in negotiations, with John Marshall returning to America and Charles Pinckney outright refusing Talleyrand's request for a bribe. For 10 points, identify this early American diplomatic controversy named for the code names of the three members of the French delegation.;;XYZ (affair)
Art;;Three shadowy stone arches form the backdrop of this painting, with light falling on two women sitting on the right: one in a plain white shawl and the other in red, blue and gold, both facing each other and weeping. A third woman behind them in the shadows cries and hunches over two small children. The main action shows a man in red holding out three swords as a trio of soldiers reaches out towards them. For 10 points, identify this Jacques-Louis David work depicting the titular brothers swearing allegiance to Rome.;;Oath of the Horatii
World Literature;;He became a low-grade government official as a result of the publication of his patriotic "Ode to Liberty," but he was sent to a remote province to keep him out of the way. While in exile he wrote such poems as "Count Nulin" and "The Gypsies" and began work on a long poem about love between the titular urbane dandy and Tatyana Larin. His dramatic works include The Feast in the Time of the Plague, The Water Nymph and The Covetous Knight, although better known are The Stone Guest and a play concerning a Boyar during the Time of Troubles. For 10 points, name this Russian writer of Boris Godunov and Eugene Onegin.;;(Alexander) Pushkin
Biology;;The molecule CA1P strongly inhibits a key enzyme in this process that is regulated by the presence of thioredoxin enzymes. Often taking place in pyrenoids, one of its starting substrates is replenished by the action of aldolase on a molecule of DHAP and a molecule of Gald3, and at one point in it, glyceraldehyde phosphate dehydrogenase reduces 1,3-bisphosphate. The Hatch-Slack pathway sometimes provides it with carbon dioxide, which is then fixed to ribulose bisphosphate by the action of the enzyme rubisco, eventually producing a molecule of glucose-6-phosphate after two "turns". For 10 points, name this series of reactions which gets NADPH and ATP from the light reactions of photosynthesis, fixes carbon to form starch, and takes place in the chloroplasts of plants.;;Calvin (Cycle)
World History;;They wore belts that were sewn collectively by a thousand women to show support. Although there were supposed to be special okha or "cherry blossoms" built for them, the exigencies of the engagement pressed regular craft into service. The first recorded one struck off the coast of New Guinea and they were more effective than their underwater counterparts called "heaven shifter" or kaiten. Primarily deployed during the encounters at Leyte Gulf and Okinawa, these forces had a name meaning "divine wind" and emulated the Banzai charges of the Japanese infantry. For 10 points, give this term that names the Japanese suicide air force during World War II.;;Kamikaze(s)
Music;;They can be found at the entrance to the catacombs of St. Sebastian, around the Piazza di Siena, and at the site of a World War II atrocity in the Fosse Ardeatine caves. All of those directly inspired passages in this work, which opens with a portrait of "ring-around-the-rosy" at the Villa Borghese. The score goes on to call for medieval brass instruments in the finale and a tape of a nightingale near the Janiculum in the third movement. For 10 points, name this Ottorino Respighi piece, the sequel to a work about fountains.;;(the) Pines of Rome
Biology;;It receives input and output via large bundles known as peduncles and groups of mossy fibers. Cells found within it include Golgi cells, whose dendrites receive input from parallel fibers, and Lugaro cells, which are found beneath the Purkinje cells. The Marr-Albus model suggests "synaptic plasticity" or long-term depression as a physiological mechanism. For 10 points, the "muscle memory" of repeated motions is thus controlled by what structure located directly above the brainstem of vertebrates, which plays a critical role in the control of movement?;;Cerebellum
Mythology;;Famous ones in Celtic myth include Caladbolg, the property of Fergus Mac Roeg, as well as Fragarach the "Answerer," which had belonged to Nuada of the Silver Hand and Lugh of the Long Arm. Gram is the feared instrument of the Volsungs, while Durindal was once owned by Hector of Troy and had been used to commit suicide by Ajax the greater before coming into the hands of Roland. For 10 points, these are examples of what type of weapon whose most famous representative in myth, bestowed by the Lady of the Lake, is likely Excalibur?;;Sword
United States History;;Speaker of the House Champ Clark and Alabama's Oscar Underwood were runners-up in Baltimore, while the Democratic ticket featured the governor of Indiana as the vice presidential nominee with the governor of New Jersey as his running mate. Minor third party competition came from Eugene Chafin, in his second run with the Prohibition Party, as well as the fourth and final Socialist ticket headed by Eugene Debs. The Republican incumbent lost his bid for re-election, due to a challenge by his predecessor, who finished second with the Progressive Party. For 10 points, identify this presidential election that saw William Taft and Theodore Roosevelt lose to Woodrow Wilson.;;(Election) (of) 1912|(The) 1912 Election
British Literature;;His first poem, "The Masquerade" was published under the pseudonym Lemuel Gulliver, and he continued this theme of disguise in his early comedy Love in Several Masques. William Booth lives with the title character in his last novel, Amelia, and he fictionalized the life of a master criminal in his 1743 novel Jonathan Wild. He created memorable characters such as Lady Booby in a novel whose title character is thought to be the brother of another author's epistolary heroine. For 10 points, name this English author of Joseph Andrews who mocked Richardson in Shamela and wrote about Squire Allworthy's relationship with a foundling in Tom Jones.;;(Henry) Fielding
World History;;Two of the last struggles were led by guerilla leaders Te Kooti in the East Cape region and Titokowaru in the Taranaki region. The largest phase came in 1863-1864 with the Waikato Wars, which saw the British ship in thousands of Australian militiamen as allies. A series of violent reactions by natives to the failure of European colonists to honor the terms of the Treaty of Waitangi, for 10 points, what was the collective name for these military conflicts named after the indigenous people of New Zealand?;;Maori (War(s))
European Literature;;In book two of James Joyce's A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man, Stephen Dedalus expresses his love for this book. In this novel, the Count de Morcerf is exposed for betraying Ali Pacha and selling Ali's wife and daughter into slavery. One of the protagonist's enemies is convicted for attempted infanticide, and the bandit Luigi Vampa kidnaps Danglars and takes his money. For 10 points, a man sent to the Chateau D'If for being a Bonapartist abandons the identity of Edmond Dantes in what Alexandre Dumas novel?;;(The) Count of Monte Cristo
Geography;;Its central basin is known as "the cuvette," and its navigable portion begins at Kisangani. It receives the Luapula and Lualaba Rivers, from whose effluence at Boyoma Falls this river receives its name. Further downstream, following the addition of the Ubangi River, is the Pool Malebo, a widening of this river near two national capitals shortly before it tumbles over the Livingstone Falls on its way to the Atlantic Ocean. For 10 points, name this second longest river in Africa, which forms part of the boundary between a namesake "Republic" and "Democratic Republic".;;Congo (River)
Physics;;The Stanton or Margoulis number studies one variety of this process, and the Colburn j factor equation calculates its natural variety for vertical surfaces or horizontal cylinders. The Nusselt equation calculates it for the heating or cooling of fluids outside rows of tubes perpendicular to fluid flow. For 10 points, exchange between a surface and a fluid flowing over the surface is the process of what nonradiant heat transfer method in which actual physical movement of a substance takes place, an example of which is warm air filling a room?;;Convection
World History;;Deities of this culture included Itzamna, who held sway over writing and divination, and Chac, a rain god. The screech owl Muan was one of the deities of its underworld, a place where all humans who died peaceful deaths went. That underworld, Xibalba (sheh-BALL-buh), was the site of the outwitting of the dark deities by the hero twins, Xbalanque (sheh-buh-LAHN-kwey) and Hunahpu. For 10 points, the Popul Vuh is the mythical text of what Meso-American people who worshipped their gods at temples in Tikal and Chichen Itza?;;Maya(ns)
World History;;They were always vulnerable to cavalry harassment, as the Athenian one under Nicias discovered in Sicily, and they could not operate on broken ground, as the Spartan one of Sphakteria found twelve years earlier. Named for the Greek for "log" or "beam," the Athenian general Iphicrates domonstrated their complete vulnerability to light-armed, mobile peltasts in 390 BCE, yet they remained in use due to the ease of teaching their "advance and stab" tactics. For 10 points name this standard battle formation, abandoned by the Romans after the Samnite wars in favor of maniples, which consisted of eight to twenty lines of hoplite warriors.;;Phalanx
Biology;;The porous "mull" variety, which is most commonly found in forests, is characterized by an alkaline pH and an abundance of insects, earthworms, and bacteria. In contrast, the "mor" type is more acidic, is found in colder temperatures, and commonly contains fungi and arthropods. The "moder" kind is found in between these extremes, though at the AO horizon, soil is composed purely of this material. For 10 points, name this brown-to-black colored organic matter caused by the microbial decomposition of plants and animals.;;Humus
American Literature;;The opening line of his "Of Mere Being" lent its name to a posthumously published collection of his works, which included the play Bowl, Cat, and Broomstick and bore the title The Palm at the End of the Mind. He described his poetic philosophy in his Notes Towards a Supreme Collection, and such poems as "Le Monocle de Mon Oncle" and "Sunday Morning" appear in his collection, Harmonium. In one poem he describes a musician who "does not play things as they are" on his colorful instrument; in another he talks about a "roller of big cigars whip[ping] / In kitchen cups concupiscent curds". For 10 points, identify this 20th Century Connecticut poet of "The Man with the Blue Guitar" and "The Emperor of Ice Cream".;;(Wallace) Stevens
Linguistics;;At a cost of twenty million dollars, South Korea is currently transforming their system for this process, but the McCune-Reischauer method is still used in the north. The International Convention of Orientalist Scholars uses DMG system for Arabic, while the US military prefers SATTS. Japanese schoolchildren learn "kunrei-shiki," but many words are more familiar to Americans under the Hepburn system. For 10 points, name this process of transliterating non-Latinate alphabets, which for Chinese uses either the Pinyin or Wade-Giles system.;;Romantization
Art;;His classically inspired works include a rendition of a teenage Cupid cavorting nude over a pile of musical instruments, entitled Amor Vincit Omnia, and a portrait of a boy as Bacchus dated 1597. Commissions for the Cerasi Chapel and the Contarelli Chapel shifted his focus to religious subjects, which he treated with his trademark dramatic lighting and emphasis on realism over flattery, as in the 1603 Supper at Emmaus. For 10 points, name this Italian Baroque painter, who produced The Conversion of St. Paul and The Calling of St. Matthew.;;Caravaggio
Chemistry;;Lewis Snyder's team at the University of Illinois claimed to have discovered this molecule in space. An inhibitory neurotransmitter in the spinal cord, it is a co-agonist of glutamate for NMDA receptors. It has an isoelectric point of about 6.06, and strychnine works by blocking its receptors. It makes up about one-third of collagen fibers, and is the only amino acid that is not optically active, due to the simplicity of its R-group. For 10 points, name this nonessential amino acid whose side chain consists of a single hydrogen atom.;;Glycine
European Literature;;His poems "Good Morning Thought," "Teardrop" and "Blackcurrant River" were published without his knowledge during his time as a gunrunner in Ethiopia. Verdant imagery pervades this man's poem "Memory," which recounts the day he first moved to the city, while three loving sisters make up the title group of "The Seekers of Lice". He wrote many of his poems in the Alexandrine meter including "First Communions," "Vowels" and a more famous poem about the intoxicating effect liberty has on a seafaring vessel. For 10 points name this poet of "The Drunken Boat" and "A Season in Hell".;;(jean) (Nicholas) (Arthur) Rimbaud
World History;;Among the building projects undertaken by this monarch were two enormous obelisks, then the largest in the world and still standing in the Red Chamber at Karnak. Ruling under the regnal name Maatkare and clearly attempting to emulate the earlier Sobekneferu, this monarch also sent an expedition to Punt. While archaeologists have recently begun to believe that the erasing of names long blamed on the next ruler actually came much later, someone was clearly offended by such actions as this ruler's assumption of the title "Pharoah" and the wearing of the ceremonial false beard. For 10 points name this successor of Thutmose I, the most powerful woman to rule Egypt before Cleopatra.;;Hatshepsut
Biology;;Among many proposed causes is a deficiency of cerebral Purkinje cells. A common symptom is echolalia, or automatic repetition of speech. An interest in preserving the external environment and rhythmic body movements also characterize this disorder, categorized with Rett's and Asperger's syndromes. For 10 points, name this disorder characterized by delayed development, preoccupation with a specific interest, and impaired communication and social interaction.;;Autism
Chemistry;;One of them, denoted with a lowercase pi, can be calculated from the gas constant, temperature, and concentration of the substance. The extent of two important ones is determined by the product of the molality and the constants denoted k-sub-f and k-sub-b. One of them is the vapor pressure lowering of a solution, as it is dependent on the mole fraction of components present in the solution. Osmotic pressure, freezing-point depression, and boiling-point elevation are all examples of, for 10 points, what kind of property, which is dependent only on the concentration of solute in a solution?;;Colligative (Properties)
Philosophy;;The first of its twelve books describes how the author learned steadiness of purpose from Apollonius, self-government from Maximus, and good morals and the government of his temper from his grandfather Verus. Book Eleven quotes frequently from Epictetus, although the author of this treatise never labels himself a Stoic. For 10 points, what book, probably written during its author's military campaigns in central Europe during the 170s, elaborates the philosophy of Emperor Marcus Aurelius?;;(the) Meditations
Music;;Early works by this composer include "Tahiti Trot," "Three Fantastic Dances," and "Aphorisms". He incorporated patriotic texts into his second and third symphonies, subtitled "To October" and "The First of May". His works for the stage include "Hypothetically Murdered," "The Human Comedy," and "The Nose". His symphonies included one inspired by the siege of Leningrad and one labeled "a Soviet artist's reply to just criticism. For 10 points, name this composer of Lady Macbeth of the Mtsensk District.;;(Dmitri) Shostakovich
United States History;;He taught at San Fernando College in Mexico City early in his life, a fact recorded by his biographer and life-long companion Francisco Palou. His conflicts with military commander Felipe de Neve stemmed from his championing of native rights and his willingness to incorporate their customs during his efforts to convert them. He would follow Gaspar de Portola to San Diego, where he began his rigorous trials of self-mortification. He was beatified by Pope John Paul II in 1984 at his grave in San Carlos Borromeo, one of the original nine in a system that also included San Juan Capistrano and San Luis Obispo. For 10 points identify this Franciscan who founded numerous missions in California during the eighteenth century.;;(Junipero) Serra
British Literature;;He wrote "To a Friend (With an Identity Disc)" after being hospitalized for falling into a fifteen-foot hole, and while at a different hospital, he edited the hospital's literary journal, the Hydra. He uses grotesque images such as "eyeballs, huge-bulged like squids" and "the wild chattering of his broken teeth" to describe the title character's affliction in "The Sentry". In hell, a man meets the enemy he killed in his "Strange Meeting," while he asks "What passing-bells for these who die as cattle" in his "Anthem for Doomed Youth". For 10 points, name this British anti-war poet, who urged people not to "tell that old lie" about how sweet war is in his most famous poem, "Dulce et Decorum Est".;;(Wilfred) Owen
Physics;;With Ernst Stückelberg, his name graces an interpretation of antimatter that treats antiparticles as normal particles that travel backwards in time. His namesake integral is a term in the perturbation expansion of a scattering matrix element. His namesake propagator is commonly used to calculate probability amplitudes for particle interactions using another namesake, which is basically a finite directed colored graph. For 10 points, name this physicist who shared the 1950 Nobel with Tomonaga and Schwinger for his work on quantum electrodynamics, whose namesake diagrams represent the interactions of elementary particles.;;(Richard) (Phillips) Feynman
European History;;They were rendered inconsequential after forces under Ammatus and Gedimer lost at the battle of Tricameron. Many years earlier this people had crossed the Pyrenees, concluded a peace with Honorius, and had begun to expand their holdings under Gunderic. But it was under that man's successor that they would defeat Boniface, take Hippo, and conquer Rome on the invitation of Valentinian's widow Eudoxia. For 10 points, name this tribe ruled from Carthage by Gaiseric whose ruthless destruction of the lands they conquered may explain the modern use of their name.;;Vandals
European History;;His early career consisted of working on humanitarian missions in Armenia and the USSR and serving as minister of defense in his country's agrarian coalition government. Together with Johan Hjort, he founded the Nasjonal Samling party in 1933. King Haakon VII opposed his efforts to seize power, though finally he was able to become premier in 1942. For 10 points, identify this Nazi-backed Norwegian leader whose name has since become a synonym for "traitor".;;(Vidkun) Quisling
British Literature;;He attempted to commit suicide at age 22 by swimming out to sea but turned back after being stung by a jellyfish. He used his experiences teaching at a Welsh private school to write his first novel, which was followed Men at Arms, Officers and Gentlemen and The End of the Battle, the trilogy about Guy Crouchback called Sword of Honour. Tony Last embarks on a trip to South America to escape his wife Brenda in another of his works. For 10 points, name this author of Decline and Fall and A Handful of Dust who wrote of Charles Ryder's relationship with the Marchmain family in Brideshead Revisited.;;(Evelyn) (Arthur) (St.John) Waugh
Music;;He took music lessons at a synagogue, at Hull House, and under classical instructor Franz Schoepp before developing his "ray," an infamous icy glare that followed mistakes of fellow performers. In 1926 he joined the Ben Pollack Jazz Band, recorded "He's the Last Word," and formed his own band for the radio show Let's Dance. His success began with performances at the Palomar Ballroom in Los Angeles, and his signature tunes include "Don't Be That Way," "Goodbye," and "Stompin' at the Savoy". For 10 points, name this "King of Swing," an American clarinetist.;;(Benjamin) (Benny) (David) Goodman
Chemistry;;The Danish pediatrician C.E. Bloch hypothesized its existence based on the work of E.V. McCollum. The carboxylic acid formed from this vitamin is conjugated to glucuronide and secreted into bile, and its esters can be stored in Ito cells or more generalized hepatocytes. Sperm production requires an adequate amount of this vitamin, and deficiency in it can lead to decreased thyroid hormone synthesis, while its aldehyde is a key component of rhodopsin. For 10 points, beta-carotene is a provitamin for what compound also called retinol, whose deficiency can also lead to night blindness?;;(Vitamin) A
United States History;;As part of these tri-partite negotiations, Nagappattinam in India and navigation rights in Moluccas were surrendered to England by the Dutch. British surrender of Tobago and Senegal to France and provisions allowing Spain to keep Minorca and East and West Florida were also included, though the most important points involved access to the Newfoundland fisheries, return of property confiscated from British subjects, and the ownership of Canada. For 10 points, recognition was also extended to a new country in what 1783 resolution to the American war for Independence?;;(Peace of) Paris
Geography;;Its highest point was once known as Mount Victoria but became Mount Tomanivi after independence. It controls the ethnically distinct island of Rotuma and is coterminous with the Koro Sea. Of this country's over three hundred islands, arranged in such groups as the Yasawa and Mamanuca, the largest are Viti Levu and Vanua Levu. For 10 points, name this island group in the South Pacific, located east of Vanuatu and south of Tuvalu, still struggling to manage relations between the "Girmitiyas" and natives from the capital of Suva.;;Fiji
Mythology;;Aphrodite punished this goddess for sleeping with Ares by giving her a consuming passion for mortal men. Tragic results of that interest included her fatal dalliance with Orion and the murder of Procris by Cephalus. Driven by the horses Lampus and Phaeton, the latter perhaps a poignant reminder of her slain nephew, she is married to Astraeus, to whom she bore Boreus, Notus, Zephyrus, and the star Phosphorus. For 10 points, name this lover of Tithonus, whose immortality without eternal youth led to his shriveling into a grasshopper, the sister of Selene and Helios and goddess of the dawn.;;Eos
Math Theory;;One example is the number of births in a city in a given week, and another is the number of cosmic rays detected in a given area in a day. It justifies the rule of thumb that, if you count N events, the uncertainty in the number is given by the square root of N. Also called the "law of small numbers," it says the probability that an event occurs N times is given by e to the minus x, times x to the N, divided by N factorial, where x is the expected number of events. Radioactive decay counting is one place where it is commonly found. For 10 points, what is this statistical distribution discovered by a 19th-century French mathematician?;;Poisson (Distribution)
World Literature;;A reading of Kafka inspired his story "The Third Resignation," and he explored similar themes in "The Other Side of Death" and "Eva Is Inside Her Cat". In "The Sea of Lost Time" and "Blacaman the Good, Vendor of Miracles," he emphasizes the use of imagination, as he does in "The Handsomest Drowned Man in the World". He relates anecdotes about dictators such as Juan Vicente Gomez in Autumn of the Patriarch, and In Evil Hour describes the period of violence in his native country much more bluntly than did his No One Writes to the Colonel. For 10 points, name this author who created the Buendía family and the city of Macondo, the author of Chronicle of a Death Foretold, Love in the Time of Cholera, and One Hundred Years of Solitude.;;(Gabriel) Garcia Marquez
United States History;;During his time in the Second Continental Congress, he wrote appeals to the citizens of Canada and Ireland, which followed his earlier Address to the People of Great Britain. A signer of the 1783 Treaty of Paris, he also served as Minister to Spain, and co-signed a failed treaty concerning access to the Mississippi River with Diego de Gardoqui. He also negotiated an unpopular treaty regarding British occupation of forts in the western territories. For 10 points, name this co-author of The Federalist Papers, a New Yorker who served as the first Chief Justice of the Supreme Court.;;(John) Jay
British Literature;;Swinburne, among others, ridiculed his later works, such as The Law and the Lady and The New Magdalen, which were written to address social ills. While he did write historical novels like Antonina, more popular were sensational works like Basil, No Name, and Armadale. One of his more famous works is narrated by Gabriel Betteredge and ends with the discovery that Franklin Blake was drugged and that Godfrey Ablewhite took the exotic treasure. For 10 points, identify this friend of Charles Dickens and creator of Sergeant Cuff, the author of The Woman in White who pioneered of the English detective story in The Moonstone.;;(William) (Wilkie) Collins
Music;;His cousin Nachod, a performing tenor, debuted the role of Waldemar in his song cycle Gurrelieder. His other works include two chamber symphonies, the abstract Music for a Film Scene, and The Book of the Hanging Gardens. He died before finishing the opera Moses und Aron, but he did popularize such concepts as serialism and Sprechstimme as the teacher of Anton Webern. For 10 points, name this composer of Pierrot Lunaire and Transfigured night.;;(Arnold) (Franz) (Walter) Schoenberg
United States History;;He wrote the majority opinion protecting the right of Santeria practitioners to sacrifice chickens in Lukumi Babalu Aye v. Hialeah. He coauthored a joint opinion with Souter and O'Connor in the key abortion case Planned Parenthood v. Casey, and he continued to move away from his initial conservative orthodoxy by writing the gay-rights decisions in Romer v. Evans and Lawrence v. Texas. Recently lambasted by Tom DeLay for using Internet research in his jurisprudence was, for 10 points, what compromise choice to replace Lewis Powell, nominated by Reagan in 1988 after the rejection of Douglas Ginsburg and Robert Bork?;;(Anthony) (McLeod) Kennedy
Physics;;In the so-called "Delta E effect," it is induced by elastic tension, and the Fleming-Kennelly law states that the reluctivity of a substance with this property varies linearly with field strength at certain points. Heisenberg's theory of it assumes that parallel electron spins are favored and Ewing's theory of it assumes that each atom can turn freely about its center, though Weiss's theory is more generally accepted today. Characterized by a transition temperature called the Curie temperature, it is caused when an external field aligns microscopic regions, or domains. For 10 points, what is this form of magnetism possessed by iron?;;Ferromagnetism
American Literature;;Less known members included Mason Cogswell and Elihu Smith, while minor works included The Widow of Malabar and a Versification of Ossian, by David Humphreys and Richard Alsop, respectively. The Echo was a contribution to the American Mercury, while their staunch Federalist agenda was best expressed in long collaborations like The Political Greenhouse for the Year 1798 and The Anarchiad. More well known individual works include The Conquest of Canaan by Timothy Dwight and the pair of poems, The Columbiad and The Hasty Pudding, by Joel Barlow. For 10 points, identify this loosely confederated group of writers who took their name for a city in Connecticut.;;Hartford Wits
Geography;;Tourists here still use the seven Pictorial Guides to the region created by Alfred Wainwright. In addition to Grayrigg Forest, Borrowdale valley, the fell of Cold Pike, and Crinkle Crags, it contains Scafell Pike, the highest point in England, and such features as Windermere and Ullswater, which give it its name. For 10 points, the county of Cumbria is home to what mountainous region of England, the home and namesake of a group including Thomas Gray, Samuel Taylor Coleridge, and William Wordsworth?;;Lake District
European History;;Scholars such as T.J. Cornell have argued that they did not exist until restrictive marriage and office-holding laws were passed. They resorted to such tactics as secession to the Aventine to force the codification of the Twelve Table, though the civic penalties against them were effectively ended by the Sextio-Licinian laws of 366 BCE, which demanded that at least one of the two consuls be elected from their number. For 10 points, the Greek for "the mass" names what segment of the Roman population that apparently spent only 150 years under the yoke of the Patricians.;;Pleb(ians)
Astronomy;;Hermann Vogel derived its total mass and orbital velocity in the late 19th century. The astronomical paradox named for this triple-star 93 light years away is solved by the mass transfer between the two stars that orbit each other at a distance of six million miles at the center of the system; the A star is a blue-white main sequence star, while the B star is a red giant that was once the more massive of the two. The interaction of those two stars causes the system as a whole to vary in visual magnitude between 2.3 and 3.5 over 2.85 days. For 10 points, name this star in the constellation Perseus also known as the Demon Star, which is most famous for its eclipsing binaries.;;Algol
European History;;It began the "aggiornamento" period and sparked the sedevacantist movement. Among its most significant decrees were Sacrosanctum Concilium, dealing with the liturgy; Inter Mirifica, discussing social communication; and Nostra Aetete, calling for understanding the truths of other religions and relieving Jews of collective guilt for the death of Christ. It closed with a "gesture of justice and mutual pardon" from Athenagoras. For 10 points, Paul VI ended, in 1965, what council called by John XXIII in 1962 to modernize Catholicism?;;Second Vatican (Council)
Biology;;It was posited to settle an argument between Udny Yule and Reginald Punnett. When using this method, relative disadvantage is usually represented by a selection coefficient s, which is measured in conjunction with relative fitness w. The processes of introgression and fecundity selection make it non-applicable, as well as the founder effect and sexual selection, which contribute to nonrandom mating. For 10 points, name this pervasive model of population genetics, generally named for its English and German formulators.;;Hardy-Weinberg (equilibrium)
European History;;Close quarters of the buildings where it took place allowed combatants to escape across rooftops. It was led by the ZZW and ZOB, commanded by Mordecai Anielewicz, and occurred within an eleven-mile circumference that had already lost ninety percent of its population. This attempt to forestall deportations to Treblinka inflicted two hundred casualties and held off Jürgen Stroop's soldiers for four weeks despite having access to only nine rifles and one machine gun. For 10 points, name this spring 1943 episode of resistance to the Nazis, which led to the utter destruction of the Jewish quarter in the capital of Poland.;;Warsaw Ghetto (Uprising|Rebellion)
Mythology;;Writing the word "emet," which means truth, on the forehead of one of these is a key to controlling it, as erasing one letter forms the word "met" or death. One of the more prominent ones was created to defend against the schemes of Taddeush by a man named Löw ben Bezulel, who used the Shem Hameforash to animate it in Prague. For 10 points, name this beings of mud created to protect Jews in medieval folklore.;;Golem
British Literature;;He treated the social problem of race in his novel about Rhoda Aldgate, An Imperative Duty, while a trip to Quebec sparks a cross-generational romance between Kitty Ellison and Miles Arbuton in A Chance Acquaintance. Heavily influenced by Laurence Gronlund and Leo Tolstoy he left his post at the Atlantic to write his economic novels such as A Traveler from Altruria. He championed the importance of "Real Life" in works such as The Leatherwood God, The Lady of the Arostook, and A Modern Instance. For 10 points, identify this author of A Hazard of New Fortunes and The Rise of Silas Lapham.;;(William) (Dean) Howells
Art;;Every day for a month, this painter went to the Pierre Loeb galley and added to one of his canvases, which by the end of the month portrayed a crust of bread, an apple with a fork in it, and a bottle of gin wrapped in newspaper. In 1967, he collaborated with José Llorens Artigas to create Wall of the Sun and Wall of the Moon, two murals for the Paris UNESCO office, which later commissioned him to design the Picasso Medal. For 10 points, name this surrealist painter of The Reaper and the afore-described Still Life With Old Shoe, which recorded his feelings upon leaving his Catalan homeland.;;(Joan) Miro
Chemistry;;The Griffiths method uses the Joule variety of this device, and one named after Nernst and Lindemann is used at low temperatures. In the differential scanning type, two aluminum pans sit on a calibrated slab and the temperature of one is raised linearly. Though the Joly version uses the mass of condensed steam, the "continuous-flow" variety named after Callendar and Barnes uses the flow of liquid water. The isothermal titration one can determine the end point of a reaction, and in a more common type, the bulb of a thermometer below the water surface is utilized. For 10 points, name this device which measures the amount of heat that has been absorbed or evolved during a chemical reaction, more famous examples of which are the "coffee cup" and "bomb" types.;;Calorimeter
Biology;;Its increased presence in urine is a strong indicator of Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, and defects in molecules that bind to it have been hypothesized as a cause of Rubenstein-Taybi snydrome. It increases the amount of water in metabolic waste by opening an apical chloride ion channel, and it is crucial to the dissociation of the beta-gamma dimer of G-protein-coupled receptors. Discovered by Earl Sutherland, this molecule indirectly stimulates gluconeogenesis due to its activating effect on protein kinase A. For 10 points, the action of a specific phosphodiesterase is usually responsible for creating what second-messenger protein produced from ATP by the enzyme adenylyl cyclase?;;C(yclic) AMP|Cyclic Adenosine MonoPhosphate
Mythology;;They will be summoned to Ragnarok by the crowing of Fjalar. Suttung, who hid the mead of poetry inside a mountain, was one of them, as were Hrod and Hymir. After the first race of them were drowned in Ymir's blood, Bergelmir, a grandson of Ymir, repopulated this race. Other members included Jarnsaxa, mother of Thor's sons Magni and Modi. For 10 points, the mother of the Fenris wolf with Loki, Angerboda, was another example of what race that lives in Jotunheim, enemies of the Aesir who parallel the Greek Titans in size?;;(Frost) Giant(s)
American Literature;;Its protagonist laughs at the drunks in backseat of his car, who sing spirituals out of key after drinking rum at Ernie's Kitchen Shack. That main character also plans on robbing Old Blum's place with Jack, G.H., and Gus, but fails to do so after pleasuring himself during a showing of Trader Horn. The prosecutor Buckley battles the communist lawyer Boris Max at the protagonist's climactic trial, and the communist Jan Erlone forgives the protagonist for attempting to frame him for murder. For 10 points, Vera faints after a rat is killed in a Chicago tenement and Bessie is murdered after the accidental smothering of Mary Dalton in what novel about Bigger Thomas, a work of Richard Wright?;;Native Son
Astronomy;;Formally known as the National Astronomy and Ionosphere Center, shortly after its opening in 1963, this facility determined the correct rotation period of Mercury. It also provided the first direct image of an asteroid, had a role in intelligence during the Cold War, and was used for the SETI@home project. Despite its fixed location, it is capable of viewing a 40-degree swath of the sky, between 1 degree South and 39 degrees North. For 10 points, name this largest single telescope in the world, whose 1000-foot collecting dish is located in a natural depression on the north shore of Puerto Rico.;;Arecibo (Observatory)
European Literature;;Operas by Franz Josef Haydn and Antonio Vivaldi show this character imprisoned in cave by the sorceress Alcina and emerging to discover that Medoro has married his love object Angelica, causing him to go mad briefly. The work that storyline is derived from follows an unfinished epic by Matteo Boiardo, and was itself written by Ludovico Ariosto. In his most notable epic, he is betrayed by his stepfather Ganelon, and dies blowing his horn Olifant to summon troops, but only after using his sword Durendal to make a failed stand against the Saracens that vastly outnumber his men. For 10 points, name this paladin of Charlemagne and subject of a namesake chansons de geste "song".;;Roland
Geography;;Features in it include Angels Landing, the Great White Throne, The Watchman, the Three Patriarchs, Kolob Arch, and the Virgin River Narrows. Originally known as Mukuntuweap National Monument, it is located at the junction of the Great Basin, the Colorado Plateau, and the Mojave Desert. For 10 points, name this national park that exhibits nine different exposed sedimentary rock formations known as the Grand Staircase, located near the city of St. George in southwestern Utah.;;Zion (National Park)
Music;;According to its score, a baritone can be substituted "if necessary" for the contralto soloist specified in the even-numbered movements of this work, which was conceived when its composer came across a Hans Bethge volume after being diagnosed with valvular malformation. Its sixth and final movement, "Farewell," is as long as the five that precede it. It starts off with a "Drinking Song of Misery," and includes movements entitled "On Youth" and "On Beauty". For 10 points, identify this setting of four eighth-century Chinese poets by Gustav Mahler, concerned with the natural world and the "circle of life".;;(The) Song of the Earth|(Das) Lied von der Erde
World History;;The leader of a conspiracy of nobles to murder the false Smerdis, he legitimized his rule by marrying Atossa. He created the satrapy system, built the royal road from Susa to Sardis, allowed the Jews to rebuild Jerusalem, and conquered Thrace, but at the end of his life he was so disturbed by the Ionian revolt that he had a servant remind him constantly of his need to punish the Athenians. For 10 points name this Persian ruler whose efforts to crush Athens were stymied by the defeat of his commanders at Marathon and who bequeathed his desire of vengeance to his son Xerxes.;;Darius (I|the First|the Great)
Biology;;The protein presenilin, mutant versions of which cause Alzheimer disease, is located primarily in it, and filamentous material is associated with the center of each of its units. Complex glycosylation of molecules occurs within it by means of sugar transferases that face its lumen, and it actually breaks up and disappears at the onset of mitosis. Generally divided into cis, medial, and trans faces, the last of which releases clathrin-coated vesicles, it consists of a stack of five to eight flattened cisternae. For 10 points, name this organelle which processes proteins made in the endoplasmic reticulum, and which is named for its Italian discoverer.;;Golgi (Apparatus)
United States History;;A "total exhaustion rule" for considering it was created in Rose v. Lundy, while abuses of it were discussed in McCleskey v. Kemp. The power to alter it has been considered to reside exclusively with Congress ever since Ex Parte Merryman. Article I, section 9, clause 2 of the Constitution prohibits abridgement of it except in such circumstances as war, as when the Civil War led Lincoln to suspend it. For 10 points, name this action used by prisoners to demand a cause for detention, literally meaning, "May you have the body".;;(writ of) Habeas Corpus
European History;;He did much to cultivate his physical resemblance to Alexander the Great, though it is unlikely that Alexander would have allowed an enemy to slip away at night as this man did twice, once while fighting Sertorius, once while pursuing Mithridates. He otherwise needed only six weeks to clear the sea of pirates despite being given a year in 67 BCE. The presentation of his head by Thedotus outraged his rival, who dealt this man a defeat in a 48 BCE run-in at Pharsalus. For 10 points name this onetime triumvirate colleague who was defeated by Julius Caesar.;;Pompey (the Great)
Music;;His concerti include one for a saxophone quartet. His most recent symphony, his eighth, is entitled "Ramakrishna". Some of his early works were inspired by Samuel Beckett; while more recently he has set David Henry Hwang, Allen Ginsberg, and Jean Cocteau and provided the scores for such films as Naqoyqatsi, Candyman II, and The Truman Show. For 10 points, this self-described "theater music composer" of Akhnaten, Satyagraha, and Einstein on the Beach.;;(Phillip) Glass
American Literature;;He began growing his famous beard following the death of his wife Frances in a house fire that scarred his face. He later commemorated her in his sonnet "The Cross of Snow". Although he created the first American translation of Dante's Inferno, it was his poetry that made him famous, ranging from the "spreading chestnut tree" under which "the village smithy stands" to "ships that pass in the night". For 10 points, name this American poet whose Tales of a Wayside Inn includes the famous "Paul Revere's Ride".;;(Henry) (Wadsworth) Longfellow
Mythology;;In the mythology of Celtic France, this was the responsibility of Andarta. It was the domain of the Latvian Jumis, the Babylonian Mylitta, the Japanese Ugajin, and the Philistine Dagon. In the aspect of Bhumiya, Vishnu was the patron of this, replacing Prthivi in Vedic times. For 10 points, all were deities of what quality, also patronized by the Roman Bona Dea, the race of Vanir in Norse myth, and the Greek Demeter?;;Fertility
Chemistry;;It joins with copper to form a common algaecide, and when joined with titanium it forms a dye-stripper and reducing agent. With uranium, it forms radioactive yellow crystals, and with barium it forms a compound used in scans of the digestive tract. With magnesium it forms Epsom salts, and with calcium, it forms gypsum. Its four oxygens are bonded tetrahedrally to another atom from group 16. For 10 points, name this common polyatomic anion with charge "minus two" and formula SO4.;;Sulfate
World History;;His exploits began after he was named commandant of Fort Frontenac. Ultimately this commander of the Griffon was murdered by his own men upon reaching the Gulf of Mexico and attempting an overland route east. His companions over the years included Michael Aco and Father Hennepin, whom he sent into Michigan, and he organized a confederation among the Miami and the Illinois in order to fight the Iroquois, who threatened him and his lieutenant Henri de Tonti during their travels up and down the Mississippi. For 10 points, identify this French explorer who founded numerous forts and named Louisiana.;;(Sieur) (de) Lasalle
European Literature;;Early works of this author include the short story collection Pleasures and Days and the autobiographical novel Jean Santeuil. His essay "Contre Sainte-Beuve" attacked contemporary French literary philosophy and in 1909 he experienced a revival of childhood memories through the taste of tea and a madeleine that sparked the writing of his literary masterpiece. "Cities of the Plain", "Within a Budding Grove", and "Swann's Way" are among the works that comprise, for 10 points, what author's Remembrance of Things Past?;;(Marcell) Proust
World History;;His mysterious death came shortly after an uprising, in which his subjects branded him a traitor and pelted him with stones. After his death, his daughter was rechristened as Isabel, and he was succeeded by his brother Cuitlahuac, who in turn was succeeded by Cuauhtemoc. This man's downfall began when he misinterpreted the arrival of conquistadors as the return of Quetzlcoatl and welcomed them into Tenochtitlan. For 10 points, name this Aztec ruler who was captured and put down by Hernando Cortez.;;Montezuma (II)
British Literature;;The title character agrees to give the end-of-term lecture on "Merrie England" and spend a weekend with the Welches in an attempt to save his teaching job. Over the weekend, he meets Bertrand's girlfriend Christine and weeks later sees her at the Summer Ball, taking her home early as Bertrand is mistreating her. Prior to giving the final lecture, Mr. Dixon gets in a fight with Bertrand and gets drunk, and the next day, he is fired. For 10 points, fortune prevails for the titular Mr. Dixon in what novel by Kingsley Amis?;;Lucky Jim
Astronomy;;H interest in the writings of Ptolemy caused him detect movements in the stars Arcturus, Procyon, and Sirius. As commander of the HMS Paramour, he posited a core-fluid-crust model of the Earth. He financed the publication of Newton's Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy, and he succeeded John Flamsteed as Astronomer Royal. The Aquarids are meteors associated with his most famous namesake, sightings of which were recorded in the Nuremburg Chronicles and Bayeux Tapestry. For 10 points, name this Englishman whose namesake comet completes an orbit around the sun every 76 years.;;(Edmund) Halley
United States History;;In 1977, two treaties signed by Jimmy Carter and a general who would die in a mysterious plane crash a year later, Omar Torrijos, provided for it to be transferred from American control. John Findlay Wallace was the original leader of its development, but was replaced by John Stevens. However, George Goethals, who eventually led the Isthmian Commission and the army engineer corps, is credited as the main overseer of this project, which was placed under American control by the Hay-Bunau Varilla Treaty. For 10 points, name this structure that connects the Pacific to the Atlantic by means of its namesake country.;;Panama Canal
Chemistry;;In 1912, Von Kármám and Born showed that the propagation of elastic waves through a solid causes this value to deviate from what Einstein's model predicted it would be, and Debye postulated that at low temperatures, it is equal to 234 times the molar gas constant times the quantity temperature divided by the Debye characteristic cubed. It can be calculated at constant volume by taking the partial derivative of the energy per mole of a substance with respect to temperature, which is key to the empirical observations of the Law of Dulong and Petit. For 10 points, name this quantity often measured in joules per gram-kelvin, defined as the amount of heat required to increase the temperature of a unit mass of a substance by a unit amount.;;(molar) specific heat (capacity)
Religion;;They were first observed in a jail cell on Mount Averno in 1224. This term was used by pioneering criminologist Cesare Lombroso to denote the unusual skull features which Lombroso believed were present on criminals. The founder of the Ghost Dance, Wovoka, gave them to himself. An invisible form was granted based on the prayers of Catherine of Siena, and dogmatically they do not put forth an odor and they resist medical treatment. For 10 points, name this appearance of wounds on the side, head, or especially hands and feet corresponding to the wounds of Christ, seen on Francis of Assisi.;;Stigmata
World History;;He allied with Bezborodko in an attempt to displace Platon Zubov, and he supervised the "Greek project" aimed at reconstituting Moldavia, Walachia, and Bessarabia as the neo-Byzantine empire under Constantine. In an attempt to improve the Russian military position, he authorized the Kherson arsenal and harbor at Sevastopol. For 10 points, name this governor of south Ukraine who allegedly created sham "villages" to cover up his agricultural failures, a paramour of Catherine the Great and namesake of a mutinous battleship.;;(Grigory) (Aleksandrovyich) Potemkin
Computer Science;;The "Merkle hash" variety is used to ensure data integrity, while the B-star variety guarantees two-thirds fullness at all but one point. One named after Adelson-Velskii and Landis re-sorts itself recursively to achieve balance, while another named after Fibonacci has order n-1 to the left and n-2 to the right. In Huffman encoding, one is built based on the frequency of characters, and finite one with n vertices will have exactly n-1 edges, and it is defined as a connected graph with no cycles. For 10 points, name this data structure that also comes in "red-black" and "binary search" varieties, and consists of a root at the top and parentless "leaves" at the bottom.;;Tree
Music;;Unique in the repertoire is the mezzo-forte dynamic at the end of his fourth symphony, which includes music planned for a tone poem based on Poe's "The Raven". His other works include En saga, The Oceanides, Tapiola, the Karelia suite, and Kullervo. His tone poems Pohjola's Daughter and Luonnotar were based on the same source as The Swan of Tuonela. For 10 points, name this composer who again drew on his country's struggle for cultural and political independence from Russia to write Finlandia.;;(Johan) (Julius) (Christian) (Jean) Sibelius
British Literature;;His protagonists included Elias Gotobed, who visits England in The American Senator, as well as Harry Norman, and the Tudors, Alaric and Charley, who romance the daughters of Mrs. Woodward in The Three Clerks. But these books, along with titles like Mr. Scarbrough's Family, The Way We Live Now, and The Bertrams, were not part of his two most popular series, which include volumes like The Warden and The Duke's Children. For 10 points, name this author who focused the political Palliser family and Barset County and in such novels as Phineas Finn and Barchester Towers.;;(Anthony) Trollope
Geography;;Originating at Shlisselburg and passing through Ivanovskaya, it receives the Volkhov and Svir tributaries. Despite being only forty-six miles long, its watershed is over one hundred thousand square miles, because it indirectly receives outlet from both Lake Saimaa and Lake Onega. Flowing out of Lake Ladoga, its Bolshaia and Malaya branches create a forty-six-island delta into the Gulf of Finland. For 10 points, in 1703, Zayachy Island in what river became the foundation of the new city of St. Petersburg?;;Neva (river)
Mythology;;He was nearly tricked into drowning himself by his former tutor, a son of Hriedmar, but a disguised Odin advises him to dig a network of pits to save himself. He then kills Regin after slaying the dragon Fafnir, whose blood makes him invulnerable except for a leaf-shaped spot on his back. Guttorm stabs him at the behest of Gunnar and Brynhild, and Brynhild foretells how the ring of gold will be returned to the Rhine River. For 10 points, name this Volsung and son of Sigmund.;;Sigurd|Siegfried
World Literature;;In high school he wrote tragedies such as "The Brigands" and "Two Little Fishes" for magazine Dung of Parnassus, and Pushkin's Gypsies inspired the early poetic work "Hanz Kuchelgarten". Stories such as "The Enchanted Spot" and "Terrible Vengeance" can be found in Evenings on a Farm near Dikanka, which generally portrays a mythically happy world of Cossacks in this author's native Ukraine. One of his novels follows a plot by Chichikov to purchase titles to serfs. For 10 points, name this author of "Nevsky Prospect" and "The Nose" who created the novels The Overcoat, The Inspector General, and Dead Souls.;;(Nikolai) Gogol
European History;;His heroics at the Battle of Longarone helped him become the youngest winner of the Blue Max. His 1937 book, Infantry Attacks, became a popular military textbook, and in 1940 he became commander of the Ghost Division of Panzer tanks. For 10 points, name this commander of the Afrika Korps who was forced to commit suicide after his role in the July Plot was discovered, a German general nicknamed the "Desert Fox".;;(Erwin) Rommel
Math Theory;;The Bianchi identity is satisfied by his namesake curvature tensor, and his namesake surfaces are used to define functions of a complex variable, such as the logarithm, which are multi-valued. His namesake geometry deals with smooth spaces on which one can measure distance, and was used by Einstein to develop general relativity. His famously unproven hypothesis deals with the so-called zeta function and relates to the distribution of prime numbers. He is known for his sums, which partition an interval into subintervals on which a function is multiplied by the length of the interval. For 10 points, who is this mathematician who gives his name to the simplest way of defining the definite integral?;;(Bernhard) Riemann