World History;;This nation's Continuation War involved an alliance with Germany partially to respond to a neighbor's use of the Aland Islands and ended during Gustaf Mannerheim's presidency. It helped the Nazis because it allowed for submarine training in the Baltic and cut off the Murmansk railroad. This followed a 4 month war with fighting was over control of the  Petsamo mines, Lake Ladoga, and the the Karelian Isthmus, called the Winter War. They were a grand duchy controlled by Russia until 1917, and which was taken from Sweden. Inhabited by the Suomi, this is FTP what Baltic nation with capital Helsinki?;;Finland;;Suomi
Literature;;This author edited Woman's World for 3 years during which time, this author published The Happy Prince and Other Tales. Several previously-published essays were collected in Intentions, which came out the same year as two more collections of this author's stories, Lord Author Savile's Crime, and Other Stories, and A House of Pomegranates. Aubrey Beardsley published an English version of his play originally written in French, Salom¨¦, and soon after appeared his A Woman of No Importance. The Dutchess of Berwick and Mrs. Erlynne appeared in his first major hit,  Lady Windermere's Fan, and the title character loves Sibyl Vane and has the title object painted by Basil Hallward in this man's only novel, The Picture of Dorian Grey. FTP, name this Irish author of The Importance of Being Earnest.;;(Oscar) (Fingal) (O'Flahertie) (Wills) Wilde;;
Noncomputational Math;;A set of corporate practices developed by Motorola and practiced by 3M and Raytheon, among others, is named for this, implying exceptional quality and almost no manufacturing defects. The so-called empirical rule, or 68-95-99.7 rule, relates area to distance, which is expressed in terms of this quantity. The z-score is computed by subtracting mu from the individual raw score, then dividing the difference by this  number, in a process known as normalization. For the Wechsler IQ test it is 15, while for the Stanford-Binet it is 16. It is the root mean square of the differences between each data point and the arithmetic mean. Also defined as the square root of the variance, it is denoted by the Greek letter sigma. FTP, in statistics, this is a measure of the spread of values in a random variable or a probability distribution.;;standard deviation;;sigma
Literature;;Its "Footnote" begins by repeating the word "Holy!" fifteen times. Its third and final section expresses solidarity with the person to whom it is dedicated by repeatedly stating "I'm with you in Rockland". Its second section begins with asking about a "sphinx of cement", and from there most of the lines begin with an invocation of Moloch. Like the rest of it, the first part of this poem features increasingly long lines about the exploits of  "angelheaded hipsters". The dedication is to a mental patient, Carl Solomon. FTP name this poem first published by Lawrence Ferlinghetti in 1956 that begins, "I saw the best minds of my generation destroyed by madness, hysterical naked", a landmark beat poem by Allen Ginsberg.;;Howl;;
Biology;;This animal's Y chromosome shares genes with the ZZ/ZW sex chromosomes found in birds. It is one of the only animals known to use electroreception to locate its prey, by detecting electric fields generated by muscular contractions. The males have ankle spurs which deliver a cocktail of  venom. When this mammal was first discovered by Europeans in the 1700s, most scientists thought it was a hoax. It is one of the five remaining species of monotremes, or egg-laying mammals. FTP, name this semi-aquatic mammal commonly described as "duck-billed".;;(duck-billed) platypus|Ornithorhynchus anatinus;;
World History;;This country's ruler Kaleb invaded southern Arabia and ruled there until 525, and a century later, Armah gave asylum to early Muslims. Kassa Halyu had himself crowned Emperor Theodore II in 1855, and was succeeded by Johannes, who was himself succeeded by the signer of the Treaty of Ucciali. Starting in 1527, this country was overrun by Muslims led by Harar, and many of this country's Falashas were repatriated to their religious homeland of  Israel in 1991 as part of Operation Solomon. This country was ruled by the Zagwe dynasty for 300 years after the fall of the Kingdom of Aksum, and in medieval Europe, this country was associated with the Christian kingdom of Prester John. Other famous rulers include Lij Yasu, Menelik II, and Haile Selassie. FTP, name this eastern African nation, formerly known as Abyssinia, with capital at Addis Ababa.;;Ethiopia;;Abyssinia
World History;;The Ugandan party of this name is led by Nsubuga Nsambu and won one seat in the 2006 elections. In Canada one joined itself with pro-conscription liberals to form the Unionist Party in 1917 and was formed by George-Etienne Cartier and John MacDonald, bringing together ultramontane Quebecois and  Orange men. The most famous one traces its roots to supporters of  King James the 2nd and Robert Peel created this party from the Tories. FTP what is this party of Benjamin Disraeli and Margaret Thatcher, which suggests being to the right of the political spectrum.;;Conservative(-Unionist) (Party);;
Anthropology;;This work ends with, "Le roi est mort, vive le roi! Ave Maria!" in its last chapter, "Farewell to Nemi". Other chapters include "Killing the God in Mexico" and "Homeopathic Magic of a Flesh Diet". Three chapters are devoted to Attis, five to Adonis, and four to Osiris. Several chapters are devoted to taboos, and another chapter discusses the Corn-spirit as several different animals. Its analysis of the Crucifixion was removed in later editions, and this work otherwise caused a scandal for its inclusion of Jesus in its depiction of otherwise pagan gods. Named after an object that  Aeneas and Sibyl presented to earn admission to Hades, FTP, name this seminal work of comparative anthropology by James Frazer.;;(The) Golden Bough;;
Pop Culture;;In his first appearance in 1940, he is named Jasper, and his ostensible owner from then until 1952 is Mammy Two Shoes, a very stereotypical African-American housemaid. He sings "Is You Is Or Is You Ain't My Baby" to woo a potential mate in "Solid Serenade", and later competes for her affection with Butch. His main enemy takes care of an orphan in a diaper whose speaking roles are almost entirely in French as a Musketeer of sorts, but has also dressed up as a  pilgrim and eaten an entire turkey while he himself was dressed as an Indian. He is frequently antagonized by Spike and his son Tyke, bulldogs who inconveniently have a soft spot for collaborating with mice. FTP name this cartoon cat who never seems to succeed in catching Jerry.;;Tom;;
Earth Science;;Its discoverer posited this based on aberrations in recorded data from an earthquake in the Kulpa Valley. An ophiolite forms when rocks formed in this region are exposed due to an obduction into the continental crust. A proposal to drill a hole down to  it was cancelled by Congress due to insufficient support. This can define the boundary between the asthenosphere and the region above it when under mid-ocean ridges, but it usually lies entirely within the lithosphere. It was first identified by its namesake Croatian seismologist in 1909. FTP, name the boundary between the Earth's crust and mantle.;;Moho(rovi?i?) (discontinuity)|Moho(rovicic) (discontinuity);;
Literature;;His final, unfinished novel concerns two Parisian Clerks who move into the country near Chavignolles to pursue every kind of intillectual stimulation and failing miserably. Related to that work, Bouvard and Pecuchet, is his Dictionary of Recieved Ideas, which is a spoof of the 2nd French empire. Another novel's focus is a Carthaginian priestess,  Salammbo. His most famous works center on the selfless maid Felicite,  the autobiographical Frederic Moreau, and the bored Norman wife Dr. Charles who commits adultery and suicide. FTP name this French author of A Simple Heart, A Sentimental Education, and Madame Bovary.;;(Gustave) Flaubert;;
Religion/Mythology;;According to Pausanias, the statue of Britomartis in the temple of Olous was made by him, and in the Iliad, Homer calls him the creator of a wide dancing-ground.  The son of Metion, after arriving in Sicily, he built a temple to Apollo and was taken in by King Cocalus, whose daughters murdered his former employer.  The partridge avoids high places because his nephew, the inventor of the saw, was turned into one by Athena after he tried throwing Perdix off a tower, and his identity is revealed through a riddle about a sprial seashell.  At the request of Pasiphae he made a wooden cow, he was locked up after  Ariadne fled, but in his escape his son didn't listen and ended up drowning.  FTP, identify this mythological inventor, the father of Icarus and the man who built, and then escaped from, the labyrinth.;;Daedalus;;
Music;;Tone poems by this composer include the semi-autobiographical A Hero's Life and one with a really big cello solo, Don Quixote. Two of his symphonies describe single days: one, a day in the life of his household, including bathing the baby; in the other, he depicts a thunderstorm and the view from a mountain peak. In addition to Symphonia Domestica and Alpine Symphony, he depicted death by a squawk on a clarinet in one tone poem and an  elegant sigh in another, Till Eulenspiegel's Merry Pranks and Death and Transfiguration. Appropriately, his last major work is his Four Last Songs, and his operas include Intermezzo, Die Frau Ohne Schatten, and Der Rosenkavalier. FTP, name this German composer of the opera Salome and an homage to Friedrich Nietzsche, Thus Spake Zarathustra.;;R(ichard) Strauss;;Strauss
Philosophy;;He asserted that "history repeats itself, first as tragedy, second as farce" in his discussion of France's 1851 coup d'etat, and another work took the form of a letter to the Eisenbach political party. In addition to The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Napoleon and Critique of the Gotha Program he argued in one work that social relationships were being replaced with commodity fetishism and another begins with the line, "A  spectre is haunting Europe" and was co-written with Friedrich Engels. FTP, name this philosopher who penned Das Kapital and The Communist Manifesto.;;(Karl) Marx;;
Chemistry;;Along with lead and belladonna, it is used to make Aqua Tofana. It is poisonous because it disrupts ATP production by inhibiting NAD+ in the citric acid cycle. During the Bronze Age, it was included in bronze to make the alloy harder. The Grainger challenge is to find an economical way to remove it from contaminated groundwater in countries such as Bangladesh. Some of it was found in Otzi's  hair and Napoleon's wallpaper and could've caused their deaths. FTP, name this metalloid with atomic number 33 and symbol As.;;arsenic;;As
Literature;;One author from this country wrote a novel that gets its title from a letter by Henry James senior, and chronicles a resident of the Casa de Ejercicios Espirituales, who is a deformed member of the Azcoitias family. Another writer from this country wrote the poetry collections Sonnets of Death and Despair. An author who used to live here wrote the fantasy City of the Beasts along with a retelling of  Zorro. The most famous poet from here wrote a 340 poem cycle that examines Latin America from a Marxist view entitled Canto General. Home to the author of The Obscene Bird of Night, Jose Donoso, and the creator of Eva Luna who wrote about the Truebas in House of the Spirits, that author wrote about the dictatorship of Pinochet. The native country of Gabriela Mistral, this is FTP what South American nation, home to Isabel Allende and Pablo Neruda, with captial Santiago.;;Chile;;
United States History;;In this event's subsequent lawsuit, the legal counsel of the defendants, Max Steuer, discredited a witness who did not alter a word of testimony after several repeats, which implied memorization, thus helping acquit Max Blanck and Isaac Harris.  Their company had already gained fame two years prior in the Uprising of the 20,000, but it was this notorious occurrence which prompted the creation of the American Society of Safety Engineers.  Probably started by a  lit cigarette, warning did not reach the 9th floor of the Asch Building in time, the only viable door was locked, and the fire escape quickly collapsed.  FTP - Name this 1911 fire in a New York clothing factory.;;Triangle Shirtwaist (Factory) (Fire);;
Art;;A student of this work's artist, Anne-Louis Girodet, depicted a continuation of its story, in which a title character kills his sister for mourning her fianc¨¦, The Death of Camilla. That sister is in the painting itself, along with several other women on the right-hand side. The central figures are preparing to fight an analogous group from Alba Longa, one of whom is Camilla's husband-to-be, who is killed in the altercation. A secondary focus is the background, whose arches number the same as the title  characters, while one of the men is clutching a spear in his right hand and himself being held by his brother. A man in front of them has one hand open and three swords in the other, while the three title characters stretch their arms forward towards the swords. FTP name this painting depicting a triplet of soldiers swearing to fight for Rome, by Jacques Louis David.;;Oath of the Horatii;;
Biology;;The alpha type of this cannot be dissolved in a 17.5% solution of sodium hydroxide at 20 degrees Celsius. It is a straight chain polymer derived from beta-glucose, whose hydroxyl groups form hydrogen bonds with each other, contributing to its high tensile strength. In 1908, a Swedish textiles engineer treated it with alkali and carbon disulfide to create viscose, which was extruded through a slit to create a clear film. Rayon can be made by extruding viscose though a hole rather than a slit. In vascular  plants it is synthesized at the cell membrane by rosette terminal complexes. Although it cannot be digested by humans, it acts as a dietary fiber, absorbing water and making defecation easier. Some animals, for example cows and termites, can digest it with the help of certain micro-organisms. FTP, name this structural polysaccharide found in the cell walls of green plants.;;cellulose;;
Literature;;Among his scientific works was Treatise on the Astrolabe, written for his ten-year-old son, and one of his earliest works was an elegy for Blanche, the first wife of the Duke of Lancaster: Book of the Duchess. The first recorded use of the word "galaxy" is found in his House of Fame. Most of his works were left unfinished, but one of his completed poems took the plot from  Boccaccio's Filostrato and saw rhyme royal used in English for the first time. That poem, Troilus and Criseyde, is often considered to be his best work, although his most famous depicted a storytelling contest between pilgrims travelling to the shrine of Thomas ¨¤ Becket. FTP name this author of The Canterbury Tales.;;(Geoffrey) Chaucer;;
Religion/Mythology;;In the Mozart oratorio La Betulia Liberata this widow of Manassas's return interrupts a discussion between Ozias and Achior. Erwin Panofsky argued that in northern art that she had both a maid and a charger, to distinguish her from Salome. In Gustav Klimt's portrait she wears a thick gold brooch and is partially nude, draped with a billowy blue cloth. She was also subject of a Donatello statue, and  Artemisia Gentileschi's most famous work is a thinly veiled self portrait as this biblichal character. FTP name this Israelite who beheaded the Assyrian Holofernes.;;Judith (beheading Holofernes);;
Geography;;The land near the coast of this body of water is home to the famous Lavaux vineyards and its coast is home to the Castle of Chillon, which was built by the Dukes of Savoy. There is a city that shares a name with it in southern  Wisconsin, and the lake was called Lacus Lemanus in Roman times. The stretch of coast from it's namesake city to Lausanne is called La Cote. The Rhone river flows in to and then back out of  FTP What second largest European lake, named for a Swiss city.;;(Lake) Geneva;;
Literature;;The author of this work is frustrated after waiting nine years to meet a man named Faustus, only to discover Faustus is ignorant. Book three of this work discusses Cicero's lost work Hortensius, and also includes an episode where the narrator steals from a pear tree just for the thrill of theft. It talks about the death of the author's mother  Monica and the narrator discusses how he gave up Manichaeism due to the influence of Saint Ambrose of Milan. FTP, name this autobiographical work describing the conversion of the Bishop of Hippo, Saint Augustine.;;Confessions;;
World History;;This war commenced after an ultimatum demanding the revision of the Straits Convention, free access of the Danube River, relinquishing responsibility of Orthodox Christians, and surrendering protectorate over the Danubian Principalities.  Hostilities spilled over to the Pacific Theatre when the Allies attacked but were repulsed at Petropavlovsk, as well as Archangelsk.  While  Baltic operations such as the bombardment of Bomarsund lead to stalemate, its main battles of Inkerman and Balaclava near the besieged city of Sevastapol took place on the war's namesake peninsula. FTP - Name this conflict which pitted France, Britain, and the Ottoman Empire against Russia.;;Crimean (War);;
Physics;;His 1944 book What is Life? introduced the term "negentropy" and discussed the idea of an "aperiodic crystal" which contained genetic information, a concept which later inspired Watson and Crick to research the structure of DNA. In his 1926 paper, Quantization as an Eigenvalue Problem, he published an equation describing the time- and space-dependence of quantum mechanical systems, using a model of the atom as waves rather than particles. Later, he rejected the mainstream definition of wave-particle duality altogether, promoting the wave concept alone. This led him to propose a  thought experiment to demonstrate the absurdity of wavefunction collapse. FTP, name this Austrian-Irish physicist whose namesake thought experiment involves a vial of poison, a decaying atom, and a cat.;;(Erwin) (Rudolf) (Josef) (Alexander) Schrodinger;;
Literature;;At one point in this novel, a female character gives shelter to pilgrims Ivanushka and Pelageyushka. Another character loses 40,000 roubles while gambling with his friend Dolohov, and Vassily Denisov gets rebuffed in a marriage offer to a teenager. The novel opens at a party hosted by Anna Scherer, at which Anna Drubetskoy reveals her desire to get a position for her son, Boris, in the army. Mademoiselle Bourienne falls in love with Anatole Kuragin, who has actually come to the estate of Bleak Hills with his father, Vassily, to meet and ostensibly court a friend of his sister Julie, Marie  Bolkonsky. Marie's sister-in-law, Lise, dies in childbirth, allowing Andre Bolkonsky to fall in love with that teenager, Natasha Rostov. FTP, name this gigantic novel about Pierre Bezuhov and other early Russians during the time of Napoleon, a major work of Leo Tolstoy.;;War and Peace|Voyna i Mir;;
Psychology;;It was first demonstrated in the laboratory in a 1968 study by Darley and Latane, in which participants heard audio recordings of different voices and were told that their microphones would be off until it was their turn to speak. A famous example of it occurred on March 13, 1964, when a young woman returning to her home in Rego Park, Queens, was approached by Winston Mosely, who repeatedly stabbed her and  raped her while she was dying, in an attack that lasted half an hour. The New York Times reported that there were 38 witnesses. It is an example of diffusion of responsibility leading to social loafing. Sometimes it can be caused by pluralistic ignorance, or groupthink, where each person concludes from the inaction of others that the other people don't think help is needed. FTP, name this psychological phenomenon in which people are less likely to give help in a life-threatening situation when others are present.;;bystander (effect)|bystander (apathy)|(Kitty) Genovese (effect)|(Kitty) Genovese (syndrome);;
Pop Culture;;Its earliest mention is from the eleventh century from the diaries of a woman who lived on the edge of the marsh that would give it its name, who only knew the name of one day of the week. The first full description of its modern form is from 1398 by Zacharias Mumps. In 1884, stooging was declared a penalty, one year after the three goal baskets on each side were  replaced with the modern hoops. There are 700 types of fouls listed in the rule books, every one of which occurred in the final of the first ever World Cup, in 343. The two best Australian teams of this sport are the Thundelarra Thunderers and the Woollongong Warriors, while British teams include the Tutshill Tornadoes, who have seen recent success, and Puddlemere United, who signed Oliver Wood. FTP name this sport played on broomsticks by Cedric Diggory, Cho Chang, and Harry Potter.;;quidditch;;
Literature;;This author published the collection Home and Exile containing the essays My Home Under Imperial Fire, The Empire Fights Back, and Today, the Balance of Stories, while one of his stories is about Emenike who promises to put a girl through school, collected in his Girls at War. That collection has 3 stories set during the  Biafran war, and other characters include the priest of Ulu named Ezeulu in Arrow of God and Obi, a British educated official in Lagos who left Ufuoma, the land of his grandfather who commited suicide after killing a British official. FTP name this creator of Okonkwo, the Nigerian author of Things Fall Apart.;;(Albert) (Chinualumogu) Achebe;;
World History;;This battle was followed up by Operation ¨¦glantine, the losing side's last offensive in the war, which led to the Battle of Mang Yang Pass. The aftermath saw the 17th parallel established as a temporary boundary between the victorious nation and the occupier-backed losing side. The latter, which counted among its number Hmong mercenaries,  had captured the namesake mountainous border  town, which was promptly cut off and surrounded by Vo Nguyen Giap. Indirectly leading to the fall of the Fourth Republic, FTP, name this major victory for the Viet Minh and disaster for the French that effectively ended the First Indochina War.;;(Battle) (of) Dien Bien Phu;;First Indochina (War)|French Indochina (War)
World History;;The first use of this phrase appeared in the title of a committee, which came up with a "February Outline", but the "Group of Five" was declared in a "Notification" sent to the Politburo as "completely penetrated with double-dealing" and subsequently disbanded.  A major spark to this event was "big-character-poster" written by Nie Yuanzi labeling professors  as "black anti-Party gangsters," and within a week, the first Red Guard groups formed in Tsinghua University, and rival Red Guard groups fought street battles in Beijing.  FTP - name this disastrous period in modern Chinese history during which Mao Zedong's cult of personality spiraled out of control.;;(Chinese) Cultural Revolution (of China);;
Literature;;This author's unfinished autobiography, Illumination and Night Glare, was released over 30 years posthumous in 1999. Novels include one about a latent homosexual officer and his nymphomaniac wife, and one about Jester, Fox Clane, and J.T. Malone. In addition to Reflections in a Golden Eye and A Clock Without Hands, she wrote the short stories "A Domestic Dilemna" and "The Sojourner" in one collection. One of her more famous works features Janice Evans getting married to Jarvis, the brother of the title character, Frankie Addams, while her most famous novel includes Jake Blount, a drunk who frequents Biff Brannon's New York Cafe, as well as  Spiros Antonapoulos and John Singer, both of whom are deaf-mutes. FTP, name this author of The Ballad of the Sad Cafe, The Member of the Wedding, and The Heart is a Lonely Hunter.;;(Carson) McCullers|(Lula) (Carson) Smith;;
Art;;He founded his own architectural firm in 1955 with James Freed and Henry Cobb, a year after becoming a U.S. citizen. He was a member of the National Defense Research Committee from 1943 to 1945. While at Harvard, he studied under Walter Gropius, and during his early years, he designed many of his buildings in the style of Mies van der Rohe. One of his buildings was commissioned by Fran?ois Mitterrand and includes an underground lobby. Some of his other projects include the Mile High  Center in Denver, the Dallas City Hall, the Four Seasons Hotel in New York, the Javits Convention Center in New York, the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in Cleveland, and the Bank of China Tower in Hong Kong. FTP, name this Chinese-American architect who designed the glass pyramids in front of the Louvre.;;(Ieoh) (Ming) Pei;;
Music;;The composer intended it and its two successors, Songs of Catullus and Triumph of Aphrodite, to be accompanied by dancers and scenery, but usually only the music is performed. The penultimate song equates Venus with two medieval heroines, Blanzifor and Helena, and is in Latin, as is the rest of the work, except for most of Part I, which is in Low German. That section, Uf Dem Anger, uses folk melodies from the composer's native Bavaria. Part II consists of a bunch of  drunk monks having fun in a pub, and is, as such, named In Taberna. The work begins and ends with an evocation of a goddess "in a state of change like the moon", O Fortuna. FTP name this collection of 26 medieval songs set to music by Carl Orff.;;Carmina Burana;;
Religion/Mythology;;His courage came from the thunder god Adad, and to amuse himself he sounded the tocsin.  He loses the pukku and mikku, and on his journey he encounters the only man to survive the Flood.  Two scorpions at the base of Mount Mashu warn him of impending danger, and he has to prove his identity to the tavernkeeper Siduri.  He dreams of a meteorite that he is forced to compete with, and has another where he has to fight an axe.  A snake consumes the plant he found that would restore his youth, and he is offered the chance to become immortal if he can stay awake for six days and seven nights.  His friend dreams of a "house of dust" after they  slay the Bull of Heaven sent to kill him after he rejects Ishtar's marriage proposal, and he returns home on a raft of cedar after slaying Humbaba.  FTP, identify this King of Uruk and subject of a Babylonian epic.;;Gilgamesh;;
United States History;;During his lame-duck period, he appointed Nathan Goff, Jr., as Secretary of the Navy to replace Richard Wigginton Thompson, and other members of his cabinet included Secretary of the Interior Carl Schurz and Attorney General Carl Devens. Pozo Colorado is the capital of a department named after him in Paraguay, where he is a national hero, having arbitrated in their favor while president after the War of the Triple Alliance. Congress overrode his veto of the  Bland-Allison Act, and he promised not to run for a second term after a supposed bipartisan committee rewarded him 20 disputed electoral votes. FTP, name this 19th president who won a controversial election in 1876 against Democrat Samuel Tilden.;;(Rutherford) (Birchard) Hayes;;
Philosophy;;This work claims that the words "brotherly love" have led to "the best lying and dissembling" in its section "The Spirit of Gravity," and it called for the creation of new values in the section "Old and New Tables". The most famous quote from this work first appeared in its author's earlier tract The  Gay Science, and it discusses the ideas of the "superman" and the "the will to power" and was also the inspiration for a Richard Strauss tone poem. FTP, name this work, in which the title character, an ancient Persian mystic, asserts that "god is dead," written by Friedrich Nietzsche.;;Thus Spake Zarathustra|Also Sprach Zarathustra;;
Physics;;He wrote an article entitled Report on the Mode of Detecting Vegetable Substances mixed with coffee for the Purpose of Adulteration in 1857, and his work in the field of absorption of hydrogen gas by palladium has been recently made significant by the cold fusion controversy. While a 14-year-old student at Glasgow, he angered his professor by accurately suggesting that when  gases are absorbed by liquids they become liquids. FTP, name this man, best known for his equation that states that the rate at which gases diffuse is inversely proportional to the square root of their densities.;;(Thomas) Graham;;
World History;;This event was worsened by the mobilization of the Interahamwe, who got together after the death of Juvenal Habyarimana, whose plane was shot down above the capital. Pasteur Bizumungu took over as president after the event, while most Cabinet posts were given to the RPF, which had been formed by refugees in a neighboring country. Tensions had existed for a long time previous, with the two major entities involved having race riots that ended with 20,000 killed in 1959, and independence was given to the nation involved by Belgium  in 1962. The Belgians considered one tribe superior to the other, but the majority Hutu took power away from the minority Tutsi, who had had power under colonial rule. FTP, name this 1994 massacre of the Tutsi in an African nation with capital at Kigali.;;Rwanda(n) (genocide);;
Literature;;In the beginning of this novel the protagonist's sister Thomasin is in Diggory Venn's van, after her marriage license to Damon Wildeve is rejected. Bonfires feature prominently in the opening, as the work begins and ends on Guy Fawkes Day, and the title character is a diamond merchant who has just returned from Paris. His wife drowns in a lake  after trying to meet Damon in the middle of the night, and the protagonist goes blind by the end. Following the romantic life of Eustachia Vye, this is, FTP, what novel set in Wessex about Clym Yeobright, a work by Thomas Hardy?;;(The) Return of the Native;;
Physics;;It mediates the quantum field of the same name, which has a constant vacuum expectation value of 246 gigaelectronvolts. It is CP-even, but because it is a scalar particle, it has zero spin. Several alternate models, such as top quark condensate theory, have been proposed in which it need not  exist, as it is the only particle in the Standard Model that has yet to be observed. FTP, name this hypothetical boson, sometimes called the "God particle", thought to be responsible for giving mass to the gauge bosons.;;Higgs (boson);;God (particle)
Religion/Mythology;;According to Homer, the breezes of Zephyrus always fan at this location on the banks of the Oceanus, while Hesiod places it in the Isles of the Blessed.  Also called the Land of Orchards or the White Island, and Arion tells his lyre that he will join those here who have passed the darkling flood.  A purple light covered everything and horses roamed around, and it is here that Aeneas reunites with his father.  Mortals who were related to the gods, as well as Hypermnestra, were sent here,  and it was ruled by Rhadamanthys.  Orpheus can be heard playing his lyre, and among the notable figures here are the founders of Troy.  Often contrasted with Tartarus, FTP, identify this region inhabited by those favorably judged as well as fallen heroes.;;Elysium|Elysian (Fields)|Elysion;;
Pop Culture;;In this work, the main character had hundreds of replaceable heads for expressions, while his lover had interchangeable masks for the same effect. The main character's pet dog is named Zero, and has a red nose. The palette used for the main town was restricted to orange, black, and white.  Each holiday has its own town that can be accessed through portals in a circle of trees. Characters include the Lock, Shock, Barren, the Clown with the Tear-Away Face, and Oogie Boogie. FTP, name this 1993 stop-motion movie about Jack Skellington, directed by Tim Burton.;;(The) Nightmare Before Christmas;;
Noncomputational Math;;This figure is formed by graphing y=1/x with a domain restriction to avoid the asymptote, then rotating it in 3 dimensions around the x axis. Integrating under the curve shows that the volume approaches pi, while the surface area is greater than two pi times the natural log of the upper bound of integration. This is sometimes called the painter's paradox  as painting an infinite area requires an infinite amount of paint, but filling the figure requires a finite volume of paint. FTP, name this figure with infinite surface area, but finite volume.;;Gabriel's (horn)|Torricelli's (trumpet);;Painter(')(s) (paradox)
World History;;This organization was first established by the Statute of Westminster. The 1991 Heads of Government Meeting in Zimbabwe reaffirmed a declaration stating its voluntary and cooperative nature first put forth in the meeting twenty years earlier in Singapore, and its original definition was stretched with the admission of Mozambique in 1995. Burma rejected membership upon independence in 1948, and Ireland,  South Africa, and Pakistan withdrew from it, although the latter two have since rejoined. Manchester and Melbourne were the hosts of this organization's quadrennial athletic Games, founded in 1930 as the British Empire Games. FTP, name this association of sovereign states, almost all of whom were former members of colonial Britain.;;(the) (British) Commonwealth (of) (Nations);;
Literature;;One story in it is about Eliot, who is watched by Mrs. Sen after school. Another story is about Miranda, who goes with her married lover Dev to the Christian Science Center's Mapparium where he tells her "You're sexy". The final story is about an immigrant boarding with the 103 year old Mrs. Croft after his marriage in Calcutta and is entitled "The 3rd and Final Continent". The title story is about a tour guide for the Das family who learns that Bobby is not Raj's  son, but the bastard son of a Punjab man. FTP name this collection of stories named for Mr. Kawasi's job translating Gujarati to a doctor, the 2000 Pulitzer prize winner by Jhumpa Lahiri.;;Interpreter of Maladies;;
World History;;With its early history shrouded in mythology, its first distinguishable cultures were the Valdivia and Manchalilla Cultures around 3500 BCE. Volcanoes in this nation include Pichincha, Illiniza, Cotopaxi, and Chimborazo. It gained its independence from the Spanish Vice-Royalty of Peru  in 1822 and its capital city was made a UNESCO cultural heritage site in 1978. For ten points, name this country to which the Galapagos Islands belong and which has its capital at Quito.;;(Republic) (of) Ecuador;;
Psychology;;Though not a composer, this man used whistles, metronomes, and tuning forks in his work. He won a Nobel prize in Medicine in 1904 for researching the digestive system, from which his most famous work stemmed. The term which he is most famous for introducing was actually a result of a mistranslation into English, which caught on when John B. Watson used it. He started the study of TMI, or transmarginal  inhibition, an organism's response to overwhelming stimuli, such as stress or pain, relating shutdown points to temperament. In his most famous experiment, he paired a CS with a US, ringing a bell whenever meat powder was present. FTP, name this psychologist known for conditioning dogs to salivate.;;(Ivan) (Petrovitch) Pavlov;;
Music;;Ko-ko-ri-ko and F¨¦-an-nich-ton were characters in his first major success, Ba-ta-clan, and other works include a musical retelling of Robinson Crusoe and Mr. Cauliflower will be at Home on.... Many of his works had libretti written by the nephew of the composer of La Juive, Ludovic Hal¨¦vy, including Bluebeard and two of his more famous works featuring the characters of the Viceroy of Peru and Gardefeu:  respectively, La P¨¦richole and La vie parisienne. Agamemnon and Menelaus were in his La belle H¨¦l¨¨ne, and he never completed his only grand opera, The Tales of Hoffman. FTP name this French composer and creator of the operetta, his best-known example of which is Orpheus in the Underworld.;;(Jacob) Offenbach|(Jacques) Offenbach;;
United States History;;Appendix 3 to its report consisted of Public Law 88-202, which was passed by the Senate on December 9th and the House a day after. Appendix 17 is a polygraph examination requested by one of the major remaining players in the event being examined, while Appendix 10 had expert testimony from Robert Frazier and Cortlandt Cunningham of the FBI, who testified regarding firearms and their identification. Members in this included two senators, Richard Russell and John Sherman Cooper; two House members, Hale Boggs and  Gerald Ford; as well as John McCloy and Allen Dulles, former director of the CIA. It was led by the chief justice at the time, and determined that the fatal shots had been fired from the sixth floor of the Texas School Book Depository. FTP, name this commission that investigated the assassination of president John F. Kennedy.;;(the) Warren (Commission)|(the) President's Commission on the Assassination of John F. Kennedy;;
Astronomy;;Its companion, first sighted by Alvan Clark in 1862, was the first white dwarf ever discovered, and the two rotate about each other with a period of about 50 years  and a distance of about 20 astronomical units. Its more common name probably comes from the Greek for "sparkling", although it was known as Sothis to the Egyptians,  who used it to calculate the length of the year and for whom its appearance signaled the coming of the annual floods. Located 8.6 light years away from the solar system, FTP, name this binary star, the brightest in the night sky and largest in the constellation Canis Major, often known as the "dog star".;;Sirius;;Alpha Canis Majoris|(the) Dog Star
Pop Culture;;Influenced by and influencing Todd Rundgren and Mark Bolen, this artist is colorblind in one eye due to a fight he had at age 15.  He played Major Jack Celliers in Merry Christmas, Mr. Lawrence and Jareth king of the goblins in Labyrinth. He had to change his last name from Jones in order to avoid being confused with a Monkee.   This songwriter studied theater and brought theatrics to rock, taking on personae like the White Duke and Ziggy Stardust. His song "It's No Game No.2" from Scary Monsters is the favorite song of Artemis Fowl. FTP, name this writer of Changes, Let's Dance, and Rebel Rebel and Husband of Iman.;;(David) Bowie;;
Philosophy;;He argued that sin lies in intentions, not actions, in Know Thyself, and also wrote Dialogue Between a Philosopher, a Jew, and a Christian. He disagreed with Roscelin of Compi¨¨gne and Guillaume de Champeaux by saying that language is incapable of demonstrating the truth of physical objects. He went to study under Anselm of Laon but hated it, despite the fact that both are today considered major writers of Scholasticism. His autobiography, History of My Troubles,  describes his famous love affair, which produced a son named Astrolabe, while his best-known work as a logician is Sic et non. FTP name this medieval French philosopher castrated for his love affair with H¨¦lo?se.;;(Peter) Abelard|(Petrus) Abaelardus;;
Art;;He reworked many of his pieces innumerable times before he would be satisfied with it, which along with his use of aggressive brushwork and high-key colors combined to create a sensation at the Sidney Janis Gallery in 1953. Major influences on his work are Cubism, Surrealism, and Arshille Gorky, with whom he shared a studio. He was awarded the Andrew W. Mellon Prize in 1979, and a retrospective of his work was mounted in 1983 by the Whitney Museum. The toothy snarls, overripe breasts, and  vacuous eyes of pieces such as Seated Woman, Woman and Bicycle, and Two Women in the Country are characteristic of, FTP, which abstract expressionist painter best known for his "Woman" series?;;(Willem) de Kooning;;
Philosophy;;Some of his early works include "The Spirit of the Age" and Two Letters on the Measure of Value," and he laid out the five principles of inductive reasoning, which would become known as his namesake method in his book System of Logic. In one essay he discusses the "tyranny of the majority" and created the Harm Principle, and in another work he would defend the Greatest  Happiness Principle and lay the foundation for a movement that would include philosophers such as Henry Sidgewick and Jeremy Bentham. FTP, name this philosopher who wrote On Liberty and Utilitarianism.;;(John) (Stuart) Mill;;
World History;;After it was supressed, a band called The Plastic People of the Universe was arrested, and many prominent artists protested, forming the human rights watchdog group Charter 77. One trigger for this event may have been the publication of Milan  Kundera's satire The Joke, and it followed the end of Anton Novotny's presidency. Its leader announced in Brno that there would be "the widest possible democratization," and introduced the idea of "socialism with a human face". FTP name this massive liberalization by Anton Dubcek in Czechoslovakia in 1968, crushed by the USSR and named for the capital of its country.;;Prague Spring|Pra?sk¨¦ jaro|Pra?sk¨¢ jar;;(liberation) (of) Czechoslovakia
Biology;;The most common type in humans is made up of cross-linked DHI and DHICA polymers and has two types which differ from each other in the pattern of polymer bonds. The second-most-common type incorporates L-cysteine and is found in greater concentrations in women. This type may also become carcinogenic when exposed to  UV rays. It can be found in the zona reticularis in the adrenal cortex and the stria vascularis in the inner ear. People of African descent were at a higher risk of developing rickets before the advent of vitamin D supplements, because their skin contains higher levels of this substance. In the brain, it causes the distinctive coloration of the locus ceruleus and the substantia nigra. FTP, name this skin and hair pigment whose deficiency can be caused by albinism.;;melanin;;
Literature;;He studied medicine under Geoffroy d'Estissac, and published his own editions of Hippocrates' Aphorisms and Galen's Ars parva. However, he is best known for an extended series of works whose "Fifth and Last Book" was expanded from a work which appeared two years earlier of questionable authorship, Isle Sonante. The fourth book in the series is the longest, and concerns a quest for the Sacred Bottle, which contains a "Simulated Battle". He was forced to flee to Metz after publication of the third book in the series in 1546.  In 1532, he published the first book of the series, which concerned the "Horrible and Terrifying Deeds and Words of the Renowned" title king of the Dipsodes. FTP, name this French author best known for his works on Gargantua and Pentagruel.;;(Francois) Rabelais;;
World History;;Many naval vessels have at one point carried this name such as the Admiral Kuznetsovand the Ulyanovsk.  The most famous one sits on the former site of Prince Dolgorukiy's hunting lodge on Borovitskiy Cape at the confluence of the Neglinnaya River and a river bearing the name of the city it is located in.  Though the aforementioned one is by far the most famous, many others exist such as the one in Novgorod.  FTP, name this complex on the Moscow River that bears the name of the Russian word for fortress, which became synonymous with the government of the Soviet Union.;;(Moscow) Kremlin;;
Religion/Mythology;;This movement founded in the 18th century was opposed by a group whose name literally means "those who oppose". Founded on the two principles of religious panentheism  and Devekus, communion between God and man, adherents are distinguished by their wearing of kolpiks and satin caftans.  Organized into dynasties, among them Ger and Belz,  they typically segregate themselves from secular civilization. Found primarily in Crown Heights or Israel, FTP  name this form of Orthodox Judaism originating with the Baal Shem Tov who count among its members, Chabad Lubatvich who can be found on college campuses worldwide.;;(C)hasidi(s)m|(C)hasidic (judaism) (jews);;
Geography;;On its northern coast is Point Pedro, and its rivers include the Yan Oya and Aruvi Aru. Off its coast is Delft island, and the Victoria Falls Reservoir is in its center. Its largest mountain is Pidurutalagala, and the North Eastern province's capital is Trincomalee. The peninsula on its northern tip connected by Elephant Pass and is named after the city Jaffna, which has been a rebel base. It got one of its former names from the city Kandy. The  Adam's bridge connects it to the mainland, and spans the Palk Straight. Buddhism was brought here by Ashoka's son Mahinda. FTP name this island nation which has had an ongoing civil war between the southern Sinhalese and the northern Tamils, who practice Hinduism, with a de facto capital at Colombo and which is near India.;;Sri Lanka;;
Religion/Mythology;;An early known example of one was Kur, who was killed by Enki, Ninurta, and Inanna. In Korea , they are said to resemble the outlines of mountain chains. The Chinese type is usually benevolent, and their bones were believed to have medicinal uses.  Pliny the Elder wrote of one fighting with an elephant, while Cadmus killed one that guarded Castalian Springone, and another called Ladon  guarded the apples of Hesperides.  In Asia they fly without wings and control the rain and the four oceans, while in Europe they have wings and usually guard hoards of treasure, only to be slain and have their treasure taken. FTP, name this mythical creature that is always seen in a Chinese New Year parade.;;dragon(s);;
Miscellaneous;;Ted van der Parre is the only Dutch winner of this annual competition, while former champions from Britain include Gary Taylor and Geoff Capes. Since hosting and winning in the first six years of this competition's existence, America has hosted only twice, in 1997 and 2007, and produced only one winner, in 2006. Events include Farmer's Walk and Keg  Toss, and former champions include Finns Janne Virtanen and Jouko Ahola, and Swede Magnus Samuelsson, the self-professed "king of" one of the signature events, the Atlas Stones. One commentator is 3-time champion Bill Kazmaier, while the three 4-time champions have been two Icelanders, J¨®n P¨¢ll Sigmarsson and Magn¨²s Ver Magn¨²sson, and the current champion, Mariusz Pudzianowski. FTP name this programming staple of ESPN2 that requires contestants to complete activities such as lifting barrels loaded with weights and pulling trains.;;(Met-Rx) W(orld's) S(trongest) M(an);;Strongest Man
United States History;;In Article 9, the parties agreed to maintain cruisers off the coast of Africa to help enforce the abolition of the slave trade, while Article 10 dealt with extradition, an issue highlighted by the Caroline Affair involving political fugitives from the failed Upper Canada Rebellion. Granting 7,015 square miles of disputed territory to one of the parties, it also defined the boundaries from  Lake of the Woods 49 degrees north to the Rocky Mountains, but the question of Oregon was left undecided.  FTP - name this US-Britain treaty of 1842 named after two diplomats, which concluded the so-called Aroostook War.;;Webster-Ashburton (treaty);;
Chemistry;;They are functionalized via 1,3 dipolar cycloaddition in the Prato reaction, and their 6, 6 bonds can react as dienes or dienophiles in the Diels-Alder reaction. They are resistant to hydrogenation, but they can be oxidized via osmium tetraoxide and a 2002 study showed that they can organically synthesized, but they are usually generated by a current between graphite electrodes. They can form inclusion compounds known as endohedral and according to Euler's theorem their smallest type needs twelve pentagons to form a closed and stable molecule.  Nanotubes are a cylindrical version of, FTP, these carbon allotropes which often take the shape of soccer balls.;;(buckminster)fullerene(s).;;buckyball(s)|buckytube(s)|(carbon) nanotube(s)
Literature;;Its 42nd chapter, entitled "Vanished into the Clouds," is left blank, implying the title character's death. Earlier, the title character contemplates the transience of life after the death of his wife, who wished to become a nun after her husband married the Third Princess. Throughout his life, the main character engages in many affairs with different women, including his half-brother's  concubine and his stepmother, with whom he fathers the future emperor. Very few of the characters are given an explicit name, so modern readers keep track of them using nicknames based on, for example, the color of the character's clothing. FTP, name this Heian period work written by Japanese noblewoman Murasaki Shikibu, considered by some to be the first novel.;;(The) Tale of Genji|Genji Monogatari;;
Psychology;;He published his first paper about "the testicles of eels" at the University in the city he lived most of his life. The analysis of "Irma's Injection," a dream based on the botched nasal surgery of his patient Emma Eckstein, whom he had prescribed cocaine, formed the basis of one of his most important works. In Beyond the Pleasure Principle, he introduced the theory of the death drive, or Thanatos, which is in constant conflict with Eros, the life drive. Otto Rank, formerly one of his closest colleagues, disagreed with his  Oedipus complex theory and was consequently expelled from the Vienna Psychoanalytic Society. He proposed a structural model of the psyche as being divided into the id, ego, and super-ego. FTP, name this Austrian author of The Interpretation of Dreams, known as the "father of psychoanalysis".;;(Sigmund) Freud;;
Noncomputational Math;;There are over 367 known proofs for this, including a proof by differential equations, a proof using similar triangles, a proof by rearrangement, and Euclid's proof which appeared as Proposition 47 in Book 1 of the Elements. However, there cannot be any  trigonometric proof for it because the trigonometric identities are themselves proven using it. By its converse, which is also true, tying 12 equally-spaced knots in a loop of rope may have allowed ancient Egyptians to construct right angles. A more general form of it is the law of cosines, which holds true for all triangles. FTP, name this theorem of Euclidean geometry which states that the square of the hypotenuse of a right triangle is equal to the sum of the squares of its legs.;;Pythagorean (theorem);;
Music;;The piece opens with triplets of octave chords of G. The title character is sings that he is charmed by an unnamed child's "beautiful shape" and offers the child his mother's golden garments, his daughters' nightly dance, and promises to play games with him. The four parts are all sung by one person, where a higher range signifies the child's part, a lower range signifies the  father's part. The child is dying of an unknown ailment, and is claiming to see the title figure, while his father is telling him he is only seeing trees and clouds. FTP, name this piece that uses Johann von Goethe's poem as lieder, written by Franz Schubert.;;(The) Erlking|(Der) Erlk?nig;;
Physics;;It occurs because, due to the spin-statistics theorem, electrons have half-integer spin and therefore their wavefunctions are asymmetric under exchange of particle positions. Materials that display this property align their dipoles into Weiss domains which are divided by Bloch or N¨¦el walls and a hysteresis curve describes the magnetization of such materials under an external field. Because this effect competes with entropy as the temperature rises, it is no longer displayed by materials above the Curie point. FTP, name this phenomenon, a tendency to maintain spontaneous magnetization, often seen in cobalt and iron.;;Ferromagnetism;;
World History;;Examples of this civilization's writing have been found in the village of Cascajal outside their earliest known building site, San Lorenzo. Other major cities in its heartland by the Tuxtla mountains are Tres Zapotes and its capital, built on an island in the Tonal¨¢ River. Much of their art is based on a jaguar god, including much in that capital, La Venta. Some historians have hypothesized that  African traders visited this civilization, thus explaining the Negroid facial features of this culture's distinctive giant stone heads. FTP, name this civilization that was succeeded by the Zapotecs and Mayans, among others, after flourishing from 1200 BC to 400 BC, the oldest in Mesoamerica.;;(the) Olmec (civilization);;
Literature;;He wrote about Gordon Comstock and Dorothy Hare in two of his earlier novels, Keep the Aspidistra Flying and A Clergyman's Daughter. He told of his childhood in an autobiographical essay published three years after his death, Such, Such Were the Joys and described his experiences among poor miners in northern England in The Road to  Wigan Pier. He warned against using overly obtuse and meaningless speech in his essay Politics and the English Language using the example of "a not unblack dog". His first book talked about his time in the title cities, Down and Out in Paris and London, and other works based in his travels include Homage to Catalonia and Burmese Days. His most famous works include characters like Parsons, Syme, and Boxer, and, more centrally, Napoleon and Winston Smith. FTP name this author of Animal Farm and 1984.;;(George) Orwell|(Eric) Blair;;
Biology;;One of these is a homohexamer structured to have a hole in its center, and it hydrolyzes ATP which shifts the structure of what it binds to. That specific kind is diametric and is structured in 6 bundles. They can activate primase, and they come in rho and DNAb families, along with superfamilies based on motifs found in their structures.  5'-3' kinds require a covalent bond to single strands, and all of them move along a phosphodiester backbone of a nucleic acid. FTP name this class of enzymes that separate nucleic acid strands before replication and are named for DNAs structure.;;Helicase;;
World History;;The Messinians were driven out of here by the Spartans after the battle of Aegispotami, and its first bishop took part in the council of Ephesus. Pope Pius the 5th was canonized for an outburst he made predicting the outcome of a conflict here, and after it Sokullu rebuilt his country's navy. Uluc Ali Pasha led one side here,  while forces of Spanish, Venice, and the papal States were led by Don John of Austria. Fought off the coast of Naupaktos, which had been controlled by the Ottomans, it was the first time a Christian fleet defeated the Turks. FTP name this city that is the name of a famous 1571 battle.;;(Battle) (of) Lepanto;;
Art;;Seven are made of marble, while the other nine are cast in either brass or bronze. They are polished smooth, but have a flat edge shaved off at the top. The first one was mounted on a conical support, while the brass one in the Guggenheim is on an "organically irregular stem" and the marble one at the Metropolitan Museum of Art has a marble base. The artist called it a "project before being enlarged to fill the vault of the  sky". One was notoriously taxed by U.S. Customs when the artist brought it into the country because it was considered "raw material" and not art, which caused a court battle in 1927. FTP name this series of sculptures by Constantin Brancusi depicting the motion of an avian.;;(Essence) (of) Bird in Space;;
Chemistry;;This element is used in lamps that produce short, intense flashes of light like stroboscopes and high-speed photography. The existence of its 129 isotope in many meteorites suggest that it is a product of the decay of iodine-129. Another isotope of this element, with atomic mass 135, is produced by uranium fission, while its most common isotope has an atomic mass of 132. In 1962, Neil Bartlett formed a red, crystalline solid out of this element's hexafluoroplatinate, and other compounds this elements form include one with Cs2F8 and a series of fluorides, of which the easiest to prepare is  tetrafluoride. These compounds all go against the conventional wisdom that compounds can not be made from noble gases. First isolated by Sir William Ramsay and Morris Travers in 1898 by fractional distillation of krypton, FTP, name this noble gas with atomic number 54 and chemical symbol Xe.;;xenon;;xe
Literature;;This poem's last section begins, "Passing the visions, passing the night," and the penultimate one mentions "battle-corpses, myriads of them" and "debris of all the slain soldiers of the war". The 14th section proclaims, "praise! praise! praise!", continuing the pattern of repetition established earlier in the poem by the eighth section, which begins nearly every line with "As"; the sixth, which begins nearly every line with "With"; and the second, which begins nearly every line with "O". In 1946, this poem was set to music by Paul Hindemith. Its first line is the title of the poem, which is followed by "And the great star early droop'd in the western sky in the night". Followed in the collection in which it appears by O  Captain! My Captain!, FTP, name this elegy for Abraham Lincoln written by Walt Whitman.;;When Lilacs Last in the Dooryard Bloom'd;;
Philosophy;;In one lecture he discussed the Greek origin of the word "hymn" in relation to Holderlin's poem "Der Ister," while he argued that each new work of art inherently changes the meaning of existence in his essay "Origin of the Work of Art" that appears in his collection Off the Beaten Track.  In his most famous work  he asserted the need for escaping from the "hermeneutic circle" and discussed the concept of Aletheia and Dasein, which was heavily influenced by his teacher Edmund  Husserl. FTP, name this German philosopher who wrote Being and Time.;;(Martin) Heidegger;;
World History;;The discovery that led to this event was registered under the name of George Cormack due to anti-Native American racism of the time, but the actual discovery was by Tagish First Nation member Skookum Jim Mason.  For two winters, famine threatened the area due to the influx of people, famously depicted by Charlie Chaplin eating a  shoe.  Later regulation by the Mounties forced incomers to bring a year's worth of supplies.  Dawson City became a boom town of over 37 times its current population, but under Sam Steele's command the Mounted Police was able to avert disorder.  FTP - name this late 19th Century mass migration for mineral prospecting along a Canadian River.;;Klondike Gold Rush;;Yukon (gold) (rush)
Literature;;Many of his later works like Puck of Pook's Hill are set in Sussex, and he married the sister of his collaborator on The Naulahka. He wrote about the horrors of five years of his childhood spent in a foster home in "Baa Baa, Black Sheep", a story in the collection Wee Willie Winkie. His place of birth is the setting for many of his more famous works, including a story in The Phantom Rickshaw about Daniel Dravot and Peachy Carnahan, "The Man  Who Would be King". Racial superiority was the impetus for exhorting Europeans to "send forth the best ye breed" in "The White Man's Burden", while many of his other poems were first published in Barrack-Room Ballads. FTP name this Anglo-Indian author of Kim, Gunga Din, and The Jungle Book.;;(Joseph) (Rudyard) Kipling;;
Physics;;Their ability to absorb and scatter solar radiation is measured by their SSA. Black carbon has an SSA of 0.23, indicating that it very absorbing. According to the IPCC, it is difficult to model the effect of these on global warming, because of uncertainties regarding their atmospheric burden, anthropogenic contribution, and their optical parameters. Inhalation of these can cause diseases such as silicosis and black lung. They are a major source of pollution in industrial cities such as Mexico City and Beijing. Examples of these include  smoke, dust, and smog. They differ from sols in that the continuous medium is always a gas, usually air. FTP, give this term which in common usage can also refer to a spray can capable of dispensing it.;;aerosol(s);;
World History;;During his stay as hostage in Thebes, he was greatly influenced by Epaminondas, and returned home to the throne after the death of brother  Perdiccas .  It was during this time that he invented the use of the sarissa pike and formed the core of the army that would fight at the seige of Methone, where an arrow penetrated his right eye.  Later, his forces annihilated the Sacred Band of Thebes and decicively defeat the Theban ally Athens at  Chaeronea, following which he formed the League of Corinth, sometimes called the Hellenic League.  However, his invasion of Persia was just getting underway when he was murdered by his bodyguard Pausanias of Orestis.  FTP -- Name this father of Alexander the Great.;;Philip (II) of Macedon|Philip II (of) (Macedon);;
Anthropology;;He concluded that the minds of the "primitive" man and the "civilized" man are the same, but that their responses to situations are different because of their different cultural backgrounds, which he then used to disprove the universality of Freud's Oedipal Complex in Sex and Repression in Savage Society. He founded a school of anthropology that focuses on how an individual's needs are served by societal institutions, practices and beliefs, and how the psychology of an individual can change their society, known as functionalism. His most famous work involved study of the Kula ring system.  FTP, name this Polish/Austrian anthropologist whose most famous works include Myth in Primitive Society, Magic, Science and Religion, and Argonauts of the Western Pacific.;;(Bronislaw) (Kasper) Malinowski;;
Music;;His 4-movement Violin Concerto in D Major contains a Tocatta, 2 Arias, and is ended with a Capriccio and was choreographed by George Balanchine in Balustrade. Another collaborations with Balanchine involved the late serialist work Agon and he arranged the Star Spangled Banner along with writing the Dumbarton Oaks concerto after moving to America. His neoclassical works include a work with a double fugue movement that lacks violin and viola and sets "Expectans expectavi Domini" and ends with psalm 150, and is known as the Symphony of  Psalms. More famous for works depicting the struggles of Ivan Tsarevich against Katschei, while another is split into the sections Adoration of the Earth and The Sacrifice and depicts a pagan ritual where a virgin dances herself to death. FTP name this Russian born composer of the ballets Petrushka, The Firebird, and The Rite of Spring.;;(Igor) (Fyodorovich) Stravinsky;;
Physics;;Most of them are pseudoscalars, and the heaviest is a vector. One set of neutral ones require a small correction for charge-parity violation, and they were originally believed to be carriers of the strong force. Their flavorless varieties are known quarkonia, which include the J-Psi, or charmonium. Examples of these particles that exist outside of the quark model include glueballs and tetraquarks and  Hideki Yukawa won the Nobel Prize for predicting these. Named for the heavier of the two quarks in their composition, FTP, name these strongly interacting hadronic bosons whose name comes from the Greek word for middle.;;Meson(s);;
Philosophy;;The last section of this work talks about the monistic and pluralistic ways of reading Whitman's poem "To You," and earlier its author asserts that there are two types of people: tender-minded and tough-minded. The second section of this work discusses a man chasing a squirrel around a tree and posits the question "Does the Man go round the squirrel or not"? Subtitled "A New Name for Some Old Ways of Thinking" this work was published after its author's previous works  Varieties of Religious Experience and Principles of Psychology. FTP, identify this work, which names the philosophical movement led by C. S. Peirce and John Dewey, written by William James.;;Pragmatism;;
Literature;;This author asked "Mortals, what one of you that loves not me / Abundantly more then my sisters three"? in the Air section of The Four Elements, while another work is a discussion between two sisters near the Lacrim flood, The Flesh and the Spirit. A more famous work include the lines "The world no longer let me love;/ My hope and Treasure lies above" and is entitled  Verses upon the Burning our House. She did not know that her brother in law secretly published her most well known works, which include To My Dear and Loving Husband. FTP name this poet of The Tenth Muse, Lately Sprung up in America, the first famous woman American author.;;(Anne) Dudley (Bradstreet)|(Anne) (Dudley) Bradstreet;;
Astronomy;;Barnard 33 is an example of a dark one. The Wings of the Butterfly one and the Red Square one are examples of the bipolar type. The Pleiades is an example of a reflection type, which do not produce much visible light, and the Omega one is an example of an emission type, which contain ionized gas. Italo Calvino wrote in his short story "At Daybreak" about living in one. The term was originally used for any extended astronomical object, and was used to describe the Andromeda Galaxy at one time.  The Eagle one contains the Pillars of Creation, and other notable ones include the Cat's Eye and Crab ones. FTP, give the name for an interstellar cloud of dust, gas, and plasma, which comes from the Latin for "mist", also known as a "stellar nursery".;;nebula(e)(s);;
Religion/Mythology;;It is alleged that she had an affair with Ares that resulted in the birth of Parthenopaeus, and the centaurs Hylaeus and Rhaecus tried to rape her.  Her father Iasus abandoned her because he wanted a boy, but a she-bear was sent so she couls suckle.  Her face was "too boyish for a girl, but too girlish for a boy," and she was a child, her fortune said that marriage would be her ruin.  Toxeus and Plexippus were killed over a gift to this figure by their nephew, and Rhea made her and her husband into the lions that pull her chariot after she failed to pay her respects to Venus, as Hippomenes was lent three  golden apples in his race with this hunter, who killed any who challenged her to a foot race and lost.  FTP, Meleager killed his uncles over a gift to what mythical female hunter?;;Atalanta;;
Literature;;This author wrote a short story in which onlookers waiting for a bus observe a series of tragedies in the rain, "Beneath the Shelter". In addition to "The Answer is No" and "The Conjurer Made Off With the Dish", this author wrote a novel in which Gamasa captures a genie that puts a double in his place that gets beheaded after the ruler decrees that no more virgins shall be killed. Said Mahran is the title character of this man's novel The Thief and the Dogs, and  Ahmad al-Jawad is the patriarch of the family at the center of this author's most famous work. For ten points, identify this author of Palace Walk, Palace of Desire, and Sugar Street, the Egyptian who wrote the Cairo Trilogy.;;(Naguib) Mahfouz;;
World History;;A legendary curse attached to his tomb would unleash the demons of war into the country of anyone who enters, and sure enough, three days after Mikhail Gerasimov opened his tomb, the Nazis invaded Russia. After destroying the armies of Bayazid I at Ankara and recieving the submission of the sultan of Egypt, he turned East planning a final great expedition against China, but fell ill and died in 1405. This leader  slaughtered 20,000 inhabitants of Baghdad, razed Delhi to the ground, and depleted Damascus of its artisans during his conquests. FTP - Name this Mongol-Turkic conqueror who strove to make his capital Samarkand the most splendid in all Asia.;;Timur-e Lang|Timur (the) (Lame)|Tamerlane|Tamburlane;;
Art;;An 1832 tour of northern Africa inspired many of this artist's later works, including Women of Algiers in Their Apartment. At the Paris Salon a decade earlier, he had displayed his first major work, Dante and Virgil in Hell. He was friends with Frederic Chopin and George Sand, whom he painted in 1838, and may have been the illegitimate son of Charles  Talleyrand. He greatly admired Lord Byron, using one of Byron's plays as the basis for his The Death of Sardanapalus, and showing support for the cause Byron died fighting for with The Massacre at Chios. FTP name this French artist best known for his commemoration of the July Revolution of 1830, Liberty Leading the People.;;(Ferdinand-Eugene-Victor) Delacroix;;
Miscellaneous;;One lies on the counter of an apothecary in Riverside Scenes at Qingming. Its name is derived from a word meaning "table sprinkled with sand or dust" because the first version of one used by the Babylonians were like that. The quipu of the Incas used  string, the Russian schoty has wires that are bulged upward in the center, and the Roman ones use grooves in tablets. The Chinese suanpan can handle decimal and hexadecimal, while the Japanese soroban that has two beads less can only count in decimal. FTP, name this counting device whose most well-known version consists of beads on wires set in a wooden frame.;;abacus;;
Literature;;His collections of poetry include Playful Evil, Easter of Gea, and a translation of Goethe's Roman Elegies. The influence of psychologist Alfred Binet can be seen in his essay On Humor, and other psychological themes can be seen in his short story collections The Trap and And Tomorrow, Monday.... He wrote about Sicily in the late 19th century in The Old and the Young, but his most successful novel was The Late Mattia Pascal. He is most famous, though, for his plays, including  Right You Are If You Think You Are, Henry IV, and one featuring The Boy, The Child, The Son, The Stepdaughter, The Father, and The Mother. FTP name this Italian playwright best known for that play, Six Characters in Search of an Author.;;(Luigi) Pirandello;;
Religion/Mythology;;Kalinga used to be home to many of its followers, until Ashoka invaded and converted the region to Buddhism. Each Kalchakra consists of one progressive time cycle and one regressive time cycle, mirroring the turning of a wheel. According to its cosmology, we are currently in the 5th period of a regressive time cycle. It holds that Tirthankaras, or "fordmakers", of which there have been 24 in the "present age", reveal the truth and show others the path to enlightenment. A person's jiva, or soul, can take on a new body after physical death. It has two main sects, Digambara and Svetgambara, the main difference being whether the wearing of  clothes is allowed. Adherents practice Ahimsa, which means "non-violence", or absence of desire to harm any living thing, in order to prevent the accumulation of harmful karma. The devout often cover their mouths to avoid harming insects. FTP, name this religion founded by Mahavira in ancient India.;;Jain(ism) (Dharma);;
Art;;It is different from other buildings of its style because its bas-reliefs depicting the churning of the Ocean of Milk proceed in a counter-clockwise direction and it faces west instead of east. The quincunx of towers represents the five peaks of Mount Meru. This building was used as the capital city for King Suryavarman II, and is surrounded by a moat. It appears on the flag of the country it's located in, and was once dedicated to  Vishnu, but is now a Buddhist temple. Its name comes from Sanskrit for capital and Khmer for temple, and it is an example of the high classical style of Khmer architecture. FTP, name this Cambodian temple built in the 12th century.;;Angkor Wat|Angkor Vat;;
Pop Culture;;In the unedited version of this song a much heavier metal interlude is begun by an E minor arpeggio which is ended by a held  note carrying over into the 3rd verse as the A minor theme is reintroduced. It discusses the seasons, wind, sun, and rain as examples of cyclic death, and the narrator desires to be like them. HIM did a cover of this song as a duet, and it also inspired their "Join Me In  Death". The 2nd verse cites that 40,000 men and women redefine happiness every day, and says that Romeo and Juliet are together in eternity. In the last verse it is clear that a woman can't go on, and the title character appears after her candle disappears and the curtains blow before taking her hand and flying, representative of her suicide, in FTP what single from the 1976 Agents of Fortune album by Blue ?yster Cult?;;(Don't) (Fear) (The) Reaper;;
Biology;;Somatic hypermutation occurs in their variable domains, and serves to increase their binding strength through affinity maturation. The nicking and breaking of DNA by AID and uracil DNA glycosylase at two S regions followed by non-homologous end joining results in their isotype switching, and their variable regions are encoded in V, D, and J segments. Their monomer consists of four polypeptide chains, two heavy and two light, and, of their five classes, one is a pentamer and one a dimer. IgM and IgA are examples of these proteins produced in the humoral  immune system by B cells, which, FTP, bind to antigens.;;Antibod(y)(ies)|immunoglobulin(s);;
Literature;;The narrator starts out assessing himself as a "safe man" and mentions the late John Jacob Astor who once described him as "prudent". The building where he works has a window that faces the shaft of a skylight, and another window that faces a brick wall. The title character, who had previously worked at the Dead Letter Office, has only three coworkers, one who has digestion problems and cannot function in the mornings,  an alcoholic who cannot work in the afternoons, and a twelve year old boy named for the cakes he buys for the others. It was first printed in Putnam's Magazine in two parts, and later reprinted in The Piazza Tales. FTP, name this short story by Herman Melville whose title character always turns down requests by saying "I would prefer not to".;;Bartleby(,) the Scrivener(:) (A) (Story) (of) (Wall-street);;Bartleby
Biology;;White blood cells from 4 anonymous donors were used, although one of them, RP11 from Buffalo, New York, was used much more than the others. A rival project, privately funded by Celera, used the riskier but quicker shotgun method, leading to competition with the publicly-funded project. The International HapMap Project is working to further the data produced by this project by studying patterns of single nucleotide polymorphism groups, or  haplotypes. It was begun in 1990 and led by James D. Watson. By 2003, most of its sequencing work was complete, except for the highly repetitive centromeres and telomeres. FTP, name this international scientific research project which aims to understand the genetic makeup of humans.;;H(uman) G(enome) P(roject);;
World History;;A 13-point ultimatum was presented to them on the banks of the Thukela River, all the terms of which expired on January 10, after which the invasion commenced.  Sergeant Henry Gallagher exclaimed, "Here they come, as thick as grass, and as black as thunder" when their columns attacked at Rorke's Drift.  Immediately before the siege of Eshowe, their troops attempted to ambush British columns at  Inyezane, while an impi defeated the British encamped at Isandlwana.  FTP - Name this south African ethnic group who fought an 1879 war with the British Empire.;;Zulu(s);;
Philosophy;;He praised tar-water in his last work, Siris, while he attacked Newton's theory of fluxions in The Analyst.  He wrote a discussion between a figure who represents John Locke and another figure whose name translates to "lover of spirit" in one work, while in A Treatise Concerning  the Principles of Human Knowledge features his famous axiom "esse est percipi".  FTP, name this Idealist philosopher who wrote Three Dialogues Between Hylas and Philonus and who is the namesake of a university town in California.;;(George) Berkeley;;
Pop Culture;;In this work, a stuttering rebel is tortured for information until a sympathetic Doctor Ferreiro gives him a lethal injection. When Carmen is feeling ill because of her pregnancy, a mandrake root that is placed under her bed relieves her, but she dies after throwing the root into a fire. Pedro is the leader of the rebel guerrillas, and is also the brother of Mercedes  who works as a servant at the mill where the main family resides. The main character has to prove herself to be Princess Moanna of the Underground by performing three tasks that are revealed to her by a book. FTP, name this fantasy film set in post Civil War Spain about a girl Ofelia who meets a faun directed by Guillermo del Toro.;;Pan's Labyrinth|El Laberinto del Fauno;;
Religion/Mythology;;In Thailand and Laos, the walking one is depicted with double Abhaya mudras. Amitabha is the principal one of these in the Pure Land sect, and is said to have been a king who renounced his throne after receiving teachings from Lokesvararaja. One of them is described in Hindu writings as an avatar of Vishnu. In countries like Myanmar, there are 28 of them. Lao Tzu was said by some to have reincarnated into one.  They are usually depicted as having ushnishas, which represent their "expanded wisdom", long earlobes, and "snail shell" curls of hair. The Emerald one is located in Bangkok, and the two at Bamiyan were blown up by the Taliban in 2001. FTP, give the name for anyone who has experienced Nirvana, the most famous one being Siddartha Gautama.;;Buddha(s);;
Literature;;This novel opens in the Central London Hatchery and Conditioning Centre where the Director explains the Boshanovksy process to a group of students. A major character takes a helicopter trip with Lenina Crowne  where he meets the protagonist who later finds out he is the Director's son. Involving a trip to the Savage Reservation in New Mexico, FTP, name this dystopian novel occurring in the year 632 After Ford, in which Bernard Marx and John the Savage discover the incompatibility of happiness and truth, the most famous by Aldous Huxley.;;Brave New World;;
Noncomputational Math;;The Saccheri quadrilateral and the Lambert quadrilateral were among the first theorems on this topic. One form can be described by four models, while another has three. In one model, the cross-ratio is used to describe distances. They are useful for modeling space, since one type can describe the edges of the universe where no matter exists, and since the theory of relativity states that space is curved where there is matter. In another model, called the hyperspheric model, lines are modeled by great circles. They do not obey the parallel postulate,  since in the hyperbolic type there are infinitely many lines intersecting a point A not on a line L, and in the elliptical type all lines intersect. FTP, name these geometries that do not follow the precepts of an ancient Greek geometer.;;non-Euclidean (geometries);;
Art;;He depicted St. Cosmas and St. Demian in his glass painting All Saints Day, and Rose-Carol Long studied hidden iconography in his works such as Painting with a Green Center and Improvisation 33 Orient where she identified St. John the Divine. His later work like Tempered ¨¦lan are pictographic, and he compares humanity to a giant triangle in his  Concerning The Spiritual In Art. Three of his Compositions series were displayed in the "Degenerate Art" exhibit by the Nazis before their destruction. FTP name this Russian-born German artist who taught at the Bauhaus and was involved in "The Blue Rider" group, named for one of his paintings, to promote abstract art.;;(Wassily) (Vasily) (Vasileyevich) Kandinsky;;
Religion/Mythology;;He was given the epithet Gullintani due to the gold teeth in his mouth, and he has nine different mothers.  Raised by boar's blood, seawater, and the force of the earth, his hall is known as the Cliffs of Heaven.  In the form of the god Rig, he created the serfs, peasants, and warriors, and after Loki stole the Brisingamen from Freya, he disguised himself as a seal, sat by the thief, then hours later punched him in the face.  Requiring less sleep than a bird, his hearing is keen enough such that he can hear wool grow on a sheep's back, and at  Ragnarok he will kill and be killed by Loki.  The owner of the Gjallerhorn, he is the guardian of the rainbow bridge Bifrost.  FTP, identify this Norse god who makes sure no one gets into Asgard.;;Heimdall(r);;
Computer Science;;Because of addressing issues on 32-bit operating systems, most computers can only support 4096 megabytes of it. The performance bottleneck caused by the growing disparity between its speed and the speed at which CPUs can perform, is referred to as the "memory  wall". When there is not enough of it, swapping must be used. The static type stores information in flip-flops, while the dynamic type uses transistor gates. Most types are volatile, meaning the data is lost when the power is turned off. It is usually sold in modules known as "sticks". FTP, name this type of computer storage, which allows the data to be read in any order.;;random access (memory)|RAM;;
United States History;;He served in the New York State Senate from 1830 to 1834 as part of the Anti-Masonic Party, then switched to the Whig Party as governor of New York from 1839 to 1843. As a member of the Cabinet, he resolved the Trent Affair and made a full recovery after being stabbed in the throat by Lewis Powell as part of a larger conspiracy. His Cabinet post was due to his leadership of his last political party after the collapse of the Whigs, whose nomination he lost in 1856 and 1860. This came a few years after he switched to the new  Republican party, and he served in the Cabinets of Abraham Lincoln and Andrew Johnson as Secretary of State. FTP, name this man perhaps best known for his "Folly", the 1867 purchase of Alaska.;;(William) (Henry) Seward;;
Miscellaneous;;It features the Bonnie Tyler song "Here She Comes" and "Love Kills" by Freddie Mercury, although the earlier version has a Jazz fusion score. All references to the woman Hel were cut, along with violence and Yoshiwara's House of Sin, and Georgio Moroder famously modified it. Based on a story by Thea von Harbou, it used the Shuftan process in scenes like when the mad Rotwang copies Maria's likeness,  and it features the first use of smash-zoom when Freder finds Maria's scarf. FTP name this German science-fiction masterpiece about a revolt of the workers who live underneath the title city directed by Fritz Lang.;;Metropolis;;
Geography;;You can enter it on the Bright Angel Trail, which allows access to springs at Indian Garden. To its north is the Kaibab national forest, named after a Native American tribe which has a nearby reservation. Reservations that are adjacent to it are for Hualapai and Havasupai tribes, and a million years ago it had volcanic action  block its western end. Its immense strata formed mostly below sea level and its Vishnu Schist is on its inner gorge. It is believed to have been formed 5 million years ago, with most downcutting by its river in the last 2. FTP what is this immense valley beginning in Utah which was formed by erosion from the Colorado River?;;(the) Grand Canyon;;
World History;;Tacitus described this warrior's final battle in the Midlands of England and Cassius Dio wrote that this loser to Paulinus had waist-long red hair. A statue by Westminster Bridge and the Houses of Parliament in London depicts this ruler and daughters riding a chariot. When King Prasutagus died and the Romans took her  entire estate in addition to raping her daughters, she became determined to lead a revolt, and led 120,000 people to Camulodunum where a statue of Claudius had been erected at the expense of the British. FTP, name this warrior queen of the Iceni who famously led a rebellion of the Iceni and Trinivantes against Roman rule in Britain in 61 AD.;;Boadicea|Boudica;;
Physics;;The proximity fuse, developed during World War II, applies this principle to detonate automatically when the target is close enough. Since light waves do not travel through a medium, they require the relativistic form of this, which takes into account time dilation. The classical form was tested and confirmed for sound  waves in 1845 by Dutch scientist C.H.D. Buys Ballot.  For electromagnetic waves, it results in redshift. It relates the transmitted and observed frequencies of a wave in terms of its velocity and the velocity of its source. FTP, name this physical phenomenon that causes the pitch of the siren on a passing police car to change relative to a stationary observer.;;Doppler (effect)|(shift);;
Economics;;This concept was first described by Robert Torrens in an 1815 essay on the Corn Laws, but it is most commonly attributed to David Ricardo, who explained it in On the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation. It allows specialization in production, and it allows countries to consume beyond their production possibility frontiers. According to this theory, a country should export  goods which it can produce at a low opportunity cost, and import goods which other nations can produce at a lower opportunity cost than its own. FTP, name this economics principle which states that a country can still benefit from trade even if it doesn't have an absolute advantage in the production of any good.;;comparative advantage;;
Music;;The epigraph to this work contains the words "Majora canamus", from Vergil's Eclogues, and part of 1 Timothy. The librettist took liberties with his source text, including changing all the speech of the title character from first person to third person. That librettist, Charles Jennens, took much of his text from the book of Isaiah, while the book of Luke provides the most famous recitative in the work, which begins "There were shepherds  abiding in the field", as well as one of the more famous choruses, beginning "Glory to God in the highest". The work premiered in Dublin in 1742, and its most famous section, from chapter 19 of Revelation, declares that "the Lord God omnipotent reigneth". FTP, name this oratorio by Georg Friedrich H?ndel which contains the "Hallelujah" chorus.;;(The) Messiah;;
Literature;;At the end of this work, Alquist blesses two lovers and rechristens them Adam and Eve. The psychologist Hallemeier says that the title characters occassionally ignore orders while talking to the main female role, who has arrived on the island where this work takes place on a humanitarian mission. The founders of the enterprise on the island do not appear, but Domin tells them about them: the son, who sees the title characters as inexpensive workers,  and the father, who instead wanted to play a Creator role. Helena Glory finds all this out in, FTP, what sci-fi play by Karel Capek which introduced the term "robot"?;;R.U.R. (Rossum's) (Universal) (Robots);;
World History;;While trying to avoid capture, he took refuge at the Holy Sees embassy, where troops attempted to force him out by playing hard rock and The Howard Stern Show outside. He was educated in the Military School of Chorrillos in Lima, and took a course in psychological operations at Fort Bragg, North Carolina. He was simultaneously a paid informant for the CIA and the chief of military intelligence appointed by Omar Torrijos, and spied for Castro's Cuba. He not only smuggled  narcotics from Colombia into he U.S. using his home country as a transshipment base, but was involved in laundering the huge drug profits in Colombia, and sold weapons to the Sandinista government in Nicaragua. FTP, name this dictator overthrown and captured when the U.S. invaded Panama in 1989.;;(Manuel) Noriega;;
Biology;;Hippocrates wrote that it was the most widespread disease of his time, and called it phthisis. Edvard Munch's sister, the subject of The Sick Child, died of it. The bacteria that causes it multiplies only about once a day, so infection is easily prevented by those with normal immune systems. Inmates of Georgian prisons are known to swap sputum to be tested positive for this disease and transferred to  quarantine prisons with better facilities. In March 2007, Andrew Speaker became the first individual to receive a CDC isolation order since 1963 when he entered the United States while infected with the multi-drug-resistant type of this disease. FTP, name this disease caused by mycobacteria, also known as TB.;;tuberculosis;;TB
Literature;;He wrote about his disgust with conventional education in Beneath the Wheel, and other early works describe artists, Gertrud and Rosshalde. He was a bookseller until writing about a failed writer in his first novel, Peter Camenzind, while more mature works of his include Narcissus and Goldmund. He was psychoanalyzed by J.B. Lang, the results of which led to Demian. One famous work includes characters like Plinio Designori and Thomas van der  Trave, the predecessor of the major character, while another has Kamaswami and Govinda. Along with Hermine and Maria, another work is about Harry Haller, while the first work is about Father Jacobus and Joseph Knecht. FTP, name this author of Steppenwolf, The Glass Bead Game, and Siddhartha.;;(Hermann) Hesse;;
Religion/Mythology;;Askr and Embla were born from it, four deer run across it, representing the winds, and the Roaring Kettle, which serves as the source of rivers, lies beneath it.  Also known as Laerad, Heidrun and Eikthyrmir eat from it, and Lif and Leifthrasir will use it as shelter.  Urdarbrunnr is used to sustain it while it holds together three levels that contain the Nine Worlds,  and the Aesir hold court here.  Nidhogg gnaws at the base of it, and it will eventually be destroyed by Surt.  The source of the mead served in Valhalla, Odin hung upside down for nine nights from it to receive runes.  The golden bird Vidofnir is perched on a hawk at its top, and Ratat?sk runs up and down it delivering messages.  FTP, name this giant ash, the world tree in Norse mythology.;;Yggdrasil;;
Art;;Paintings from this movement include Funeral of the Anarchist Galli by Carlo Carra and The City Rises. It his movement was temporarily endorsed by Fascists, and its manifesto was written by Filippo Marinetti, who expressed a hatred for political and artistic traditions from the past and love for speed, technology, and violence. Paintings in this style sometimes portrayed people in progressive stages of motion, and used Cubist methods of division of space. One painting in this style shows a street lamp emitting light in the shape of V's.  Dog on a Leash shows a scurrying dog whose legs are blurred into circles by motion, and Unique Forms of Continuity in Space shows the dynamism of a walking man. FTP, name this movement whose artists include Giacomo Balla, Umberto Boccioni, and Gino Severini.;;Futurism;;
World History;;As ambassador to Russia, he met and befriended Prince Gorchakov, who would later become one of his greatest adversaries, when the Prince would denounce him as having denied Russia's victory by the modification of the Treaty of San Stefano.  The League of Three Emperors thus fell apart during that same month-long meeting he led to decide upon the Eastern Question  as the host and mediator of the Congress of Berlin.  Seven years later, he organized another conference in Berlin to decide the fate of African colonization, which precipitated the Scramble for Africa.  FTP, name this German Chancellor to Emperor Wilhelm I, who famously proclaimed the great questions of the day will be decided by "iron and blood".;;(Otto) (von) Bismarck;;
Literature;;One of his works is about an old man with "white hair descending/in a frothy cataract" who gives a speech to conscripts about the horrors they were praying to inflict on their enemy entitled The War Prayer, while he explains his problems learning "The Awful German language" in an epilogue to one of his more famous works. He wrote a work about Joan of Arc dictating memoirs to Sieur Louis and a collaboration with Charles Dudley Warner which gave its name to  The Gilded Age. More famous works are The Tramp Abroad and some that follow a boy who meets Injun Joe in a cemetary and another vagrant son of a drunk who runs away on a raft with the slave Jim. FTP name this author of the books about St. Petersburg, Missouri, The Adventures of Tom Sawyer and Adventures of Huckleberry Finn.;;(Mark) Twain|(Samuel) (Langhorne) Clemens;;
Miscellaneous;;This nation won the first match in World Cup history, beating Belgium 3-0, and finished 3rd in that 1930 World Cup, still their best finish to date. Their World Cup appearance in 1990 was the first in 40 years, but in 1950, Joe Gaetjans scored the goal that helped them defeat England 1-0 in the "Miracle on Grass". They finished in last place in the 1998 World Cup, losing to Germany, Yugoslavia, and Iran under coach Steve  Sampson 4 years after hosting the tournament, and in 2006, failed to make it past the Group of Death against the Czech Republic, Italy, and Ghana, leading to the departure of coach Bruce Arena. FTP name this country whose soccer team is captained by Carlos Bocanegra and includes players such as DaMarcus Beasley, Landon Donovan, and Freddy Adu.;;(the) U(nited) S(tates) (of) (A)(merica) (national team|squad);;
Physics;;Classical physics can be defined as the limit of quantum mechanics as this quantity tends to zero. It was originally proposed in reference to black-body radiation, where E, the quantized energy of the photons of radiation, equals this quantity times nu, the frequency. A related constant which is useful when calculating with angular frequency instead of constant frequency is called  Dirac's constant, and is simply this constant divided by 2 pi. It is denoted by the letter "h" and has a value of approximately 6.626 times 10-34 Joule-seconds. FTP, name this physical constant named after a German physicist, which describes the sizes of quanta.;;Planck('s) (constant);;h
Music;;One character in this work opens a store for "the most miserable of the miserable", then proceeds to sing his "Morning Hymn", and the "Instead-Of Song" is between him and his wife. The House of Prostitution in Turnbridge is the setting for "The Ballad of Sexual Dependency", and a barmaid sings a song about herself, "Pirate-Jenny". At the end, the main character is presented Castle Marmarel, but we are first told about his banditry before seeing the opening of that store by Jonathan Jeremiah Peachum. The "Jealousy Duet" is sung between Lucy and  Polly, while the first song of Act I is the most famous, a ballad covered by Lyle Lovett and Louis Armstrong, among others, about the main character, Mack the Knife. FTP, name this opera based on John Gay's Beggar's Opera, a collaboration between Kurt Weill and Bertolt Brecht.;;(The) Threepenny Opera|(Die) Dreigroschenoper;;
Geography;;In 1995, this land mass was struck by an earthquake that destroyed the town of Neftegorsk. Its highest point is Mount Lopatin, and it is separated from the mainland by the Tatar Strait. In 1875 the country that controls it today traded it for a nearby archipelago and ran a penal colony on it before losing its southern half thirty years later. During that time, the island was known as Karafuto, and was handed over according to the Treaty of  Portsmouth. Cities on it include Alexandrovsk and Yuzhno, which is the capital of the province formed by this namesake island and the nearby archipelago, part of which is still claimed by Japan, the Kuril Islands. The Sea of Okhotsk lies east of, FTP, what island, the largest in Russia?;;(Ostrov) Sakhalin;;Karafuto
Miscellaneous;;Born into the Kutschera family in 1905, she was raised a socialist and atheist, and was cynical towards all religions until she met a Jesuit priest in college. In 1942, she started a music camp on a 660-acre farm in Stowe, Vermont, a location she thought resembled the hills of her native Austria. Unlike her portrayal in a movie, she was governess to only one child  of naval captain Georg von Trapp, a daughter who was bedridden with rheumatic fever. FTP, name this woman whose books about her family's escape from the Nazis after the Anschluss were used as the basis for The Sound of Music.;;Maria (von) (Trapp);;(von) Trapp
Miscellaneous;;His first success was the role of Arlequin in Baptiste, but he first gained international renown with a production of his interpretation of Nikolay Gogol's The Overcoat. He studied at the Sarah Bernhardt Theatre with ¨¦tienne Decroux. His movie roles include Professor Ping in Barbarella, and appearances in Paganini and Silent Movie. His most famous characterization was first presented in 1947, and was known as Bip. His album of greatest hits consists of one minute of clapping on each end, surrounding many minutes of  silence. This is because the art form for which he was most famous and helped popularize required no talking whatsoever. Retiring in 2005, two years before his September 2007 death, FTP, name this Frenchman, the foremost mime of the 20th century.;;(Marcel) Marceau|(Marcel) Mangel;;
Literature;;In act 2 of this play Lancelot Gobbo leaves his master and then meets his father, asking where Lancelot lives. Old Gobbo is then convinced that Lancelot is dead. Later, Jessica confides in Lancelot that she is ashamed to be her father's daughter, and then she elopes. The title character is friends with Gratiano, Salarino, and Solario, and he agrees to lend money to  Bassanio, who is believed to be his homosexual lover. Bassanio then goes to Belmont to court Portia, who disguises herself in the trial of Antonio to give the "quality of mercy" speech in FTP this William Shakespeare comedy about the Jewish money lender Shylock who sues the title character for "a pound of flesh".;;(The) Merchant of Venice;;
Noncomputational Math;;He delivered the first Reith Lecture, which was converted into the book Authority and the Individual. In an essay of his he proposed the concept of a tiny "celestial teapot" that is floating between Mars and the Earth in an attempt to demonstrate that God is a fairy tale like Santa Claus. His most famous work on Religion was Why I am Not  A Christian, while criticisms of his most important work involve the axiom of infinity and his namesake paradox, which involves the set of all sets that are not members of themselves. Co-writer of an influential 3-volume work in logic with Alfred North Whitehead this is FTP what British winner of the 1950 Nobel Prize in Literature who helped write Principia Mathemtica.;;(Bertrand) Russell;;
Chemistry;;When it was first proposed, it was the "fat" type of three types of earth that together replaced one of the four main elements, a theory put forth in the 1669 work Subterranean Physics by Johann Becher. Early in the 18th century, one of Becher's students expounded on the theory and gave this substance its more common name. According to that student, Georg Ernst Stahl, it was one of the products of corrosion along with calx,  known today as a metal's oxide. Its existence was defended until the beginning of the 19th century by some chemists, including Joseph Priestley, even after being discredited by Antoine Lavoisier. FTP, name this theoretical substance that was thought to explain why wood gets heavier after combustion.;;phlogiston;;
United States History;;The final tactical withdrawal from this battle was conducted under the direction of John Glover, whose Marbleheaders did not complete the operation by sunrise as planned, but were luckily saved by a heavy fog.  During the previous day, Israel Putnam's force was engaged with Henry Clinton, but a force led by William Howe marched through the lightly-defended Jamaica Pass to turn Putnam's flank, forcing the Americans to fall back.  With over 2,000 casualties, compared to the British 400, Washington ordered a surprise night retreat across the East River to Manhattan.  FTP - Name this first Revolutionary Battle after the Declaration of Independence on an island in New York.;;(Battle) (of) Long Island;;
Miscellaneous;;His collaboration with other astronomers led to the creation of the Jalali Calendar, more accurate than the Gregorian and computed from the vernal equinox.  In mathematics, he developed a method to solve cubic equations by intersecting a conic section with a circle, as explained in his 1070 Treatise on Demonstration of Problems of Algebra, and his criticism of The Elements  may have contributed to the development of non-Euclidean geometry.  However, he was most notable for composing over a thousand quatrains, many of which were translated by Edward Fitzgerald in 5 editions.  FTP, name this Persian polymath poet whose most famous line from his Rubaiyat may be, "A jug of wine, a loaf of bread, and thou".;;(Omar) Khayyam;;
Noncomputational Math;;A sorite is formed of many of these strung together. There are 256 distinct types of this, because each of the propositions can be of type A, E, I, or O, and it can be in one of four figures. The major premise and the conclusion have the same  predicate, while the minor premise and the conclusion have the same subject. It was presented by Aristotle in Prior Analytics.  FTP, name this logical argument, an example of which is: all mortals die, and all men are mortals, therefore all men die.;;(categorical) syllogism;;
Chemistry;;This substance's stress-strain behavior exhibits the Mullins effect and the Payne effect. Unlike other materials, it stores strain energy in thermal form as well as electrostatic form. In its natural form, it is a polymer of hydrocarbon monomers called isoprene. It can also be synthesized as a polymer of  isoprene or of various other monomers. It often undergoes vulcanization, a process in which it is heated and cured with sulfur. It occurs naturally in the sap of certain plants such as the Par¨¢ tree, figs, and euphorbias. FTP, name this elastic material used in most pencil erasers.;;rubber;;latex
World History;;This Dynasty's name was taken from a passage of the I Ching, meaning "Original Heaven", and during its reign China saw the increased use of the vernacular written Chinese. Zhu Yuanzhang expelled the last of its ten emperors from the capital Dadu, and the dynasty also saw the first connection of the Grand Canal to Beijing. Though the founder captured Korea,  he was repulsed in his territorial ambitions with three failed invasions of Vietnam and two failed invasions of Japan.  FTP - name this dynasty Marco Polo visited, whose most famous leader was Kublai Khan.;;Yuan (Dynasty);;
Literature;;He meets Peter Wheatstraw in the street on his way to an interview with Mr. Edmunds, and after receiving a job offer from Edmunds's gay son, he has an altercation with Lucius Brockway. Later, he attends a party at the Chthonian apartment building, where he is made fun of by a drunk brother and told he is not black enough by Emma. After a stay at Men's House, he moves to Mary's boardinghouse before taking a job as a public speaker. He sees the death of Tod  Clifton on 125th Street and reports this to Brother Jack and the rest of the Brotherhood and impersonates Rinehart, before finally reaching the conclusion to live unfettered around him and, as he mentions in the prologue, that others are incapable of seeing him. FTP, name this title character of the most famous work of Ralph Ellison.;;Invisible Man;;
Miscellaneous;;In the traditional French ritual, a sugar cube is placed on top of a slotted spoon resting on top of a glass of this drink. Cold water is slowly dripped over the sugar cube and into the glass, causing the spirit to louche, becoming opaque and milk-like in appearance. In 1915, France banned its sale, but a 1988 amendment allowed the sale of versions containing less thujone, a GABA receptor antagonist. It is produced from herbs such as anise, fennel, and  wormwood, which give it a distinctive color. Many artists have painted people drinking it, including Picasso, Manet, Degas, and Van Gogh, who is thought to have cut off part of his own ear while under its psychoactive influence. In French it is often called la F¨¦e Verte, or "The Green Fairy". FTP, name this highly alcoholic liquor often consumed by artists seeking inspiration.;;absinth(e);;
United States History;;Its original version was lost, but a version generally accepted as accurate comes from Mourt's Relation. The list of signees has survived thanks to Nathaniel Morton, and is equivalent to one provided by Thomas Prince from the annals of the drafter of this document. That list includes members like John Billington, George Soule, and Edward Winslow, all of whom are "loyal subjects of our dread Sovereign Lord  King James". Other signers include Miles Standish and William Bradford, an early governor of the ensuing created colony. Considered the basis for the United States Constitution, FTP, name this document signed near Cape Cod in 1620 by travelers on a namesake Pilgrim ship.;;(the) Mayflower Compact;;
Music;;This composer's works are organized by the "S" or "S/G" numbers. His "Totentanz" contains over 30 glissandi, and opens with a piano part that is modernistic and percussive. He wrote at the bottom of the score for "La Notte" that it should be played at his own funeral. His pieces are known for extreme technical difficulty, like his "Douze Grandes Etudes" and his Etude No.5.  His "Mephisto  Waltzes" are an example of program music, an idea that he strongly supported. A plaster cast of his right hand is in his namesake museum, and reveals that he had very little webbing between his fingers, thus allowing him to reach up to 12 whole steps on the piano. FTP, name this composer and virtuoso pianist who composed the "Hungarian Rhapsody" series.;;(Franz) Liszt;;
Biology;;Nearly half of these are capable of methanogenesis, and all have their membrane lipids ether-linked.  Insensitive to chloramphenicol, streptomycin and kanamycin, their encasings do not contain muramic acid and they use methionine as their initiator tRNA, which together with the fact that their ribosomes are sensitive to diphtheria toxin, indicates close relationship with plants, animals, and fungi.  They were first discovered by Carl Woese and George Fox in 1977, and by 2000 there were 209 catalogued species which are commonly placed in 3 broad categories of halophiles,  thermophiles, and acidophiles.  This is because many are found in extreme environments.  Though they sound old, they are in fact, FTP what domain of prokaryotic organisms closer related to Eukaryotes than bacteria are?;;Archaea|Archaebacteria;;
Literature;;His name literally means "split", which reflects his internal struggles. His small apartment has a low ceiling and faded yellow wallpaper which is torn where there is a hollow in his wall. He spends much time sleeping on his couch, and is frequently interrupted by Natasya, the landlady's servant. He does not want Luzhin to marry his sister, who ends up marrying his friend Razumihin instead. When his alcoholic friend Marmelatov is run over and killed  in the street, he gives his last copecks to Sonia. FTP, name this ubermensche who kills a pawnbroker and is sent to Siberia in Fyodor Dostoyevsky's Crime and Punishment.;;(Rodion) (Romanovitch) Raskolnikov;;
World History;;The first action in this conflict centered around four objectives, three of which were Sharm el-Sheikh, al-Arish, and Abu Uwayula.  A planned attack on the Mitla Pass by Raphael Eytan 202nd Paratroop Brigade missed, and joined with a detachment under Ariel Sharon, who attacked Jebel Heitan without orders from Moshe Dayan.  Later, an  Anglo-French task force launched Operation Musketeer, in accordance with the secret agreements of the Protocols of S¨¨vres, which marked the last British attempt to impose military will overseas without US support until the Falklands War.  FTP - name this military conflict precipitated by Nasser's nationalization of a certain Egyptian waterway.;;Suez (canal) (Crisis);;
Literature;;The title characters engage in a scheme of abduction and matrimony, proclaiming "here's a first-rate opportunity" upon meeting a gaggle of girls.  The girls are also the objects of interest to the protagonist, who begs them to help him regain a respectable life, asking if "any maiden here, whose ugly face and bad complexion, has caused all hope to disappear, of ever winning Man's affection".  Later, however, the protagonist learns that he was mistaken about his future: he was apprentice until his 21st birthday, not his 21 year, and since he was born on February  29th of a leap year, his apprenticeship will expire only when he is over 80 years old.  The returning Frederick promptly informs the outlaws of the deception of Mabel's father, leading to a showdown with the police, after which it is revealed they are all "noblemen who have all gone wrong".  FTP -- name this satirical Gilbert and Sullivan opera, whose most famous musical number is "I am the very model of a modern major-general".;;(The) Pirates of Penzance|Slave to Duty;;
Geography;;Over 90% of its volume lacks oxygen, because the upper and lower layers do not intermix, making it the largest meromictic basin in the world.  It is divided into two sub-basins, the northern one with a large shelf of over 190 kilometers wide.  The southern shelf is narrow and borders upon the cities of Samsun and Sinop, to the west emptying through the Sea of  Marmara.  It is separated from the Sea of Azov by the Cimmerian Bosporus, and northern cities include Odessa and Rostov.  FTP, name this inland sea separating Asia from Europe.;;Black Sea;;
Literature;;In this novel, the protagonist's daughter falls in love with Marius, who is rescued by the protagonist in an escape through the sewers.  That man gives himself up to save an innocent man and is imprisoned in Toulon, from which he escapes and adopts the illegitimate child of Fantine. After committing a minor crime, he is followed by Inspector  Javert. Imprisoned for nineteen years for stealing a loaf of bread, Jean Valjean is the main character, along with his daughter Cosette in FTP What 1862 novel by Victor Hugo that was turned in to a successful musical?;;(Les) Miserables;;
Art;;In one work he depicts a crowned virgin Mary standing over the family of Burgomaster Meyer, who are all standing on a wrinkled carpet. In another, a note is posted above a merchant named Gisze, who stares at the viewer while at a table with a vase of pink flowers. He made the pictures for the Erasmus book In Praise of Folly, and Sir Thomas More was another man he painted  while in his most famous job. Another work features a lute, an astrolabe, and a distorted skull while 2 men stand in robes. The painter of The French Ambassadors, this is FTP what German born court painter to Britain's King Henry VIII?;;(Hans) Holbein (the) Younger;;Holbein
Religion/Mythology;;It begins with the deaths of brothers Chilion and Mahlon and their father. Chilion's wife Orpah decides to remain in her homeland, but the title character, her kinsman, the wife of Mahlon, instead chooses to stay with a woman who instructs her to call her Marah, the wife OF  Elimelech. It ends with the lineage of the title character's second husband, beginning with Perez and ending with her son Obed, her grandson Jesse, and her more famous great-grandson. This book tracks the journey to Bethlehem of Naomi,  the title character's mother in law, from Moab, and in Bethlehem, she remarries after meeting a relative of Elimelech, Boaz. FTP name this book in the K'tuvim section of the Old Testament about the great-grandmother of David.;;(Book) (of) Ruth|(Megilat) Rut;;
Philosophy;;A work named this contains the proposition "Substance is by nature prior to its affections" in its 1st part, Of God, while the fourth part is called Of Human Bondage. Another work with this word in its title focuses on the concept of eudamia which is a form of satisfied happiness, and contains the doctrine of the mean. Its "meta" form is considered the most imprecisely defined part of moral philosophy, while its normative form attempts to define proper  conduct, such as in the Golden Rule. Nichomachean is attached to this word in the title of an Aristotle work, while it names a work advocating Pantheism. FTP name this branch of philosophy, the title of a Baruch Spinoza work, which attempts to categorize right and wrong behavior.;;ethics;;
World History;;Gregory of Tours portrayed him as a "new Constantine" in his Histories, for alhough his father Childeric I died a pagan, he himself was laid to rest at the Church of the Holy Apostles that he built in Paris, and was later joined by his wife St. Clotilda.  His military success after his AD 496 baptization was seen as Christian victories and his 507  Visigoth war as a campaign against Arian heresy.  The kingdom he built up encompassed Belgium, Gaul, and Northeastern France remained in the hands of his family until 750.  FTP, name this king of the Salian Franks and founder of the Merovingian Dynasty.;;Clovis I;;Clovis
Chemistry;;The name for this type of organic compound was first used in 1730 by F.G. Frobenius, and non-IUPAC names for some include anisole and phenetole. Used as solvents for Grignard reagents, and as inert media for reactions like the Grignard and Wurtz-Fittig reactions, along with esters, these can be tested for by splitting them with hydroiodic acid, known as the Zeisel method. These are soluble in organic liquids, but most are not soluble in water, an exception to which is dioxane, a  cyclic one of these. They are generally synthesized by reacting alkyl halides with sodium alcoholates, a process known as Williamson synthesis. Featuring two R groups connected to an oxygen, FTP, name this group of organic compounds whose diethyl type is often used as an anasthetic.;;ether(s);;
Literature;;Characters in it include Albert and his wife Lil, who says "Goonight" to Bill, Lou, and May. The third section ends with the narrator reaching Carthage "burning burning burning burning", and according to the writer, Tiresias is "the most important personage" in this work. The fourth part, the shortest, is about Phlebas the Phoenician. The epigraph is a quote from Petronius,  mostly in Latin but with dialogue in Greek. Madame Sosostris, famous clairvoyante, and Marie's memories of winters at her cousin the archduke's are in the first section, The Burial of the Dead, and the last section, What the Thunder Said, ends with the Sanskrit words "Shantih shantih shantih". FTP, name this poem that begins, "April is the cruellest month," by T.S. Eliot.;;(The) Waste Land;;
Physics;;Used in carburetors to draw in fuel and mix it with the air, the Venturi effect is a case of this. In the Venturi effect, fluid flowing through a pipe with a constriction in it must satisfy the equation of continuity and the conservation of energy, thus producing a choked flow, used to control the delivery of water through spigots and valves. The fallacy of the equal-transit-time theory makes the popular explanation that lift on an airfoil is generated by this  effect false. However, it can be used to calculate the air pressure and velocity over an aircraft wing, which may be the cause of the misconception. FTP, name this principle in fluid dynamics stating that a decrease in fluid velocity results in an increase in fluid pressure.;;Bernoulli('s) (principle)|Bernoulli('s) (equations);;
Religion/Mythology;;In the Iliad, he is the husband of Aglaea, and Dionysus was allowed to join the pantheon after getting him drunk.  His failed attempt to sleep with Athena led to the birth of Erechtheus, .  Early in life, he was taken care of by Eurynome and Thetis, and he ordered Kedalion to guide Orion to the sun so the hunter's sight could be restored.  Theseus killed his son Periphetes, and after publicly revealing his wife's infidelities  using a magic net, the other gods laughed.  Cyclopes served as his assistants, and to prevent infighting, Aphrodite was married to him.  Thrown off of Mount Olympus by both of his parents, he created Pandora from clay, and he aided in the birth of Athena by splitting Zeus' head open.  FTP, identify this cripple Greek god who made lots of stuff in forges.;;Hephaestus;;
Miscellaneous;;A category 5 on the PSI scale, it was first observed at Fort Riley, Kansas and in Queens, New York. Soon afterwards, it appeared in Boston, Massachusetts, Sierra Leone, and Brest. 99% of its resulting deaths occurred in people under 65, and it killed up to 20% of those infected. As the disease spread, many countries were reluctant to publicize it due to censorship, except for one country whose newspapers freely discussed it because it had not imposed censorship, as it was not involved in the  war. A major factor accelerating its spread was the increased amount of travel. Sailors and soldiers spread the disease to different countries, and the close quarters and stress of combat during World War I increased their susceptibility. FTP, name this outbreak of the H1N1 virus which started in 1918.;;(1918) spanish (in)flu(enza) (pandemic) (epidemic);;
Literature;;One character attempts to sell chocolate-coated cotton, after buying an entire year's worth of Egyptian cotton on impulse. The protagonist is part of the "two to the fighting eighth power" squadron stationed on an Italian island. Snowden's death  affects the protagonist greatly, leading him to ask, "Where are the Snowdens of yesteryear"? Aarfy rapes and murders Michaela, who represents pure innocence. M&M emterprises, run by Milo  Minderbinder, is really a black market racket. Its title refers to the illogical military rule that prevents Doc Daneeka from grounding the protagonist. In the final chapter, it is discovered that Orr has deserted to Sweden, which leads Yossarian to escape to Sweden himself. FTP, name this novel set in World War II by Joseph Heller.;;Catch(-)22;;
Chemistry;;During the Hellenistic period, the millefiori technique was developed, allowing people to create intricate designs in it. A light green type of this, called trinitite, was formed as a result of the Trinity nuclear test. It is formed by quenching a melt. In medieval Europe, the bullseye of the crown type of this was less expensive than the outer edges. Because of the lack of electric transition states in the range of visible light and because of its homogeneity, it is usually transparent.  Some common types include the Germania, soda-lime, and borosilicate types. Natural ones, such as obsidian, are usually produced in lava flows. It is cooled through its transition temperature quickly enough so that a crystal lattice cannot form, hence they are amorphous. FTP, name this solid material commonly used in window panes.;;glass;;
Biology;;The most primitive members of this group are sea squirts, whose motile larval stage sports a muscular post-anal tail.  In craniates, the nervous system develop into a brain and head, while pharyngeal slits become gills, such as those in hagfishes, which technically are not true fish.  True fishes have jaws while lampreys do not, but since they both belong to the subphylum  vertebrates, they have an extensive skeletal system, including a spinal column evolved from the shared notochord. FTP - name this phylum in the Animal Kingdom to which amphibians, reptiles, and mammals all belong.;;Chordate(s)|Chordata;;
Religion/Mythology;;In one legend, she took the form of a wild cat and killed all who come near, but Thoth told her stories to get her to come back, and her cult was centered at Dandarah.  People would come to her temples to have dreams explained, and her cult was unusual as men and women were priests.  Known as the Lady of the Limit, during the war between Horus and Seth, she danced naked around Ra in order to cheer him up.  Often identified with Aphrodite, she is often depicted behind Osiris, in the form of Sakhmet, and another god had to get her drunk in order to prevent her from wiping out humanity.  The "Eye of Ra", her name translates as  "the House of Horus", and her headdress features a sundisk.  FTP, identify the Egyptian goddess depicted with the head of a cow.;;Hathor;;
Literature;;Among the most famous adventures of this novel are those of the Spider Monsters and the Skeleton Monster. One of the four protagonists is lazy and gluttonous, and has eight abstinences he must abide by which make up part of his name. Another was trapped under a mountain as a punishment for a misdemeanor, but was freed and given an opportunity to redeem himself. He has magic power for seventy-two transformations  whereas the glutton only has thirty-six. FTP, name this novel in which Chu Pa-chieh, the half-pig glutton, Sun Wu-k'ung, the half-monkey fighter, and the loyal Sha Monk all help the Buddhist priest Hsuan-tsang embark on a pilgrimage, one translation of which is called Monkey, written by Wu Ch'eng-en in Ming Dynasty China.;;Journey to the West|Hsi yu chi|Xi you ji;;Monkey
Physics;;Typically, one side is flat and has a shorter lead to mark the cathode side, as they must be inserted in the right direction. The flat side corresponds to a straight line segment on one side of their circuit diagram symbol. In AC applications where the current exceeds the breakdown voltage, they can be protected by placing a second one in inverse parallel. Although they are much more reliable than incandescent sources,  they can still be damaged by a sudden change in temperature, which might cause cracks to form in the epoxy resin in the packaging. Aluminum gallium arsenide is used in red and infrared ones, while blue ones require a quantum well and are thus more expensive to produce and rarer. The color of the plastic casing does not significantly affect the color. FTP, name this electronic device which exhibits electroluminescence and allows current to flow in only one direction.;;L(ight-)E(mitting) D(iode);;diode
United States History;;After his father died at the Battle of Point Pleasant, his mother moved to Missouri and he was raised by his sister and his brother, who trained him to become a warrior. On a trip south, he won over members to his cause by predicting the New Madrid earthquakes and claiming that a comet was a good omen, because his name meant Shooting Star. With his brother, a reformed alcoholic who became known as The  Prophet, he set up the city of Prophetstown, which soon saw the arrival of many Native Americans for his confederacy. Two years before being killed at the Battle of the Thames, forces under his brother were soundly defeated by William Henry Harrison at the Battle of Tippecanoe. FTP, name this Shawnee leader whose war for Native American unity was later subsumed into the War of 1812.;;Tecumseh|Tekamthi;;
Noncomputational Math;;It has been called "The Helen of Geometers", because it often caused quarrels among 17th century mathematicians. First studied by Nicholas of Cusa and named by Galileo, it is an example of a roulette curve. It is related to the epitrochoid and hypotrochoid curves, which can be constructed using a Spirograph toy. The solution to both the  tautochrone and brachistochrone problems, its area is 3 times that of the generating circle, and its length is 4 times the diameter of the generating circle. FTP, name this curve traced by a fixed point on the edge of a circle rolling along a straight line.;;cycloid;;
Art;;Contrary to popular belief, this painting was popular enough to be reproduced by Gerrit Lundens in oil, which is now found in the National Gallery in London. It was moved in 1715, and in the process it was cut down, losing 3 figures on its left side. It was commissioned by Franz Banning  Cocq, and its subjects were probably taking part in a parade. In the background a mustachioed man lifts a blue and gold striped banner, while another beats a drum on its right side. FTP name this group portrait of a ceremonial marching company by Rembrandt, so misnamed because of the dirt accumulated on over the ages.;;(The) Night Watch|(The) Company of Franz Banning Cocq;;
Pop Culture;;One of these belonging to an elite trainer can generate voodoo dolls out of ice, and also create wispy bands of ice around targets, which that trainer then uses to track down with her powder case. An episode was made with Santa Claus and this Pok¨¦mon, which was known in Japan as Rougela. In another episode, three of these were overprotective of another Pok¨¦mon which would later evolve into it, Smoochum. After complaints, this Pok¨¦mon's complexion  was changed, because she was originally depicted as being in blackface. According to the Pok¨¦dex in Red/Blue, "It seductively wiggles its hips as it walks". FTP, name this Pok¨¦mon, #124, an ice/psychic type with egregiously feminine features.;;Jynx|Rougela;;
Music;;The penultimate section of this work was adapted into Land of the Rising Sun, the national anthem of Biafra, and other uses for the same tune include A Prayer for Wales and We Rest on Thee. When it was first performed, it was the last of four movements, the other three of which were later published as Sc¨¨nes historiques. For a while, it had to be performed under the title Impromptu due to Russian rule, but the name by which it goes today was first suggested by Axel Carpelan, a fan of this work. Words for that penultimate section were written first by W?in? Sola, and then rewritten two years later by V.A.  Koskenniemi to support the namesake nation in a war against Russia. FTP, name this tone poem about the native land of composer Jean Sibelius.;;Finlandia;;
Literature;;This novel begins in Gateshead Hall, with John Reed bullying his cousin, who fights back and is taken to the red room as punishment. After a near-death experience on the moors of northern England, the title character is taken in by the Rivers family and assumes the false surname of Elliot. She later shares her inheritance of 20,000 pounds with the Riverses, after discovering that they are her cousins. After spending eight years at Lowood School,  the title character advertises and is hired at Thornfield Manor as a governess for Ad¨¨le Varens. After unsuccessfuly trying to marry her employer, she discovers that he has been keeping Bertha Mason, his violently insane wife, locked up in the attic. FTP, name this novel written by Charlotte Bront? in which the title character falls in love with Mr. Rochester.;;Jane Eyre;;
Geography;;In the north is Qeshm Island, a free trade zone, 21 miles away to the south is the territorial exclave of Musandam, and it is mentioned but left unnamed in the Periplus of the Erythraean Sea.  In following with a Traffic Separation Scheme, the traffic lane is only 6 miles wide, consisting of 2-mile inbound and outbound lanes with a 2-mile buffer zone in between.  Some 35 percent of the world's and 75 percent  of Japan's oil supply pass through this strategic passage, which was the location of the 1984-1987 Iran-Iraq Tanker War.  FTP, name this opening to the Persian Gulf.;;(Strait) (of) Hormuz;;
World History;;A League against these helped James Wilson found The Economist publication.  Thomas Malthus believed 80 shillings for a quarter-hundredweight to be fair price, and Duke of Wellington devised a sliding scale which reduced it to 73 shillings.  They were first instituted by the Tory government of Lord Liverpool, and after the disaster of  Peterloo Massacre, the Six Acts declared any reform movement meeting "an overt act of treasonable conspiracy".  Later repealed by Sir Robert Peel, these were, FTP, what last protectionist policy of the mercantilist era which placed a tariff on imported grain, not the namesake maize product?;;Corn (Laws);;
Biology;;These cause the only known diseases that can be sporadic, genetic, or infectious. They behave somewhat like ice-nine in Kurt Vonnegut's Cat's Cradle. Initially controversial because they violate the central dogma of molecular biology, the abnormal ones propagate themselves by causing the normal molecule to fold itself into the abnormally structured form, without the use of nucleic acids. They can cause Kuru,  as well as scrapie in sheep and goats, and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in humans. They aggregate to form plaques called amyloids, which disrupt tissue structure and make brain tissue appear "spongelike". FTP, name these infectious agents responsible for mad cow disease.;;prion(s)|proteinaceous infectious particle(s);;
Art;;This man began to collect portraits of famous people in 1845, eventually compiling them into his 1850 A Gallery of Illustrious Americans.  At the outbreak of the American Civil War, he embarked on a project that costed $100,000 and would eventually bankrupt him.  Among his hired staff were Alexander Gardner and Timothy H. O'Sullivan  and 20 others, each of whom were given a mobile darkroom, capturing scenes of Civil War battlefields, including shots of Antietam which were exhibited in "The Dead of Antietam".  FTP -- Name this pioneering American photographer, who took the pictures of every president from John Quincy Adams to William McKinley.;;(Mathew) Brady;;
Noncomputational Math;;Hardin's tragedy of the commons is sometimes said to be an example of a multi-player generalization of it. It demonstrates that in a non-zero-sum game, the Nash equilibrium isn't necessarily Pareto optimal. In its iterated form, successful strategies tend to be nice,  retaliating, forgiving, and non-envious, making tit-for-tat one of the best deterministic algorithms. In its payoff matrix as described by Douglas Hofstadter, the sucker's payoff must have the lowest value and the temptation to defect payoff must have the highest value. FTP, name this game in which each of two players can choose to either cooperate or defect.;;prisoner's dilemma;;
Literature;;Much of his love poetry is addressed to Jeanne Duval, and although his projects The Lesbians and Limbo never appeared in book form, six poems excised from his most famous work were republished in Wreckage. His translation of "Mesmeric Revelation" was the first of many that would later be part of a collection of translations of Edgar Allan Poe, Extraordinary Tales. Various poems in prose were published posthumously in  Paris Spleen, while "Spleen and Ideal" is the first section of his most famous work. Other sections include "Parisian Scenes", "Wine", "Revolt", "Death", and one that shares its name with the title of the work. FTP name this French author of Les Fleurs du Mal, or The Flowers of Evil.;;(Charles-Pierre) Baudelaire;;
Miscellaneous;;In 2004, the Pet Shop Boys created a new soundtrack for this movie, while the original was composed by Edmund Meisel. At the climax, the word "Brothers!" is shown on the screen and the title entity passes unharmed in the fifth and last section, "Rendezvous with a Squadron". Its third section, "A Dead Man Calls for Justice", sees the people of a certain port mourning the death of Vakulinchuk,  who died leading a rebellion over meat infested with maggots. Cossacks are then called into that port city, Odessa, and ruthlessly massacre citizens by marching down a staircase with guns pointed. FTP, name this 1925 silent film directed by Sergei Eisenstein that begins and ends with the story of the title warship.;;(The) Battleship Potemkin|Bronenosets Potyomkin;;
World History;;These people called themselves the gag-gigga, meaning "black-headed people".  During the rule of Ennantum of Lagash, who unified many city-states and even extended the realm to Elam.  The last king of the Lagash dynasty, Lugal-Zage-Si was the last king of the ethnicity, conquering  Uruk, where he established his capital.  Following his rule, the lands came under the domination of Semitics from Akkad, during which their native language phased out of common ussage.  FTP - What civilization is credited with the invention of the wheel, and the establishment of the first writing system, which is called cuneiform.;;Sumerian(s);;